

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/10695/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 18th April 2018 (before UTJ Bruce)     |On 19 March 2019               |
|And 18th December 2018                    |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     DW
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For DW:          Mrs Barton instructed by Mica Services
For the Secretary of State:        Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  DW.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings




         1. For the reasons given in her  decision  signed  on  23rd  April
            2018, Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce found that First-tier Tribunal
            Judge P Chambers had materially erred in law in  allowing  DW's
            appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse  his  human
            rights  claim.  The  SSHD  had  taken  a  decision   that   the
            deportation of DW was conducive to the public good.


         2. The chronology is well known to the parties and is set  out  in
            UTJ Bruce's decision and does not have to be repeated here save
            in so far as it is relevant to my decision.

         3. In essence the SSHD's case is that the  deportation  of  DW,  a
            Liberian citizen born in 1968, is conducive to the public  good
            because he was convicted of a very serious crime in the USA for
            which he was sentenced to more than four years imprisonment and
            that he had deliberately concealed that  fact  when  he  sought
            entry to, leave to remain and then nationality in the UK. Since
            any leave he had obtained had been obtained by deception, there
            was in this case very great weight to be attached to the public
            interest in the maintenance of immigration control.

         4. DW's case was that he has an established family life  with  his
            British wife and their five British children;  that  given  the
            length of time that has elapsed since  he  committed  the  very
            serious offences and that he was addicted to class A  drugs  at
            the time of the commission of  the  offences,  his  deportation
            would be disproportionate and contrary to the UK's  obligations
            under Article 8 ECHR.

         5. I heard no oral evidence. I had a bundle of documents filed  on
            behalf of DW; a skeleton argument filed by Mrs  Barton  on  the
            morning of the hearing and I heard oral submissions  from  both
            representatives. Mr Bates, no doubt because he was aware of the
            presence of two of DW's children in court,  did  not  read  out
            relevant passages from the documentary evidence but directed my
            specific attention to them. During Mrs Barton's  submissions  I
            asked  her  to  consider  whether,  given  the  tenor  of   her
            submissions,  she  thought  it  appropriate  for  two  of  DW's
            children to remain in court. After consultation  with  her  lay
            client the two children left the court.

         6. The statutory framework applicable to  foreign  criminals  does
            not apply directly to DW because he is not a  foreign  criminal
            as defined by s117D Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
            and  UK  Borders   Act   2007[1].   The   assessment   of   the
            proportionality of the decision  to  refuse  the  human  rights
            claim of DW is informed by the same  underlying  structure  and
            concepts. DW's appeal is an appeal against the refusal  of  his
            human rights claim. It is not an appeal against a  decision  to
            deport. Whether an individual is a foreign criminal, as defined
            in the 2007 Act or the 2002 Act or as determined by  the  SSHD,
            is a factor that is taken into account in reaching  a  decision
            on the  appeal,  as  are  any  criminal  convictions  or  other
            behaviour.

         7. Both parties addressed me  on  the  issues  before  me  namely,
            firstly, whether the departure of DW  from  the  lives  of  the
            children and/or his wife would be unduly harsh  and,  secondly,
            whether there were very compelling circumstances over and above
            that fact.

         8. There is no doubt but that DW and his  wife,  and  he  and  his
            children, have a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.  Their
            relationship commenced after his arrival in the UK  in  October
            2001 and after he had been granted exceptional leave to remain;
            they were married on 25th July 2003. Their children  were  born
            in 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010  and  2014.  According  to  Professor
            Zeitlin's report, DW  has  two  older  children;  one  born  in
            Liberia in 1984 and the second born in 1991 in either  the  USA
            or Liberia. There was no evidence  before  me  of  any  contact
            between DW and them, where they are now or what involvement  he
            has had in their lives.

         9. As can be seen from the chronology, DW was arrested in 1988  in
            the USA on suspicion of committing offences in 1983. He escaped
            custody and fled the USA.  He  was  then  extradited  from  the
            Netherlands to the  USA  in  December  1993  and  convicted  in
            January 1995 of two counts of robbery with a  firearm/imitation
            firearm for which  he  received  a  minimum  five  year/maximum
            twenty  year  sentence  of  imprisonment.  On  release,  having
            completed his sentence, he was deported to Liberia in 1998.  He
            changed his name to DW (he says lawfully), obtained exceptional
            leave to remain in the UK in his acquired  name  in  2001,  was
            granted ILR in 2006 in  his  acquired  name  having  failed  to
            disclose his conviction, naturalised as a  British  Citizen  in
            2007, was deprived of his citizenship in 2015  and  his  appeal
            against deprivation was dismissed in 2017. He did not  disclose
            his original name in the applications made and so the  fact  of
            his offending and his immigration history in the  USA  and  the
            Netherlands was unknown to the UK authorities.

        10. The skeleton argument  relied  upon  by  Mrs  Barton  addresses
            whether it would be  unduly  harsh  to  separate  DW  from  his
            children and wife. It does not  address  what  very  compelling
            circumstances there are over and above those  submitted  facts.
            In her oral submissions she relied heavily upon the impact upon
            the children of separation, the  difficulties  his  wife  would
            face in terms of employment,  her  mental  health  and  general
            living problems as a single mother, the length  of  time  since
            the index offence (1983 and not 1995 as Mrs Barton  submitted),
            that he has qualified as a mental health nurse and  contributed
            to society and his health problems.

        11. Mr Bates confirmed that there was no expectation or requirement
            or intention on the part of the Secretary of  State  that  DW's
            wife and/or the children should leave the UK with him; they are
            lawfully resident in the UK and are British Citizens. The  SSHD
            accepted that they have well-established lives in the UK,  they
            have never been to Liberia and for them to go to  Liberia  with
            their father/husband would be unduly harsh.  But  he  submitted
            that separation and family split is the outcome and an expected
            outcome of criminal offending by  those  who  are  not  British
            Citizens. Mr Bates submitted there was nothing in  the  reports
            relied upon by DW that indicated that the effect of that  split
            on the children following the departure of DW from the UK would
            be unduly harsh; the indications in the reports  were  that  it
            would be harsh but that was nothing more than  to  be  expected
            where families are split as a result of criminal behaviour.  He
            submitted that there was nothing significant in  the  documents
            and reports relied upon that could result  in  a  finding  that
            there were very compelling circumstances. He drew attention  to
            the significant public interest in removing DW - it is not only
            the act of removal but also the introduction of a 10  year  ban
            that serves the public interest; the deterrence effect on other
            offenders carries significant weight over and above the  effect
            on the individual.

        12. The evidence before me was that if DW is deported, the children
            will remain in the UK with their  mother.  Their  mother  works
            (according  to  the  report  dated  August  2018  by  Professor
            Zeitlin) as a mental health support worker between 7am and 3pm;
            at present DW plays a significant role in the children's day to
            day care (as he has all their lives) and this  would  cease  on
            his deportation. The home they live in is owned  subject  to  a
            mortgage. Although Ms Barton submitted that the house would  be
            re-possessed and the family would become  destitute,  this  was
            not supported by evidence in the bundle. There was no valuation
            of the house, no current  outstanding  mortgage  statement,  no
            indication of whether any enquiries had been made to extend the
            period of the mortgage  to  reduce  the  payments  due  and  no
            evidence, other than assertion, that the wife would  be  unable
            to maintain her current income level. The mortgage statement in
            the bundle seems to indicate a monthly payment  of  just  under
            �300 per month. Mrs W does not state in her  witness  statement
            how much she earns per month. Although she  states  she  has  a
            sister in the UK and that the  sister  would  not  be  able  to
            assist she does not  state  where  the  sister  lives  or  what
            requests she has made of her sister in  terms  of  for  example
            childcare assistance. In her witness statement  she  says  that
            she thinks  she  would  not  be  able  to  work,  would  become
            destitute, lose her home and have to claim benefits  but  there
            is a lack of adequate or sufficient evidence to provide support
            for those assertions. There is no indication of  what  possible
            alternative working arrangements she  could  put  in  place  or
            whether she has made any  enquiries  about  possible  childcare
            assistance. My attention  was  not  drawn  to  any  documentary
            evidence  that  could  support  those  assertions.  DW  was  in
            detention in the USA for 7 months in 2008  at  which  time  the
            couple had three children. According to the social work  report
            Mrs W left her job to look after the children during that time.
            It is not apparent from the documents in the bundle whether she
            was renting accommodation at that  time  or  whether  they  had
            bought the house subject to a mortgage. What is not asserted is
            that they became destitute and homeless.  The  submission  that
            she and the children would become  destitute  and  homeless  is
            speculative and with no supportive evidence that was  drawn  to
            my attention and I do not accept that  submission  to  be  made
            out.

        13. An independent social work report was relied  upon  dated  27th
            November 2018. Ms Pearce, who prepared the report is clearly an
            experienced social worker with many years' experience. Mr Bates
            did not challenge her expertise but rather submitted  that  the
            conclusions drawn by her were either  not  indications  of  his
            removal being unduly harsh  or  were  speculative.  The  report
            describes the distress  of  the  children  at  the  thought  of
            separation from their father as well as their concern about his
            ill  health  and  whether  he  would  be  able  to  access  the
            medication he requires. The report portrays their  anxiety  and
            their concern that he would be alone and sick. The report  also
            portrays the role he plays in their  lives.  He  is  clearly  a
            "hands-on" dad and has been throughout their lives save for the
            7 months he was detained in the USA in 2008.  Ms  Pearce  draws
            attention to the impact that separation would have had  on  the
            children given their ages at that  time.  This  involvement  in
            their lives is particularly strong given the health  scares  of
            one of the children who was  born  premature  and  the  anxiety
            because of another child's fits. It seems that since  Professor
            Zeitlin prepared his report, DW has ceased working  and  Mrs  W
            now works night shifts  because  he  is  there.  Prior  to  him
            ceasing work they would  organise  their  shifts  so  that  the
            children  were  always  with  one  of  them.   There   was   no
            corroborative  evidence  about  this   change   in   work   or,
            presumably, of the change in income  -  a  surprising  omission
            given the submissions as to destitution and homelessness. There
            is no doubt, on the basis of the report, that he is a major and
            significant person in their lives, that he  provides  stability
            and encouragement and that his  loss  from  their  daily  lives
            would have a significant impact upon them.


        14. But her report also seems predicated upon it being accepted  by
            her (or at least "so likely") that Mrs W would not be  able  to
            cope, that she would withdraw into herself, that she would lose
            her job and the family would  become  destitute  and  homeless.
            Her conclusions  that  the  children  need  not  only  physical
            attributes  such  as  food,  clothing  and  housing  but   also
            emotional stability, significant relationships and security are
            self-evident and something that all children require. That  his
            departure will be of adverse impact upon  the  children  is  an
            inevitable consequence of DW's deportation and separation  from
            the family.

        15. Ms Pearce refers to the risk that the oldest  girl  child  will
            take on caring responsibility on behalf of her mother but there
            is no evidence other than her assertion that such would be  the
            case. There is little indication in the report  of  that  child
            referring to this possibility during the interview she had with
            Ms Pearce - an interview that is  recorded  in  the  report  as
            being one with that took place with  that  child  and  the  two
            children younger than  her,  for  a  total  of  two  hours.  Ms
            Pearce's reference to "research"  indicating  that  this  child
            would be affected by her  mother's  low  mood  and  anxiety  is
            followed by her statement that the child would be vulnerable to
            taking on caring responsibilities. The reference to  "research"
            is vague but in any event seems obvious - any child is going to
            be affected by his or her mother's mood. I can see no  relevant
            or  significant  support  for  the  conclusion  in  the  report
            prepared by Ms Pearce that this  oldest  girl  child  would  be
            vulnerable to taking on caring responsibilities.

        16. Ms Pearce spent 2 hours talking with the three younger children
            and one hour talking with the youngest. There is no record  how
            long she spent talking to the oldest child although there is  a
            record of some of the things he said. She  concludes  that  the
            teenage years for the two older children will  be  particularly
            challenging for them, that one of the younger children  appears
            to be having nightmares about the loss of her  father  and  the
            overall sense  of  abandonment  the  children  will  feel  will
            contribute to the harshness of the effect on  the  children  of
            their father's deportation. These are matters that will  affect
            all children who are separated from a loving parent.

        17. The report by Ms Pearce  exaggerates  some  elements  of  their
            behaviour with  no  reference  to  why  she  has  reached  that
            conclusion nor reasoning to support it - for example she states
            that the departure of DW  from  the  UK  would  "be  completely
            devastating", that there would be a "significant  deterioration
            in the behaviour of at least [one of the children]", that there
            would be "an emotional and psychological impact on them  beyond
            their childhood and adolescence and well into  their  adulthood
            (if not throughout their adulthood)".

        18. The  report  by  Professor  Zeitlin,  a  child  and  adolescent
            psychiatrist interviewed the family - other than the  four-year
            old - on  one  day.  The  report  does  not  say  how  long  he
            interviewed them for or how long he spent with each child other
            than to say that "sufficient time was spent with  each  of  the
            four older children to  make  an  overall  assessment  of  each
            child's current state and relationship to the father". There is
            little in the report that is of much significance or assistance
            in determining whether the  separation  of  the  children  from
            their father would be unduly harsh. The  report  confirms  that
            none of the four children interviewed showed any signs of major
            psychiatric illness. He describes the future departure of their
            father would be akin to  mourning  with  "some  (his  emphasis)
            recovery back to a normal  state  over  approximately  a  year.
            However,  there  is  a  significant  probability,  given  their
            statements and anxiety about losing him, of longer-term effects
            including  indication  depression  particularly  in  the  older
            children. Difficulty  in  their  management  and  loss  of  his
            described  positive  input  is  also  likely  to  damage  their
            progress."


        19. Professor Zeitlin considers the fits of the  fourth  child  and
            refers to the child presenting a "more  complex  picture".  The
            reason for the fits has not been identified, his MRI brain scan
            was normal and the child remains under three monthly  check-ups
            with the paediatric unit at Salford Hospital. Neither Ms Pearce
            nor Professor Zeitlin nor the witness statements of DW and  his
            wife or the skeleton argument by Ms Barton  or  the  bundle  of
            documents provide any further information or  documentation  in
            relation to the reference in the CAMHS referral for the  fourth
            child that "Social Services have been involved  in  the  past".
            Professor Zeitlin concludes that this child has increased  need
            for support whatever the cause, although the extent and  nature
            of that support is unclear.


        20. It is difficult to place much  weight  on  Professor  Zeitlin's
            report given that much of the report  is  little  more  than  a
            repetition of  what  he  has  been  told.  Nevertheless,  I  am
            satisfied that it does provide support for the contention  that
            DW is a father  who  plays  a  very  significant  role  in  the
            children's lives and has done so since their birth save  for  7
            months in 2008.

        21. In KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53, the  Supreme  Court  held,  per
            Lord Kerr paragraph 23 that

                      "One Is looking  for  a  degree  of  harshness  going
                      beyond what would necessarily  be  involved  for  any
                      child faced with the deportation of a parent. What it
                      does not require in  my  view  (and  subject  to  the
                      discussion of the cases in the  next  section)  is  a
                      balancing of  relative  levels  of  severity  of  the
                      parent's offence,  other  than  is  inherent  in  the
                      distinction drawn by the section itself by  reference
                      to length of sentence. Nor ....  can  it  be  equated
                      with a requirement to show "very compelling reasons".
                      That would be in effect to replicate  the  additional
                      test applied  by  section  117C(6)  with  respect  to
                      sentences of four years or more."


        22. In this case, the criminal offending took place some  25  years
            ago at a time when DW was a Class A drug addict. After  fleeing
            the USA, prior to conviction, he  was  diagnosed  as  suffering
            from PTSD as a result of his experiences  in  war-torn  Liberia
            and on his extradition to the USA he was placed  in  prison  in
            the mental health unit where he  was  treated.  There  is  some
            inconsistency in the documentation whether he was  treated  for
            drug dependency  or  PTSD  or  both,  but  it  is  nevertheless
            apparent that he did receive mental health  treatment.  He  has
            not been charged  or  convicted  of  any  offence  since  then.
            Nevertheless, these matters cannot, in accordance with  KO,  be
            taken into account in determining whether  his  departure  from
            the UK, leaving the children behind, would be unduly harsh upon
            them. Nor can the fact that he entered the UK  in  an  acquired
            name, failed to disclose his name change  and  conviction  when
            applying for leave to  enter/remain,  failed  to  disclose  his
            conviction when applying for citizenship and failed to disclose
            his conviction when  applying  for  registration  as  a  mental
            health nurse be taken into account in deciding whether it would
            be unduly harsh for the children to be separated from him.

        23. This is not a case of a man with  occasional  or  even  regular
            frequent contact with his children. This is a  case  of  a  man
            with day to day, full  time  caring  responsibilities  for  his
            children throughout virtually the whole of their  lives.  Their
            ages range from 4 to 14. There are  five  children.  The  child
            born in 2010 has been referred to CAMHS although it is  not  at
            all clear whether he has been accepted as a  referral  or  what
            treatment he requires, if any. All five children are  suffering
            from anxiety about their father's health and about  separation.
            Their mother coped in the past during a 7- month separation and
            has no recorded health problems. I do  not  accept  the  family
            would be destitute or homeless or reliant on benefits  or  that
            their mother would be unable "to cope" if he were to leave  the
            UK. Other than  seven  months  separation  when  three  of  the
            children were very young and two had not been born, DW has been
            fully integrated in their lives to a far  greater  extent  than
            the vast majority of  fathers.  I  have  not,  in  reaching  my
            decision, taken account  of  the  length  of  time  since  DW's
            criminal offence, the nature of the offence, the failure by him
            to disclose his criminal activity on entry and stay in  the  UK
            or the use of an acquired name change to obtain leave to remain
            in the UK or British Citizenship.


        24. I have borne very much in mind that these children are  totally
            innocent of any wrong-doing on the part  of  their  father  and
            that they have considerable anxiety about his future  and  that
            they have no ability to influence or affect that future. I have
            taken into account that these children  are  unlikely,  on  the
            evidence before me, to see their father for at least  10  years
            following his deportation. But the evidence before  me  amounts
            to little more than that  they  will  suffer  distress.  It  is
            plainly in their best  interests  to  remain  in  the  UK,  the
            country of which they are citizen and within which their  whole
            social and private lives have developed. The older children are
            at school and any move to a country of which they know  nothing
            would inevitably cause great hardship. Even though the  younger
            children may not have developed their  own  lives  outside  the
            family unit, they remain part of a family of siblings who have.
            It cannot reasonably be concluded that the best interest of the
            children do not lie in the UK. The respondent did not  seek  to
            argue that proposition.

        25. The position is therefore that it is in the  best  interest  of
            the children to remain in the UK.  It  is,  self-evidently,  in
            their best interest to remain as part of  a  family  unit  with
            their mother and father. The respondent has not argued that the
            children could  reasonably  relocate  to  Liberia.   The  "real
            world" position is that unless, for some  unspecified  reasons,
            the appellant and his wife decide that the children  should  go
            to Liberia, they will remain her in the UK with  their  mother.
            It will undoubtably be harsh for these children to be separated
            from their father who has been in their lives for virtually the
            whole of their lives. Nevertheless, the evidence before me  did
            not point to a conclusion that the effect on the children would
            be unduly harsh. That test has a high threshold, as  reiterated
            in KO (Nigeria). The factual matrix in this case as regards the
            children and his wife simply does not reach that threshold.


        26. In so far as the relationship with his wife  is  concerned,  it
            was formed when he had exceptional leave to remain  because  of
            the situation in Liberia  at  that  time.  DW  submits  he  was
            advised by his then solicitors not to disclose  his  conviction
            and so he did not. The SSHD submits  that  had  his  conviction
            been disclosed he would not have been granted indefinite  leave
            to remain or, subsequently, citizenship.

        27. DW's  witness  statement  states  that  he  is  not  sure  that
            submission by the respondent is correct because he was  granted
            leave to remain and indefinite leave to remain because  of  the
            SSHD's  country  policy  in   connection   with   Liberia   and
            exceptional leave to remain was in  force  at  that  time.  The
            policy has not been produced. It would seem unlikely  that  the
            commission of a serious non- political crime would  not  impact
            upon the grant of indefinite leave to remain although of course
            the country policy in connection with Liberia at  that  time  -
            both for the grant of exceptional leave to remain and  for  the
            grant of indefinite leave to remain - may have been  such  that
            leave would have been granted. No specific point was  taken  by
            Mr Bates in connection with this other than to rely on what  is
            said in the decision letter.

        28. DW's solicitors have not disclosed the policy they rely upon in
            order to advise DW that the SSHD's position is not  correct.  I
            have taken the view that in the absence of the  policy  showing
            the contrary, the position taken by the SSHD in the reasons for
            refusal of the human rights claim is correct; DW was  aware  of
            the position taken and he has had ample opportunity to  provide
            evidence to support his submission.

        29. On the basis that he would have been granted exceptional  leave
            to remain had he disclosed his conviction and/or name change, I
            conclude that DW's immigration status at the time  of  entering
            into his relationship was precarious. I do not accept,  in  the
            absence of evidence  to  the  contrary  which  ought,  if  DW's
            solicitors are correct, to be available,  that  DW  would  have
            been granted indefinite leave to remain.

        30. Even if his status was not precarious, I do not accept that  it
            would be unduly harsh for his wife to be in the UK without him.
            It is unclear on what basis his wife  obtained  her  indefinite
            leave to remain; whether that was because of the birth  of  the
            children, because her husband had leave to remain in the UK  or
            her own length of residence. No point was taken on  her  status
            by the SSHD and I make no finding, adverse  or  otherwise  upon
            her status and its impact on this appeal.

        31. I accept the departure of her husband  from  the  UK  would  be
            difficult for her; would cause her stress and anxiety  but  not
            that she would be destitute or homeless. Nor do  I  accept  she
            would find looking after the children  unduly  harsh.  She  has
            looked after them  previously  by  herself  and  other  than  a
            vigorously expressed desire not to have to do so  again,  there
            was no significant evidence before me that she would be  unable
            to do so. Professor Zeitlin's report states that she works  7am
            to 3pm. There is no indication  in  the  documents  before  me,
            other than assertion by her in her witness  statements  and  to
            the social worker, that she would have to give up work. As said
            earlier,  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  she  has  made
            enquiries about changing her hours or obtaining assistance with
            childcare for  the  younger  children.  I  do  not  accept  her
            assertion, in the absence of any other evidence, that she would
            have to give up work.

        32.  I  have  also  considered  the  appellant's  private  life  as
            established in the UK. He has been  in  the  UK  since  October
            2001. He arrived aged 33. He is now aged 50. He has  not  spent
            most of his life in the UK.

        33. The SSHD does not appear to be saying that DW  would  not  have
            been granted exceptional leave to remain, as he was in 2001, if
            he had disclosed his name change and criminal  convictions.  He
            is saying that he would not have been granted indefinite  leave
            to remain and thereafter citizenship. I conclude that  although
            his immigration status is and always has  been  precarious,  he
            was lawfully in the UK during the currency of  his  exceptional
            leave to remain. It was during that time that he met  his  wife
            and their first two children were born.  These are  however  no
            more than neutral factors in the assessment  of  whether  there
            are very compelling circumstances over and above his separation
            from his children. Other neutral factors are that he has worked
            almost the whole time he has been in the UK, that  he  has  not
            visited Liberia since 2001, that he speaks English, that he and
            his wife are financially able to support themselves  and  their
            children,  that  he  has   qualified   as   a   mental   health
            professional. He  has  been  disciplined  by  his  professional
            association, such proceedings arising out  of  his  failure  to
            disclose his convictions and his name change.  Whilst  serious,
            these are part of the lack of candour on his part and are  thus
            factors that weigh against him albeit not  significantly  given
            the weight of the other matters.

        34. Mrs Barton  submitted  that  DW  was  socially  and  culturally
            integrated into the UK having lived in the  UK  for  almost  18
            years  and  that  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to
            integration into Liberia because he has not visited there since
            he came to the UK, has no ties or family there, no home, no job
            and no savings; he has medical problems and would be unable  to
            access the medical treatment he requires. She submitted he  has
            not broken any immigration rules, has  been  law  abiding,  has
            been employed for the majority of his time in the UK and  is  a
            qualified mental health nurse. There  are  various  letters  of
            support in the bundle attesting to his profession,  his  church
            involvement and that he is overall a kind,  well-respected  and
            positive person. law abiding.

        35. I do not accept Mrs Barton's submission that DW has not  broken
            immigration rules or that he  has  been  law  abiding.  He  has
            failed to disclose material matters which were critical to  his
            continued stay in the UK. Although not arrested or charged with
            any criminal offence whilst in the UK, his failure to  disclose
            his name and conviction led to him obtaining  indefinite  leave
            to which he  was  not  entitled;  that  is  use  of  deliberate
            deception to secure an immigration advantage to  which  he  was
            not entitled.

        36. I accept that he is socially and culturally integrated  in  the
            UK. The many letters attesting to his character, the work  that
            he does both in the church and as a mental health nurse are all
            evidence of a person who is socially and culturally  integrated
            into the society in which he now lives and has lived  for  some
            18 years. Although Mrs Barton says he has no  family  or  other
            ties in Liberia, he did have a son there and he  may  have  two
            sons there. There was  nothing  said  by  him  in  his  witness
            statement about this  and  there  was  nothing  in  the  social
            workers report about those children - who will now  be  adults.
            That nothing has been said about them does not mean they are no
            longer there or that he has no contact with them. A failure  to
            refer to existing family members cannot automatically lead to a
            finding that they are not able to help,  especially  given  the
            lack of candour this appellant has demonstrated  in  the  past.
            Nevertheless, in this case, given the length of  time  that  he
            has been in the UK, the care with which he looks after his five
            UK children, I am prepared to accept  that  he  no  longer  has
            contact with them whether they are in Liberia or not.

        37. That he has no savings,  no  home,  no  job,  knows  no-one  in
            Liberia and has not been there since 2001, as submitted by  Mrs
            Barton, does not mean that  there  would  be  very  significant
            obstacles  to  him  integrating  there.  He  has  a  recognised
            qualification. According to the FCO Travel  Advice  extract  in
            the bundle, there  are  poor  medical  facilities.  The  Borgen
            Project report in the bundle refers to a plan by the Government
            of Liberia, supported by the World Bank and United  Nations  to
            reconstruct   the   healthcare   system   including    a    new
            infrastructure and  medical  centres.  There  was  very  little
            detail in the bundle, but  it  was  not  apparent  that  DW,  a
            qualified health care professional with good references,  would
            not be able to find employment.

        38. DW has medical problems. He  is  diagnosed  with  'severe  left
            ventricular systolic function (heart  failure)'  and  has  been
            under the care of the cardiologist and heart failure  team.  He
            is prescribed medication which, according to his GP is known to
            improve life expectancy and he is  reviewed  regularly  by  the
            heart nurses. Mrs Barton  directed  my  attention  to  the  BMC
            Health Services Research (September 2016) as evidence  that  DW
            would not be able to receive the medication  and  treatment  he
            requires. However the project report is  a  comparison  between
            rural and remote healthcare utilization. It does not deal  with
            access to medication in urban or densely  populated  areas  and
            nor does it identify whether and to what extent he  would  have
            access to the drugs he requires. I was not directed to evidence
            that showed that he could not obtain the drugs he was currently
            prescribed or could not access the treatment he  requires.  The
            background paragraphs of that report indicate that the Liberian
            Government chose to implement reconstruction of health services
            around a Basic Package of Health Services. In 2003 only 10%  of
            the population had access to such services in 2003 yet by  2010
            it was stated that 80% of government clinics were estimated  to
            meet  the  minimum  standards  (free   of   charge)   focussing
            particularly  on  maternal  and  child   health,   communicable
            diseases and mental health.  In the absence of evidence to  the
            contrary, the burden of proof being upon  DW,  I  am  satisfied
            that he would be able to access such treatment as he requires -
            medication and check-ups.


        39. The evidence before me does not show that there would  be  very
            significant obstacles to DW's  integration  to  Liberia.  I  am
            satisfied that he does not meet the criteria in Exception 1.

        40. These findings are not however the end of the consideration  to
            be undertaken. The deportation of  a  person  from  the  UK  is
            conducive to the public good and in the public interest because
            they have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
            sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least  four  years;
            the public interest will only be outweighed  by  other  factors
            where there are very compelling circumstances  over  and  above
            the exceptions described in the exceptions  to  deportation[2].
            As referred to above, the appellant is not a  foreign  criminal
            as defined by Part 5 Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
            2002 but the  considerations  to  be  taken  into  account  are
            similar for those convicted of crimes outside the UK as I  have
            explained above.

        41. The issue that now arises here is how to evaluate whether there
            are very compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions
            to deportation. KO,  which  was  only  concerned  with  foreign
            criminals who had  been  sentenced  to  less  than  four  years
            imprisonment, was considering how to evaluate the  term  unduly
            harsh in the context of criminality.  Paragraphs 20 to 23 of KO
            appear to leave open whether, in considering  'very  compelling
            circumstances', s117C(2) (that the more serious the offence the
            greater the interest in  deportation)  is  imported  into  that
            deliberation or whether, as for the two Exceptions, there is no
            further balancing required other than as occurs  within  the  2
            Exceptions.

        42. I have taken the view that very compelling  circumstances  over
            and above the two Exceptions does require consideration of  all
            of the circumstances in  determining  whether  there  are  very
            compelling circumstances over  and  above  those  described  in
            Exceptions 1 and 2, including the nature and seriousness of the
            offence. Exceptions 1 and 2 are defined both in the Immigration
            Rules and in the statutory framework. Exception 1 is  described
            in KO as self-contained and nothing turns on the seriousness of
            the offence. KO  concludes  that  it  would  be  surprising  if
            Exception 2 was structured in a different  way.  On  the  other
            hand, 'very compelling circumstances over and  above'  are  not
            subject to a close definition. In the  Immigration  Rules,  the
            phrase appears as part of the sentence "...the public  interest
            in deportation will only be outweighed by other  factors  where
            there are very compelling circumstances over and above...".  In
            the 2002 Act there is a requirement for deportation unless  (my
            emphasis) there are very compelling  circumstances  (undefined)
            over and above.

        43. An alternative interpretation  is  that  an  offence  that  has
            resulted in a prison sentence of four years or  more  is,  when
            considered under s117C(1) and (2) the gateway into s117C(6) and
            the very compelling circumstances either exist or do not  exist
            in isolation from and irrespective of the length of sentence or
            nature of offence. In my view that interpretation would lead to
            injustice and improper findings as to  the  proportionality  of
            the human rights decision; there would be no point at which all
            the circumstances that relate to the individual whose appeal is
            being determined could be legitimately considered.

        44. I take the view that my interpretation is supported by the view
            taken in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60.

        45. Hesham Ali concerned appeals relating to deportation  based  on
            Article 8 ECHR and the Immigration Rules that came into  effect
            in July 2012.  Although  those  Immigration  Rules  have  since
            changed,  the  principles  in  Hesham   Ali   have   not   been
            distinguished in KO. Lord Reed, with whom Lord Neuberger,  Lady
            Hale, Lord Wilson, Lord Hughes and Lord Thomas agreed, gave the
            lead judgment in Hesham Ali; Lord Kerr dissented. Lord  Wilson,
            Lord Reed and Lord Kerr also heard KO and agreed with the  lead
            judgment given by Lord Carnwath, as did Lord Briggs.  Of  those
            principles in Hesham Ali, the following are of relevance:

                  Some of the factors  listed  in  these  cases  [Boultif  v
                  Switzerland (2001) 33 EHRR 50, Uner v  Netherlands  (2006)
                  45 EHRR 14, Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR 47] relate to the
                  strength of the public interest in deportation: that is to
                  say, the extent to which the  deportation  of  the  person
                  concerned will promote the legitimate aim pursued.  Others
                  relate to the strength of the countervailing interests  in
                  private and family life. They are not exhaustive.[26]


                  [foreign offenders who have received sentences of at least
                  four years] will be dealt with on  the  basis  that  great
                  weight should generally be given to the public interest in
                  the deportation of such offenders,  but  that  it  can  be
                  outweighed, applying a proportionality test (my emphasis),
                  by very compelling circumstances: in other words by a very
                  strong claim indeed, as Laws LJ put it  in  SS  (Nigeria).
                  The countervailing considerations must be very  compelling
                  in order to outweigh the general public  interest  in  the
                  deportation of such offenders....they can include  factors
                  bearing n  the  weight  of  the  public  interest  in  the
                  deportation  of  the  particular  offender,  such  as  his
                  conduct since  the  offence  was  committed,  as  well  as
                  factors relating to his private of family life. [38]


                  [the Tribunal should attach  considerable  weight  to  the
                  assessment of the Secretary of State] in particular,  that
                  a custodial sentence of four years or more represents such
                  a serious level of offending that the public  interest  in
                  the  offender's  deportation   almost   always   outweighs
                  countervailing  considerations  of   private   of   family
                  life....the public interest in  the  deportation  of  such
                  offenders   can   generally   be   outweighed   only    by
                  countervailing factors which are very compelling. [46].


                  The critical issue for  the  tribunal  will  generally  be
                  whether, giving due weight to the strength of  the  public
                  interest in the deportation of the offender  in  the  case
                  before it, the article 8 claim is sufficiently  strong  to
                  outweigh it. In general, only a claim that is very  strong
                  indeed - very compelling...will succeed. [50]


                  In particular, tribunals  should  accord  respect  to  the
                  Secretary of State's assessment of  the  strength  of  the
                  public interest in the deportation of  foreign  offenders,
                  and also consider all factors  relevant  to  the  specific
                  case before them...It remains for them to judge whether on
                  the facts as they have found them, and giving  due  weight
                  to the strength of the public interest in  deportation  in
                  the case before them, the factors brought into account  on
                  the other side lead to  the  conclusion  that  deportation
                  would be disproportionate. [53]


        46. The public interest in the deportation of DW is very strong and
            weighty. DW  committed  a  very  serious  crime  for  which  he
            received a sentence in excess of 4 years. It seems  that  there
            was some plea bargaining which resulted in him pleading to  two
            counts. It was accepted he did not have a firearm but  that  he
            gave an impression that he had a firearm. For the  victim  this
            would have made little difference - their terror can hardly  be
            imagined. There is no victim impact statement and whether  such
            things existed in the USA in the 1980s is unknown. But  such  a
            statement is not needed to be able to identify with the  terror
            they would have inevitably  felt.  He  was  also  convicted  of
            escaping from custody. Again,  a  very  serious  offence  which
            undermines the criminal justice system. That he was  eventually
            dealt with in the criminal justice system does  not  reduce  or
            negate the seriousness of these offences.  Those  are  not  the
            only public interest issues. DW failed to disclose his criminal
            convictions to the UK authorities. Although he asserts that his
            convictions were disclosed to the UK authorities in about 2009,
            that was disbelieved during his citizenship deprivation appeal.
            By failing to disclose  his  convictions  and  name  change  he
            acquired settlement in the UK and citizenship, although he  has
            been stripped of the latter. These matters together result in a
            very strong public interest in his deportation, as said by  the
            Secretary of State. That  public  interest  includes  not  only
            removal but the deterrent effect of deportation - this is not a
            matter of deterrence from criminal offending but ensuring  that
            it is adverse to the public interest that a person who has been
            convicted of a serious crime cannot, by changing his  name  and
            failing to disclose that which ought to be disclosed, remain in
            the UK.


        47. Very strong and compelling factors  are  required  to  outweigh
            that public interest. The impact on the children is not enough,
            in fact it can be said, given the particular public interest in
            DW's deportation  because  of  his  offending  and  immigration
            history, that it is not nearly enough.

        48. As paragraph 49 of  Hesham  Ali  makes  clear,  the  difference
            between lawfully settled migrants facing deportation and  those
            unlawfully in the UK or seeking admission  can  be  taken  into
            account in an assessment of the fair balance.

        49. In the light of my findings above the matters that  that  could
            fall into the rubric of very compelling circumstances are:

                 . He is drug free and has been since at least 1988;
                 . He has committed no further offences since 1983;
                 . the violent offence was some 25 years ago;
                 . he has resided in the UK since 2001;
                 . he was aged 15/16 when he committed the offence(s)  which
                   led to his conviction;
                 . he is an integral member of his family and the  departure
                   of him from the children's lives would be of considerable
                   significance to his children and his wife and will  cause
                   them significant distress;
                 . his family life which is strong, genuine  and  subsisting
                   has been established several  years  after  his  criminal
                   offending and there is no indication  that  it  has  been
                   formed in order to evade or avoid immigration control.

        50. A compelling circumstance is a powerful and irresistible  force
            compelling one outcome. Very compelling circumstances  must  be
            even more than this.  Distressing as it is, applying this  test
            in reaching a conclusion on the proportionality of the decision
            to deport DW, it  cannot  be  concluded  that  there  are  very
            compelling circumstances such as  to  defeat  the  decision  to
            deport.


        51. The appeal is dismissed.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision.

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).








[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker Date 15th March 2019



           NOTE

     1. In both the UK Borders Act 2007 and  the  Nationality,  Immigration
        and Asylum Act 2002 a foreign criminal is defined as a  person  who
        has been convicted and sentenced in the UK. In the Rules, there  is
        no stated requirement the criminal offence(s) should be limited  to
        UK convictions only.


     2. The Immigration Rules, in so far as relevant to this  appeal,  read
        as follows:

             Deportation and Article 8


             A398. These rules apply where:
              (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that his
             deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's
             obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;
             (b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made
             against him to be revoked.


             398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human
             Rights Convention, and
                  (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive
                  to the public good and in the public interest because they
                  have been convicted of an offence for which they have been
                  sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;


                  (b) ....
                  (c) ....
             the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
             whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not, the
             public interest in deportation  will  only  be  outweighed  by
             other factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

     3. As Charles (human rights appeal: scope)  [2018]  UKUT  00089  (IAC)
        explains, if an appellant has any criticism  of  the  Secretary  of
        State's decision making under  the  Rules  or  various  Immigration
        Acts, s/he will, if the circumstances engage Article 8(2), be  able
        to  advance  those  criticisms  in  the  Article  8   appeal   and,
        specifically when considering the proportionality of the decision.


     4. The SSHD is required to make a deportation order (s32(5) UK Borders
        Act 2007) if an individual is a  foreign  criminal  as  defined  in
        ss32(1), (2) and (3) of the 2007 Act, which reads as follows:

            32(1)In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-
                 (a)who is not a British citizen,
                 (b)who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence,
           and
                 (c)to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.
              (2)Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to a period of
              imprisonment of at least 12 months.
                       (3)Condition 2 is that-
                 (a)the offence is specified by order of the Secretary of
                 State under section 72(4)(a) of the Nationality,
                 Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (c. 41) (serious criminal),
                 and
                 (b)the person is sentenced to a period of imprisonment.


     5.  'Foreign criminal' is defined in s117D for the purpose of Part  5A
        (my emphasis) of the 2002 Act and, in so far as is relevant to  DW,
        reads as follows

             117D (2)In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-
                  (a)who is not a British citizen,
                  (b)who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of an
             offence, and
                  (c)who-
                      (i)has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
                  at least 12 months,
                      ....


     6. The definition of a foreign criminal for the purpose  of  s117D  of
        the 2002 Act therefore includes a person who is a foreign  criminal
        as defined by s32(2) of the 2007 Act.


     7. S117C of the 2002 Act sets out the additional matters to  be  taken
        into account where an individual is a foreign criminal (as  defined
        in the 2002 Act) in deciding whether the deportation  would  breach
        the UK's obligations under Article 8.


     8. The Immigration Rules, ss117A-D of the  2002  Act  and  the  SSHD's
        policies and guidance set out the various matters that  are  to  be
        taken into  account  when  considering  the  proportionality  of  a
        decision to grant or refuse a human  rights  claim.  In  accordance
        with s5(1) Immigration Act 1971 ("1971 Act"),  where  a  person  is
        liable to deportation under s3(5) or (6) of the 1971 Act, the  SSHD
        may make a deportation order against him. s3(5), in so  far  as  is
        relevant to DW reads as follows


             A person who is not a British Citizen is liable to  deportation
            from the United Kingdom if -
            a) The Secretary of State deems his deportation to be conducive
               to the public good;
            b) ...


     9. The decision whether to make a deportation  order  against  someone
        who is not a 'foreign criminal' as defined in the 2002 Act  or  the
        2007 Act is a decision to be taken by the SSHD.  That  decision  is
        not predicated upon the individual  being  a  foreign  criminal  as
        defined in the 2002 Act or the 2007 Act but is  a  decision  to  be
        taken by the SSHD on the  basis  that  he  deems  the  individual's
        deportation to be conducive to the public good.  That  decision  by
        the SSHD is not amenable to challenge in a statutory appeal but, as
        per Charles (human rights appeal:  scope)  [2018]  UKUT  00089  any
        alleged deficiencies in that decision can be addressed in the human
        rights statutory appeal rather than by  way  of  parallel  judicial
        review proceedings.

    10. "Foreign criminal" in the context of the 2007 Act is a term of  art
        which requires certain criteria to be fulfilled. Similarly, in  the
        2002 Act it is a term of art, albeit with other  criteria.  In  the
        Immigration Rules which are not  to  be  construed  with  the  same
        exactitude as a statute but as an expression of the SSHD's  policy,
        they are simply words denoting that a person is a  criminal  and  a
        foreigner.

    11. There is no contradiction in this approach:

        a) If an individual has committed crimes which bring him within the
           2007 Act, he is a foreign criminal for the purpose of the making
           of an automatic deportation order;
        b) If an individual meets s117D (2) (which will include  those  who
           are foreign criminals as defined by s32(2) of the 2007 Act),  he
           is a foreign criminal and his appeal will include  consideration
           by the Tribunal of the matters set out in s117C;
        c) If the Secretary of  State  has  decided  that  an  individual's
           deportation  is  conducive  to  the  public  good  (a  1971  Act
           deportation decision), whether or not he has been convicted of a
           criminal offence, the Rules govern the approach to be  taken  in
           the human rights appeal.


    12. The Rules cover, in a designated section, deportation  and  Article
        8. Paragraph A398  of  the  Rules  refers  to  "foreign  criminal".
        Paragraph 398 of the Rules refers to "a person". It  must  be  that
        the word person includes  not  only  individuals  who  are  foreign
        criminals as defined in the 2002 Act and the  2007  Act  but  other
        individuals who, in the view of the SSHD, are liable to deportation
        under the 1971 Act. This will include  "foreigners"  who  are  also
        "criminals". Paragraph 398 of the Rules imports the language of the
        2002 Act and thus the consideration to be undertaken  in  assessing
        the UK's obligations under Article 8.


    13. It is unsurprising that the SSHD, in deciding whether an individual
        is liable to deportation under the 1971 Act, should draw  upon  the
        legislative  intention  relating  to  UK  convictions.  Hence   the
        deportation section in the Rules is  not  only  concerned  with  UK
        convictions but also convictions abroad (paragraphs 398(a) and  (b)
        of the Rules). This must include consideration of s117C of the 2002
        Act in determining the appeal against the rejection  of  the  human
        rights claim. The assessment  in  a  human  rights  appeal  by  the
        Tribunal  will  include,  as  per  Charles,  consideration  of  any
        submissions regarding the SSHD's decision.

    14. Paragraph 398(c) does not refer to convictions  but  to  offending.
        This appears to be  a  deliberate  distinction  to  criminality  as
        evidenced by conviction. There is no  requirement  for  a  criminal
        conviction; it is the SSHD's view as to whether  the  behaviour  is
        such  as  caused  serious  harm  or  amounts  to  being  persistent
        offending. This  approach  chimes  with  the  concept  of  a  broad
        discretion  available  to  the  SSHD;  the  discretion  to  take  a
        deportation decision under the 1971 Act.


    15. Where an individual does not fall within the 2002 Act or  2007  Act
        definition of foreign criminal but the SSHD has  taken  a  decision
        under  the  1971  Act,  his  decision  and  his  view  as  to   the
        circumstances that led him to that decision are matters  that  will
        be considered by the Tribunal in determining the proportionality of
        the human rights decision.

    16.  Drawing this together:


                 .  A  decision  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make   a
                   deportation order under the 1971 Act  is  not  predicated
                   upon an individual being a "foreign criminal" as  defined
                   by the 2002 Act or the 2007 Act.
                 . "Foreign criminal" is a term of art in the 2002  Act  and
                   the 2007 Act whereas in the Rules the words simply denote
                   that the individual is a "foreigner" and a "criminal".
                 . Paragraph 398 of the Rules applies not  only  to  foreign
                   criminals as defined in the 2002 Act and the 2007 Act but
                   also  to  other  individuals  who  in  the  view  of  the
                   Secretary of State, are liable to deportation because  of
                   their criminality and/or their offending behaviour.


-----------------------
[1] See Note below
[2] Paragraphs 398 and 399 Immigration Rules; section 117C Nationality
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

