

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: HU/10895/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 6 June 2017                         |on 7 June 2017                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             WARREN ALVIN MILLER
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr Sarwar instructed by SLK Immigration Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Holt ('the  Judge'),  promulgated  on  14
        November 2016, in  which  the  Judge  allowed  Mr  Miller's  appeal
        against  a  decision,  stated  to  be  a  decision  to  revoke  his
        Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR), dated 29 October 2015, said to be
        contrary to Mr Miller's right to private and family life.



Background


     2. Mr Miller entered the United Kingdom in  2002  as  a  visitor.  His
        leave was subsequently extended resulting in  a  grant  of  ILR  in
        2003. On 19 July 2013 Mr Miller was convicted  at  Worcester  Crown
        Court of conspiracy to supply Class A  controlled  drug  -  heroin,
        conspiracy to supply Class A controlled drug -  crack  cocaine  and
        conceal, disguise, convert, transfer and remove criminal  property.
        On  7  February  2014  Mr  Miller  was  sentenced  to  32   months'
        imprisonment.
     3. On 25 July 2014  Mr  Miller  was  served  with  an  order  for  his
        deportation from the United Kingdom due to his  criminal  activity.
        His appeal against the deportation  order  came  before  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Rose sitting at Sheldon Court Birmingham on 25 March
        2015. In a decision dated 30  March  2015  Judge  Rose  allowed  Mr
        Miller's appeal on human rights grounds.
     4. On 16 June 2015, the Secretary of State wrote to Mr Miller advising
        him of the intention of the Home  Office  to  revoke  his  ILR  and
        providing him with an  opportunity  to  submit  representations  in
        support  of  a  continued   entitlement   to   ILR.   Mr   Miller's
        representatives responded on 26 June 2015 but such response was not
        considered by the Home Office to establish compelling reasons as to
        why Mr Miller's ILR should  not  be  revoked.  Accordingly,  on  29
        October 2015 Mr Miller was served with a Reasons for Revocation  of
        Indefinite Leave letter.
     5. [30 - 31] of the letter are in the following terms:


         30.  In light of the above, it has been decided to revoke your  ILR
             in view of the fact that Section 76(1),  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applies to you. This  decision
             has been recorded as determined on 29 October 2015.


         31.  You have a right of appeal against the decision to revoke your
             ILR under section 82(2)(f) of the Nationality and  Immigration
             Act 2002. The relevant papers are enclosed.


     6. An application for leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal issued  by
        the Secretary of State was granted by another judge of  the  First-
        tier Tribunal in the following terms:


   1. The appellant, a citizen of  Jamaica,  had  his  indefinite  leave  to
      remain (ILR) revoked on 29. 10.2015  (an  earlier  deportation  appeal
      having been allowed on  family  life  grounds),  and  his  appeal  was
      allowed by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Holt  (promulgated  on
      14.11.2016).
   2. The grounds, which were in time, complained that the judge  erred  in:
      allowing the appeal when there was no jurisdiction, since the position
      taken in the refusal letter, that there was an appeal right, had  been
      a mistake.
   3. The Secretary of State not only stated  that  there  was  a  right  of
      appeal in the written decision, but also  adopted  the  same  position
      throughout the appeal process,  including  at  the  hearing,  where  a
      representative was present. The errors in  the  decision  and  at  the
      hearing, if they were such, were on  the  part  of  the  Secretary  of
      State, and the grounds are silent as to how they occurred, but  it  is
      also notable that  neither  the  appellant's  counsel  nor  the  judge
      spotted the issue.
   4. In R v Secretary of State for the Home Department ex p  Ram  [1979]  1
      All ER 687 leave granted by mistake (if no fraud) had to  be  honoured
      (an analogous situation but with more serious consequences). An appeal
      right is a statutory matter, however, and  it  is  arguable  that  the
      Secretary of State cannot grant such a right on a discretionary  basis
      where none exists. Even if this was a concession rather  than  a  pure
      error it is therefore still arguable that there was no jurisdiction to
      hear the appeal.
   5. There is an obvious concern about fairness where  a  party  raises  an
      issue for the first time after the hearing, and  in  general  a  judge
      will not err in law in not dealing with an issue not before her, but I
      have nevertheless decided that this is an appropriate case in which to
      grant permission because of the jurisdictional point.
   6. Despite the matter not being raised it is arguable that the judge  did
      not have jurisdiction, and erred in law as a result. The Secretary  of
      State should be prepared to address any costs issues at the  error  of
      law hearing.



Error of law


     7. The starting point in this matter must be the chronology. It is not
        disputed that Mr Miller was granted ILR.  It is not  disputed  that
        Mr Miller is a foreign criminal as that term is defined in  the  UK
        Borders Act 2007 who was made the subject of  a  deportation  order
        because of his criminal conduct.
     8. The power to make a deportation order and,  as  a  first  step,  to
        decide to make one, stems originally from section 5(1) and  section
        3(5)(a) and section 3(6) of the Immigration Act 1971.  Section 3(5)
        of the 1971 Act gives the Secretary of State power to deport a  non
        British Citizen (a) if he deems it to be conducive  to  the  public
        good (b) if another member of the family is to be deported and  (c)
        if a court recommends it after conviction of an offence  punishable
        by imprisonment.
     9. The passing of the UK Borders Act 2007  changed  the  landscape  in
        relation to deportation decisions. The  most  common  source  of  a
        decision to deport a convicted person now lies in the provisions of
        section 32 of that Act. The effect of that section is  that  (i)  a
        non-British citizen who (inter-alia) is  sentenced  to  a  term  of
        imprisonment or more is termed a 'foreign criminal', (ii)  as  such
        is deportation is deemed to be conducive to the public good for the
        purposes of section 3(5)(a) of the 1971 Act so that he is liable to
        deportation, and  (iii)  the  making  of  a  deportation  order  is
        mandated re-rather  than  discretionary,  and  irrevocable,  unless
        specific exemptions apply, which one is the removal would  infringe
        Convention rights.
    10. Section 5(1) and (2) of the Immigration Act 1971 provide:


             5(1)     Where a person is under section  3(5)  or  (6)  above
                  liable to deportation ,  then  subject  to  the  following
                  provisions of this Act the Secretary of State may  make  a
                  deportation order against him, that is  to  say  an  order
                  requiring him to leave and prohibiting him  from  entering
                  the United Kingdom; and  a  deportation  order  against  a
                  person shall invalidate any leave to enter  or  remain  in
                  the United Kingdom given to him before the order  is  made
                  or while it is in force.


             5 (2)    a deportation order made against a person may at  any
                  time be revoked by  further  order  of  the  Secretary  of
                  State, and shall cease to have  effect  if  he  becomes  a
                  British citizen.


    11.  The  deportation  order  affecting  Mr  Miller  is  an  "automatic
        deportation" order deemed to be conducive to the  public  good  for
        the purposes of section 3(5) of the 1971 Act. The effect of section
        5(1) of the 1971 Act is that Mr Miller's ILR was invalidated  as  a
        result of the making of the deportation order.
    12. Mr Miller, arguably, remains liable to be deported but an order for
        his deportation cannot be made in his present circumstances because
        it would entail an infringement of his Convention rights.
    13. Mr Mills was asked whether  the  Secretary  of  State  had  made  a
        further order granting Mr Miller ILR. He advised the Tribunal  that
        this had not occurred.
    14. The situation relating to a grant of  leave  invalidated  following
        the making of a deportation order, and whether  the  revocation  of
        that order had the effect of reviving leave previously granted, has
        been the subject of detailed investigation  by  the  Senior  Courts
        culminating in the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case  of  R
        (on the application of Fitzroy George) v Secretary of State for the
        Home Department [2014] UKSC 28. The Court of Appeal had found  that
        such previous leave was revived which was an argument  rejected  by
        the Supreme Court where they find  in  the  concluding  section  of
        their judgment:


         29.  The terms of section 5 of the 1971 Act are, as words,  capable
             either of importing revival of  leave  or  of  not  doing  so.
             Revival is not their  natural  meaning,  because  the  natural
             meaning is that revocation takes effect when  it  happens  and
             does not undo events occurring  during  the  lifetime  of  the
             deportation order. Revival is a significant  and  far-reaching
             legal concept, and it is much more likely that it  would  have
             been specifically provided for if it had been intended.


         30.  The reasoning of the Court of Appeal, from section 76  of  the
             2002 Act, cannot be supported. Whilst statutes in pari materia
             should be construed consistently if possible, a later  statute
             is not a reliable guide to the  meaning  of  an  earlier  one,
             especially in a field such as  immigration  where  social  and
             political pressures have led to fast  moving  changes  in  the
             legislation. In particular, the history of  the  treatment  of
             section 5(2) of the 1971 Act in successive rules  laid  before
             Parliament both before and ever since the 1971 Act was  passed
             shows very plainly that there cannot have been  a  legislative
             assumption that revival was its effect.


         31.  The contrary construction, involving no question  of  revival,
             is entirely consistent with the scheme of the  1971  Act  (and
             indeed subsequent statues) on the topic  of  deportation.  The
             position of Mr George is  not  analogous  to  someone  with  a
             pending appeal. His status as a person liable  to  deportation
             has long since been established;  his  appeal  challenging  it
             failed long ago. Persons are liable to be deported, under  any
             of the procedures which may apply, because their  presence  in
             the United Kingdom is judged not to be conducive to the public
             good. That is true of Mr George. If it turns out that there is
             a legal obstacle to actual removal,  for  example  because  of
             Convention rights which cannot be  infringed,  that  does  not
             alter the fact he is a person whose presence is not  conducive
             to the public good. There is no legal symmetry  in  indefinite
             leave to remain coexisting with the status  of  someone  whose
             presence is  not  conducive  to  the  public  good.  It  makes
             perfectly good sense, whilst the legal obstacle  remains,  for
             the Secretary of State to be in  a  position  to  revisit  the
             terms of leave to enter. Moreover, the legal obstacle  is  not
             necessarily, or even usually, permanent.  If  it  arises  from
             conditions in the individual's home country, those  conditions
             may change or he may come into  favour  with  the  authorities
             when previously he was not.  If  it  arises  from  his  family
             connections in the United Kingdom, those may easily change. If
             someone in his position cannot at present be deported  because
             to  do  so  would  infringe  his  article  8  rights,  and  if
             indefinite leave to remain were thereupon to revive, he  would
             remain irremovable if he turned his back  on  his  family,  or
             they on him, as may not infrequently occur. Whilst  there  may
             be different routes by which the Secretary of State could  now
             achieve a similar result, for example via section  76  of  the
             2002 Act, it is clear that this was also the  coherent  result
             of the 1971 Act, from the time that it was enacted.


         32.  On its correct construction, section 5(2) of the 1971 Act does
             not mean  that  if  the  deportation  order  is  revoked,  the
             invalidation  by  section  5(1)  of   leave   to   remain   is
             retrospectively undone and the previous leave to  remain  does
             not revive. Mr George  remains  liable  to  deportation,  even
             though it cannot at present be carried out.  His  position  in
             the United Kingdom must be  regularised,  but  that  does  not
             entail a  recognition  of  indefinite  leave  to  remain.  The
             Secretary of States grants to him of successive limited leaves
             is perfectly proper. Whether or not it may become  appropriate
             after the passage of time  to  re-grant  indefinite  leave  to
             remain is a matter for her.


         33.   For those reasons, the  appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State
             should be allowed and the order of the  judge  dismissing  the
             claim for judicial review should be reinstated.


    15. It was accepted by both advocates that Mr  Miller's  ILR  has  been
        invalidated  by  the  making  of  the  deportation  order  and  not
        automatically revived following the decision of Judge Rose allowing
        the appeal on human rights grounds. Mr Mills  confirmed  there  had
        been no further grant of ILR to  Mr  Miller  by  the  Secretary  of
        State.
    16. It is known there was a previous practice by the Secretary of State
        in cases such as this to serve upon a beneficiary of ILR  a  notice
        of intention to revoke that leave and then to  produce  a  decision
        confirming the revocation, if that  was  the  appropriate  outcome.
        Such a practice, arguably, has no merit following the  decision  of
        the Supreme Court in  Fitzroy  George  which  clarified  the  legal
        effect of a deportation order upon an earlier  grant  of  leave  to
        remain.
    17. As there is no evidence that Mr Miller has had ILR since  the  date
        of the making of the deportation order and the  revocation  of  the
        previous grant of such leave, the  service  of  a  notification  of
        intention to revoke indefinite leave to remain has no effect and is
        not a lawful decision. The Secretary State cannot  purport  in  the
        circumstances to revoke a non-existent status.
    18. From the material misdirection in law that led  the  decision-maker
        to follow the  earlier  practices,  notification  of  intention  to
        revoke Mr Miller's ILR was issued, purportedly conferring  a  right
        of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, which was exercised.
    19. Post 10 November 2014 and the changes introduced by the Immigration
        Act 2014, an appeal may now only be brought, by virtue  of  section
        82 (1) of the 2002 Act, where the Secretary of State has decided to
        refuse a protection claim made by an appellant, or a  human  rights
        claim made by an appellant, or where the  Secretary  of  State  has
        decided to revoke an appellant's protection status.
    20. In this case, no protection or human rights claim  has  been  made.
        The decision to grant Mr Miller a limited period of leave  did  not
        entail an interference with a protected right or  raise  protection
        issues. It is therefore not a decision in relation to  which  there
        is a statutory right of appeal. As the question of jurisdiction was
        not considered by Judge Holt in the decision under  challenge,  who
        proceeded to treat the matter as a valid appeal  and  to  determine
        the same accordingly when there was no jurisdiction to  do  so,  we
        find that to a material error of law.
    21. The way forward in this case, as there is no power in  a  statutory
        appeal to  quash  a  decision,  is  to  conclude  that  Judge  Holt
        materially erred in making a misdirection of law and determining  a
        matter for which she had no jurisdiction. We  therefore  set  aside
        the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
    22. In proceeding to remake the decision, we remind ourselves  that  in
        Virk v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ
        652 it was held that although the Secretary of State had failed  to
        raise before the First-tier Tribunal the issue of  that  Tribunal's
        jurisdiction to entertain  a  family's  application  for  leave  to
        remain, the Upper Tribunal was entitled  to  dismiss  the  family's
        subsequent appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's decision on the
        basis that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  had  jurisdiction,
        notwithstanding that the point had not been raised below.
    23. The appeal now before the Upper Tribunal is therefore a matter upon
        which we cannot make a decision, for want  of  jurisdiction,  there
        being no valid appeal against the respondents, unlawful, decision.
    24. Having announced our decision in court Mr Sarwar raised  the  issue
        of costs and sought an order that the Secretary of State shall  pay
        Mr Miller's costs. This  was  resisted  by  Mr  Mills  although  he
        accepted that the decision purporting to confer a right  of  appeal
        has always been  legally  incorrect.  It  is  not  only  that  that
        decision is incorrect, for  want  of  jurisdiction,  but  that  the
        procedure adopted by the decision-maker is itself  arguably  flawed
        for the reasons set out above. This case involves a chain of events
        arising from poor decision-making the  consequences  of  which  are
        that Mr Miller brought an appeal, incurring legal costs, against an
        arguably unlawful decision, but which purported to give him a legal
        right that did not exist.
    25. We consider the appropriate order for costs at this stage is for an
        order that the Secretary of State shall pay Mr Miller's  reasonable
        costs of the claim with reference HU/10895/2015, to be assessed  if
        not agreed.

Decision

    26. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. We set aside
        the decision of the original Judge. We are  unable  to  remake  the
        decision want of jurisdiction.
    27. The Secretary of State shall pay Mr Miller's  reasonable  costs  of
        the claim, to be assessed if not agreed.


   Anonymity.


    28. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. We make no such order pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 6 June 2017
