
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/10796/2016
                                                               HU/10799/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 16th January 2019                          |On 1st February 2019         |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

|           |MRS A K                                           |             |
|           |MASTER I K                                        |             |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |Appellants   |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |             |
|           |                                                  |Respondent   |

                                  Anonymity


I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to  identify  the  appellants.  No  report  of
these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  them.    This
direction applies to both the appellants  and  to  the  respondent  and  all
other persons. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to  contempt
of court proceedings.
I make this order because the second appellant is a minor.
The parties are at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Canter, of Counsel, instructed by Simona Rodkin
                    Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent: Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are nationals of Turkey, born (respectively) on  27  May
    1975 and 29 August 2007. They appeal against a decision of Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Kelley  who,  in  a  determination  promulgated  26
    October 2018 following a hearing on 8  October  2018,  dismissed  their
    appeals against a decision of the respondent of 6 April 2016, to refuse
    their applications of 8 December 2015 for leave to  remain  ("LTR")  in
    the United Kingdom as the spouse and child (respectively)  of  Mr  A  K
    (hereafter the "sponsor"). The  sponsor  is  a  Turkish  national  with
    indefinite leave to remain ("ILTR") granted under the Immigration Rules
    that were in force (the "standstill provisions") as at the date of  the
    European  Communities  Turkish  Association  Agreement   (the   "Ankara
    Agreement"). He was granted ILTR as a  sell-employed  business  person.
    The second appellant is the son of the first appellant and the sponsor.



 2. The appellants appealed on the only statutory ground available to them,
    namely that the decision was unlawful under  section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998.

 3. The judge found that  the  appellants  enjoyed  family  life  with  the
    sponsor. He found that, as the first appellant was  in  United  Kingdom
    without LTR, she had to satisfy the requirements of EX.1(b) of Appendix
    FM, i.e. that  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing in Turkey.  He  was  not  satisfied  that  there  were  such
    insurmountable obstacles. He found that the second appellant was not  a
    "qualifying child" for the purposes of EX.1 (a), having only  lived  in
    the United Kingdom for 4 years.  The  appellants  have  not  challenged
    these findings.

 4. The judge then considered the Article 8 claim outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  He  was  not  satisfied  that  there  were  any  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances that warranted a grant of  discretionary  LTR
    under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

 5. The grounds only challenge the judge's finding that  the  decision  was
    not disproportionate  in  his  assessment  of  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules. They may be summarised as follows:

    (i)     (Ground 1) The judge  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  consider
          whether the appellants meet the requirements of Appendix  ECAA  of
          the Immigration Rules. It is contended that  the  appellants  meet
          the requirements of Appendix ECAA and that this  was  therefore  a
          relevant factor in the assessment of proportionality  outside  the
          Immigration Rules.

            Ground 1 entails consideration of whether any reliance  by  the
          appellants on their satisfying  the  requirements  of  Part  7  of
          Appendix ECAA constituted a "new matter"  within  the  meaning  of
          S.85(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (the
          "2002 Act"). If  it  does,  then  the  judge  was  precluded  from
          considering  whether  the  appellants  met  the  requirements   of
          Appendix ECAA unless the respondent  had  consented,  pursuant  to
          s.85(5)  of  the  2002  Act.  There  was  no  Presenting   Officer
          representing the respondent at the hearing before the judge.

    (ii)    (Ground 2) The judge erred in law by failing  to  consider  the
          principle in Chikwamba v SSHD [2007] UKHL  40.  It  is  contended,
          inter alia, that his explanation at para 22 of  his  decision  for
          not doing so made no sense. In addition, he erred in  taking  into
          account the precarious immigration status  of  the  appellants  in
          assessing proportionality.

Background

 6. The sponsor arrived in the United Kingdom on a  visit  visa  in  August
    2010. He then applied for and was granted further  LTR  as  a  business
    person under the standstill provisions.

 7. The appellants entered the United Kingdom on 12 August 2014 with  entry
    clearance visas to join the sponsor as his dependent wife and son.  All
    three then applied for ILTR. The sponsor's application was  granted  on
    29 April 2015 but  the  appellants'  applications  were  refused  in  a
    decision letter dated 29 April 2015 because they did not  meet  the  2-
    year residence requirement under Home Office guidance  issued  in  2011
    for dependants of business persons granted leave under  the  standstill
    provisions. On 15 May 2015, the appellants again applied for LTR as the
    dependants of a Turkish national business person. This application  was
    refused on 11 November 2015.

 8. The appellants then made their applications of 8 December 2015 for  LTR
    that were the subject of the appeal before the judge. It is plain  that
    these applications were applications for LTR  on  the  basis  of  their
    rights under Article 8 of the ECHR. The application form (hereafter the
    "Application"), signed and dated 8 December 2015, was accompanied by  a
    letter dated 8 December 2015 from  Stoke  White  (pages  55-60  of  the
    appellant's bundle), who were then acting for the appellants (hereafter
    the "Letter of application"). The  opening  paragraph  of  this  letter
    reads:

            "Our clients make this application for leave to  remain  in  the
             UK on basis of the family and private life in the UK, namely on
             basis of their relationship and  life  in  the  UK  with  their
             husband, respectively, [Mr A K ] who has settled status."

 9. The remainder  of  the  Letter  of  Application  explains  why  it  was
    considered that the appellants' applications for LTR on their basis  of
    their rights under Article 8 should be granted.  There  is  no  mention
    that  they  satisfy  any  of  the  requirements  under  the  standstill
    provisions or the then applicable Home Office guidance relating to  the
    requirements for LTR as dependants of Turkish nationals who  have  been
    granted leave as business persons under the standstill provisions.

10. On 6 July 2018, i.e. in the period between the date of the decision and
    the date of  the  hearing  before  the  judge,  Appendix  ECAA  of  the
    Immigration Rules came into force. This sets out the requirements to be
    met for the grant of ILTR to Turkish nationals who  have  been  granted
    LTR under the "ECAA worker" or the "ECCA business" category (as defined
    in Appendix ECAA) and their partners and children. Needless to say,  as
    Appendix ECAA was not in force  then,  it  was  not  mentioned  in  the
    Application or the Letter of Application nor was it considered  by  the
    respondent.

The judge's decision

11. It is not necessary to summarise the  judge's  reasons  for  concluding
    that the appellants did not satisfy the requirements for LTR under  the
    Immigration Rules because his findings in this  regard  have  not  been
    challenged.

12. Nor is it necessary to summarise the judge's  reasons  for  concluding,
    following  his  assessment  of  the  Article  8  claims   outside   the
    Immigration Rules, that the decision was  not  disproportionate.  If  I
    decide that the judge did err in his assessment of  proportionality  as
    contended in ground 1  and/or  ground  2,  it  would  follow  that  his
    assessment of proportionality would be set  aside.  It  would  then  be
    necessary to re-assess proportionality. Neither Mr Canter nor Mr Clarke
    sought to suggest otherwise.

13. Paras 22-24 of the judge's decision are  relevant  to  the  grounds  of
    appeal. They read:


       "22. I  do  not  consider  that  the  principles  in  Chikwamba  (FC)
             (Appellant) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
             [2008] UKHL 40 have any relevance  to  this  appeal.  This  is
             because neither the Immigration Rules nor any other expression
             of the Secretary of State's policy require the  appellants  to
             seek  entry  clearance  from  abroad.  On  the  contrary,  the
             appellants were entitled to (and did) make their  applications
             for further leave to remain whilst  they  were  still  in  the
             United Kingdom. So far as I am aware, the Secretary  of  State
             has never suggested, otherwise.


       23.  Before embarking upon my Article 8 analysis of the facts, it  is
             first necessary to deal with  Ms  Anzami's  challenge  to  the
             legality  of  the  respondent's  reasons  for   refusing   the
             appellant's  [sic]  applications  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
             Immigration Rules.  There  are  two  linked  aspects  to  this
             challenge. Firstly, it is said that the appellants  ought  not
             to have been treated as 'overstayers' given  that  they  would
             not be treated as such in an application made under  paragraph
             7.1 of Appendix ECAA of the Immigration Rules. Secondly, it is
             said that given that the second appellant is the  child  of  a
             person who  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  under
             Appendix ECAA of the Rules, it was unlawful for the respondent
             to insist upon him meeting the requirement for that  leave  to
             be granted under Appendix FM.


       24.  It is immediately apparent that both  arguments  depend  upon  a
             'pick and mix' approach to what are in fact two discrete codes
             under the Rules. In my judgement, it  is  not  appropriate  to
             'borrow' a requirement that an applicant is able to meet  from
             one code simply because  he  is.  unable  to  meet  a  similar
             requirement  under  another.  Each  Appendix  (ECAA   and   FM
             respectively) is  intended  to  codify  the  United  Kingdom's
             obligations under  a  particular  and  distinct  international
             treaty.  The  fact  that  a  person  happens  to  qualify  for
             consideration for leave to remain under both codes does not in
             my judgement alter the need for him to meet  the  requirements
             that. are relevant to the basis upon which he seeks it.  Given
             their universal nature, this applies with  especial  force  to
             provisions that are intended to codify  rights  guaranteed  by
             the 1956 European  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human
             Rights  and  Fundamental  Freedoms.  Were  it  otherwise,  the
             citizens  of  one  country  would  be  entitled   to   receive
             preferential treatment over the citizens of  another  under  a
             Convention  that.   expressly   forbids   the   discriminatory
             application of its provisions on grounds  of  national  origin
             (see Article 14). I therefore reject Ms Anzami's submission in
             this regard and  now  turn  to  consider  the  position  under
             Appendix FM and Article 8. In doing so,  I  have  adopted  the
             step-by-step approach of Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27."

Section 85 of the 2002 Act

14. During the course of submissions, I was referred to ss.82, 85  and  120
    of the 2002 Act. Section 84 is also relevant. These provide:


         82. Right of appeal to the Tribunal
         (1)      A person "P" may appeal to the Tribunal where -
             (a)       the Secretary of  State  has  decided  to  refuse  a
                 protection claim made by P,
             (b) the Secretary of State has decided  to  refuse  the  human
                 rights claim made by P, or
             (c)       the Secretary of State has  decided  to  revoke  P's
                 protection status.


         84. Grounds of appeal
         (1)      An appeal under section 82(1)(a)  (refusal  of  protection
             claim) must be bought on one or more of the following  grounds
             -
             (a)       that  removal  of  the  appellant  from  the  United
                  Kingdom would  breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
                  under the Refugee Convention;
             (b)       that  removal  of  the  appellant  from  the  United
                  Kingdom would breach the United Kingdom's  obligations  in
                  relation to persons eligible for a grant  of  humanitarian
                  protection;
             (c)       that  removal  of  the  appellant  from  the  United
                  Kingdom would be unlawful under section  6  of  the  Human
                  Rights Act 1998 (public authority not to act  contrary  to
                  Human Rights Convention).
         (2)      An appeal under section 82(1)(b) (refusal of human  rights
             claim) must be bought on the  grounds  that  the  decision  is
             unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

        85. Matters to be considered
      (1)   An appeal under section 82(1) against  the  decision  shall  be
             treated by the Tribunal as  including  an  appeal  against  any
             decision in respect of which  the  appellant  has  a  right  of
             appeal under section 82(1).
      (2)   If an appellant under section 82(1)  makes  a  statement  under
             section 120, the Tribunal shall consider any matter raised in a
             statement which constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed
             in section 84 the decision appealed against.
      (3)   Subsection (2) applies to a statement made  under  section  120
             whether the statement was made before or after the  appeal  was
             commenced.
      (4)   On an appeal under section 82(1) ...  against  a  decision  the
             Tribunal may consider... any matter which it thinks relevant to
             the substance of the decision, including...  a  matter  arising
             after the date of decision.
      (5)   But the Tribunal must not consider  a  new  matter  unless  the
             Secretary of Status has given the Tribunal consent to do so.
      (6)   A matter is a "new matter" if -
            (a)  it constitutes a ground of appeal  of  a  kind  listed  in
             section 84, and
            (b)  the Secretary of State has not previously  considered  the
             matter in the context of -
                 (i) the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or
                 (ii) a statement made by the appellant under section 120.


        120  Requirement to state additional grounds for application etc
        (1)      Subsection (2) applies to a person ("P") if-
            (a)  P has made a protection claim or a human rights claim,
            (b)  P has made an application to enter or remain in the United
                Kingdom, or
            (c)  a decision to deport or remove P has been or may be taken.
        (2)      The Secretary of State or an immigration officer may serve
            a notice on P requiring P to provide a statement setting out-
           (a)   P's reasons for wishing to enter or remain in  the  United
            Kingdom,
           (b)   any grounds on which P should be  permitted  to  enter  or
                remain in the United Kingdom, and
           (c)   any grounds on which P  should  not  be  removed  from  or
                required to leave the United Kingdom.
        (3)      A statement under subsection (2) need not  repeat  reasons
            or grounds set out in-
           (a)   P's protection or human rights claim,
           (b)   the application mentioned in subsection (1)(b), or
            (c)    an  application  to  which  the  decision  mentioned  in
            subsection (1)(c) relates.
        (4)      Subsection  (5)  applies  to  a  person  ("P")  if  P  has
            previously been served with a notice under subsection (2) and-
           (a)   P requires leave to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom
            but does not have it, or
           (b)   P has leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  only
                by virtue of  [section  3C  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971]
                (continuation of leave pending decision or appeal).
         (5)     Where P's circumstances have changed since  the  Secretary
            of State or an immigration officer was last made aware of  them
            (whether in the application or claim  mentioned  in  subsection
            (1) or in a statement under subsection (2) or this  subsection)
            so that P has-
           (a)   additional reasons for wishing to enter or remain  in  the
            United Kingdom,
           (b)   additional grounds on which P should be permitted to enter
                or remain in the United Kingdom, or
           (c)   additional grounds on which P should not be  removed  from
                or required to leave the United Kingdom,
            P  must,  as  soon  as  reasonably   practicable,   provide   a
            supplementary  statement  to  the  Secretary  of  State  or  an
            immigration officer setting out the new circumstances  and  the
            additional reasons or grounds.
        (6)      In this section-
           "human rights claim"  and  "protection  claim"   have  the  same
                meanings as in Part 5;
           references to "grounds"  are to grounds on which an appeal under
                Part 5 may be brought.

15. Section 82 and 85 were considered  by  the  Vice  President  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Jackson in Mahmud (S. 85  NIAA  2002  -  'new  matters')
    [2017] UKUT 00488 (IAC). The judicial head-note reads:

            "1.  Whether something is or is not a 'new matter' goes  to  the
             jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal in the appeal  and  the
             First-tier Tribunal must therefore  determine  for  itself  the
             issue.

            2.   A 'new matter' is a matter which constitutes  a  ground  of
             appeal of a kind listed in section 84, as required  by  section
             85(6)(a) of the 2002 Act.   Constituting  a  ground  of  appeal
             means that it must  contain  a  matter  which  could  raise  or
             establish a listed ground of appeal.  A matter is  the  factual
             substance of a claim.  A ground of appeal is the legal basis on
             which the facts in any given matter could form the basis  of  a
             challenge to the decision under appeal.

            3.   In practice, a new matter is a  factual  matrix  which  has
             not previously been considered by the Secretary of State in the
             context of the decision in section 82(1) or a statement made by
             the appellant under section 120.  This requires the  matter  to
             be  factually  distinct  from  that  previously  raised  by  an
             appellant, as opposed to  further  or  better  evidence  of  an
             existing  matter.   The  assessment   will   always   be   fact
             sensitive."

16. Paras 29-31 of Mahmud are also helpful. They read:


        "29.     A matter is the factual substance of a claim. A ground  of
             appeal is the legal basis on which  the  facts  in  any  given
             matter could form the basis of a  challenge  to  the  decision
             under appeal.  For example,  medical  evidence  of  a  serious
             health condition could be a matter which constitutes a  ground
             of appeal on human rights grounds based on Article  3  of  the
             European Convention on Human Rights which if  breached,  would
             mean that removal would be contrary to section 6 of the  Human
             Rights Act, a ground of appeal in section 84(2)  of  the  2002
             Act.  Similarly, evidence of a relationship with a partner  in
             the United Kingdom could  be  a  matter  which  constitutes  a
             ground of appeal based on Article 8 and for the  same  reasons
             could fall within section 84(2) of the 2002  Act  as  if  made
             out, removal would be contrary  to  section  6  of  the  Human
             Rights Act.


        30.      A 'new matter' is a matter which constitutes a  ground  of
             appeal of a kind listed in section 84, as required by  section
             85(6)(a) of the 2002 Act.  Constituting  a  ground  of  appeal
             means that it must contain  a  matter  which  could  raise  or
             establish a listed ground of appeal.  In the absence  of  this
             restriction, section 85(5) of the 2002 Act  could  potentially
             allow the Respondent to  give  the  Tribunal  jurisdiction  to
             consider something which is not a ground of appeal by consent,
             thereby undermining sections 82 and 84 of the 2002 Act;


        31.      Practically, a new matter is a factual  matrix  which  has
             not previously been considered by the Secretary  of  State  in
             the context of the decision in section 82(1)  or  a  statement
             made by the appellant under section 120.   This  requires  the
             matter to be factually distinct from that previously raised by
             an appellant, as opposed to further or better evidence  of  an
             existing  matter.   The  assessment  will   always   be   fact
             sensitive.  By way of example,  evidence  that  a  couple  had
             married since the decision is likely to be  new  evidence  but
             not a new matter where the relationship  had  previously  been
             relied  upon  and  considered  by  the  Secretary  of   State.
             Conversely, evidence that a couple had had a child  since  the
             decision is likely to be a new matter as it adds an additional
             distinct   new   family   relationship   (with   consequential
             requirements to consider the best interests of the child under
             section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009) which itself  could  separately  raise  or  establish  a
             ground of  appeal  under  Article  8  that  removal  would  be
             contrary to section 6 of the Human Rights Act."

Submissions

17. Mr Canter submitted that, applying Mahmud, the appellants' reliance  on
    Appendix ECAA did not constitute a "new matter" within the  meaning  of
    s.85(6). The  factual  matrix  upon  which  the  appellants  relied  in
    connection with the requirements of Appendix  ECAA  was  drawn  to  the
    respondent's attention in the Letter of Application and was  considered
    by the respondent in the decision  letter  challenged  in  the  instant
    appeals. Given that Appendix ECAA was not in existence at the  relevant
    time,  there  was  no  specific  reference  to  it  in  the  Letter  of
    Application and the decision letter.

18. Mr Canter submitted that the judge should have considered  whether  the
    appellants met the requirements of Appendix ECAA in order to assess the
    proportionality of the decision outside the Immigration Rules. If  they
    satisfied these requirements, this was  a  weighty  consideration  when
    assessing proportionality. It is clear from  para  23  of  the  judge's
    decision that he refused to consider whether the  appellants  satisfied
    the requirements of Appendix ECAA. In doing so, he materially erred  in
    law.

19. In response, Mr Clarke referred me to para 23 of the  judge's  decision
    which, he submitted, sets out what was argued before him in relation to
    Appendix ECAA. Para 23 shows that there were two limited aspects of the
    appellants' case on Appendix ECAA. He submitted that the case  advanced
    to  the  judge  in  relation  to  Appendix   ECAA   did   not   concern
    proportionality  but  the  lawfulness  of  the  respondent's  decision.
    However, the judge did not have jurisdiction to  consider  whether  the
    respondent's decision  was  lawful.  In  any  event,  the  respondent's
    decision could not be unlawful for failure to  consider  Appendix  ECAA
    given that Appendix  ECAA  was  not  in  existence  then.  It  was  not
    suggested to the judge on the  appellants'  behalf  that  part  7.1  of
    Appendix ECAA was relevant to proportionality under Article 8.

20. Mr Clarke submitted that an application for LTR under Appendix ECAA  or
    the standstill provisions  was  not  a  human  rights  application.  He
    submitted that this followed from the judgment of the Court  of  Appeal
    in SSHD v CA (Turkey) [2018] EWCA Civ  2875.  The  appellants  had  not
    submitted statements under s.120 of the 2002 Act raising Appendix  ECAA
    after it came into force on 6 July 2018. Accordingly, any reliance upon
    Appendix ECAA before the judge would constitute a new  matter.  As  the
    respondent was not represented before the judge, consent was not given.
    He therefore submitted that the judge had no jurisdiction  to  consider
    Appendix ECAA. Accordingly, any failure by the judge to consider it was
    immaterial.

21. Upon my pressing him to give me a clear answer,  Mr  Clarke  eventually
    accepted that para 9 of grounds correctly distils  from  Appendix  ECAA
    the requirements that the appellants  had  to  satisfy  under  Appendix
    ECAA. Para 9 of the grounds reads:


        "Part 7 of Appendix ECAA  to  the  Immigration  Rules  states  that
        partners of Turkish Workers or Business Persons with. ILE,  can  be
        granted leave to remain where:


        a. They are the spouse or civil partner;
        b. The Sponsor was granted ILR. in Line with the ECAA  guidance  in
             force prior to 16 March 2018;
        c. They have last been granted leave to remain as the dependant  of
             an ECAA worker or business person;
        d. They are without leave to remain because they did not  meet  the
             two year residence requirement (under the  previous  guidance)
             and did  not  qualify  for  further  leave  because  the  ECAA
             business person had acquired ILR;
        d. They are together in a subsisting  relationship  with  the  ECAA
             worker or business person, they don't fall for  refusal  under
             the general grounds and  that  maintenance  and  accommodation
             requirements are met."

22. On being pressed, Mr Clarke also accepted that the appellants appear to
    meet Part 7.1 although  he  stressed  that  this  could  not  bind  any
    decision-maker in any subsequent application by  the  appellants  under
    Appendix ECAA. He reminded me that they had not  made  any  application
    for LTR  under  Appendix  ECAA.  Furthermore,  he  submitted  that  the
    respondent's decision could not be regarded as disproportionate on this
    basis because they have the option of making an in-country  application
    for LTR under Appendix ECAA. The possibility of  making  an  in-country
    application means that the decision would not interfere with any family
    life or private life, in his submission.

23. In relation to ground 2, Mr Clarke accepted that the judge's  reasoning
    at para 22 for not considering the principle in Chikwamba was in error.
    However, he submitted that this  was  not  material  because:  (i)  the
    appellants had not argued before the judge that they meet the  criteria
    for the grant of entry clearance  under  Appendix  ECAA;  (ii)  in  any
    event, Appendix ECAA is not applicable to entry clearance  applications
    because it only applies to in-country applications for LTR;  and  (iii)
    as the appellants had not submitted English language test certificates,
    they could not satisfy  the  requirements  for  entry  clearance  under
    Appendix FM on the evidence before the judge.

24. In response, Mr Canter submitted that it  was  not  necessary  for  the
    appellants to serve a s.120 statement  following  the  introduction  of
    Appendix ECAA. Section 120 requires applicants to notify the respondent
    if there had been a change in their circumstances. There  had  been  no
    change in their circumstances. What had changed was the introduction of
    Appendix ECAA. The Secretary of State must have been aware that his own
    Immigration Rules had changed with the introduction of  Appendix  ECAA.
    The appellants' factual matrix remained the same.  The  factual  matrix
    upon which they relied was always based on their relationship with  the
    sponsor who had obtained ILTR as a Turkish business person. The  reason
    why they made their applications for LTR on human  rights  grounds  was
    that an earlier application for LTR as dependants of a Turkish business
    person was refused because they had  then  only  lived  in  the  United
    Kingdom for 4 months and therefore did not meet  the  2-year  residence
    requirement.

25. With regard to the judge's summary of the submissions advanced  on  the
    appellants' behalf in relation to Appendix ECAA, Mr Canter said that he
    had to accept that para 23 of  the  judge's  decision  shows  that  the
    argument advanced by the appellants' Counsel before the  judge  related
    to the legality of the respondent's  decision.  However,  he  submitted
    that this did not affect the  appellants'  case  that,  where  a  judge
    considers a human rights appeal, the judge is obliged to  look  at  the
    Immigration Rules and consider  whether  the  appellant  satisfies  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules because it is a weighty factor in
    the appellant's favour in the assessment of proportionality outside the
    Immigration Rules if the requirements are satisfied.

26. In relation to ground 2, Mr Canter said that it appears that there were
    no English language test certificates before the judge. However, in his
    submission, the judge should nevertheless have considered the fact that
    the remaining criteria for the grant of entry clearance were satisfied.
    He  submitted  that,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  the  appellants
    satisfied the requirements for the grant of entry clearance.

27. Mr Canter submitted that Mr Clarke's submission that the decision  does
    not interfere with the appellants' rights under Article 8 because  they
    are able to submit in-country applications for LTR under Appendix  ECAA
    means that the appellants would be left to suffer the inconvenience and
    expense of making another application during which time they  would  be
    left without LTR.

28. I reserved my decision.

Assessment

29. In relation to Mr Clarke's reliance upon the fact that  the  appellants
    had failed to submit statements under s.120 of the 2002  Act  in  which
    they relied upon Appendix ECAA after it came into force on 6 July 2018,
    Mr Canter submitted that they were not under a duty to  do  so  because
    their circumstances had not changed and that what had changed was  that
    the Immigration  Rules  had  been  amended  with  the  introduction  of
    Appendix ECAA.

30. I agree with Mr Canter that the appellants were not  under  a  duty  to
    submit statements under s.120 but for  a  different  reason.  The  duty
    under s.120(5) to inform the Secretary of State if  an  individual  has
    additional reasons for wishing to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  only
    arises if the Secretary of State has decided to exercise his discretion
    under s.120(2) and issue a notice. In Lamichhane v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ
    260, the Court of Appeal held that the service of a section 120  notice
    is at the discretion of the Secretary of State. This was followed in TY
    (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1233 (para 28). It follows  that  it
    would not have been open to the appellants to submit  s.120  statements
    of their own volition. There is nothing to suggest that the  respondent
    served any s.120 statements on the appellants.

31. Before turning to the "new matter" issue, it is worth pointing out that
    the appellants' case is that, if they were to make an  application  for
    LTR under Appendix ECAA, their applications would succeed. It  is  very
    difficult to see how the respondent's decision of 6 April 2016  can  be
    said to be disproportionate if all the appellants have to do is to make
    valid applications for LTR under Appendix ECAA.

32. I turn to the "new matter" issue, i.e. whether the appellants' reliance
    upon Appendix ECAA before the judge constituted a "new  matter"  within
    the meaning of s.85(6).

33. Mr Canter submitted, in reliance upon para 31 of Mahmud to  the  effect
    that "... a new matter is a factual matrix  which  has  not  previously
    been considered by the Secretary of State...", that the factual  matrix
    upon which the appellants relied in  relation  to  Appendix  ECAA  (for
    example as to accommodation, maintenance and their relationship with Mr
    A K) remained the same as the factual matrix upon which they relied  in
    the Letter of Application.

34. In Mahmud, the evidence in question concerning which the  "new  matter"
    issue arose was evidence of the appellant's  relationship  with  a  new
    partner, Ms P, and her sponsor which he first raised in his  Notice  of
    appeal. It is therefore  not  surprising  that  the  Tribunal  did  not
    comment  upon  whether  reliance  upon  a  different  category  of  the
    Immigration Rules in support of a human rights claim amounted to a "new
    matter". I entirely agree with the reasoning of the Tribunal concerning
    the issue that was before it in Mahmud. The Tribunal did  not  need  to
    consider whether an appellant's reliance upon a certain factual  matrix
    and a different category of the Immigration  Rules  to  make  good  his
    Article 8 claim constituted a "new matter" which is precisely the issue
    in the instant case. There is nothing in Mahmud which  relates  to  the
    issue I have to decide.

35. In the instant case, although the application before the respondent was
    plainly an application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's rights under Article 8, the Letter  of  Application  stated
    that the first appellant could not submit an application under  the  5-
    year partner route because she had  not  passed  her  English  language
    test. The letter then proceeded to make submissions as to  the  reasons
    why this family unit should not be expected to relocate to  Turkey  and
    why it would be in the best interests of the second appellant  for  him
    to be permitted to remain in the United Kingdom with  his  parents.  In
    other  words,  the  Letter  of  Application  relied  upon  the  general
    considerations that are normally fall for assessment in Article 8 case.

36. Mr Canter asked me to take into account the fact that  the  reason  why
    the Letter of Application made no mention of Appendix ECAA was that  it
    was not in existence at that time. Be that as it may, the fact is  that
    the appellants now seek to rely upon what I accept is the same  factual
    matrix as to accommodation, maintenance, their relationship with Mr A K
    and that he has ILTR as well as the criteria in part  7.1  of  Appendix
    ECAA to establish their Article 8 claim. They now contend, in  reliance
    upon the same factual matrix, that: "My removal is disproportionate and
    therefore in breach of Article 8 because I  meet  the  requirements  of
    part 7.1 of Appendix ECAA. I could not say this before because Appendix
    ECAA did not exist when I made my application but the Immigration Rules
    have since been amended" whereas their Article 8 claim, as set  out  in
    the Letter  of  Application,  was  essentially  that:  "My  removal  is
    disproportionate and therefore in breach of Article 8 because it  would
    be unreasonable (and in the case of the second  appellant,  not  in  my
    best interests) to expect me and the remaining  members  of  my  family
    unit to relocate to Turkey to enjoy family life".

37. The case the appellants now put on  the  issue  of  proportionality  in
    relation to their Article 8 claims requires a new legal judgment to  be
    made as to whether or not they comply with the Immigration Rules. Given
    the importance of the proposition that compliance with the  Immigration
    Rules is relevant in deciding proportionality, a legal judgment  as  to
    whether or not the appellants comply with the Immigration Rules must be
    recognised as a new factual matter when a new judgment falls to be made
    based on the same facts.

38. Such an interpretation is consistent  with  s.86(6)  of  the  2002  Act
    because  the  appellants'  reliance  upon  their  satisfaction  of  the
    criteria in part 7.1 of Appendix ECAA:

    (a)     constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in s.84; and

    (b)     the Secretary of State has not  previously  considered  whether
        the appellants meet the requirements of part 7.1 of  Appendix  ECAA
        in the context of the decision of 6 April 2016  (as  stated  above,
        there is no evidence that any s.120 statement  was  served  on  the
        appellants).

39. It is also consistent with the policy purpose of s.85(5) which must  be
    to enable the Secretary of State to be  the  first  person  to  make  a
    judgment as to whether or not an individual satisfies the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules unless he consents to the Tribunal  doing  so.
    To conclude otherwise would run counter to that policy purpose  and  it
    would make judges of the First-tier Tribunal first  instance  decision-
    makers.

40. For the reasons given above, and to summarise, I have  concluded  that,
    if an appellant  relies  upon  criteria  that  relate  to  a  different
    category of the Immigration Rules to make good his Article 8 claim than
    that relied upon in his application for LTR on human rights grounds  or
    in his s.120 statement such that a new judgment falls to be made as  to
    whether or not he satisfies the Immigration Rules, this  constitutes  a
    "new matter" within the meaning of s.85(6) which requires the Secretary
    of State's consent even if the facts specific  to  his  own  case  (for
    example, as to accommodation, maintenance etc) remain the same.

41. I therefore agree with Mr Clarke that the judge had no jurisdiction  to
    consider whether the appellants satisfy Appendix ECAA. Accordingly, the
    judge did not err in law in failing to consider whether the  appellants
    satisfied the requirements of Appendix ECAA.

42. I therefore reject ground 1 on the basis that the judge  did  not  have
    jurisdiction  to  consider   whether   the   appellants   satisfy   the
    requirements of Appendix ECAA.

43. If I am wrong and if  the  judge  did  have  jurisdiction  to  consider
    whether the appellants satisfied the requirements of Appendix  ECAA,  I
    have concluded that he did not err in law in failing to do  so.  It  is
    plain from para 23 of his decision that Appendix ECAA was  relied  upon
    in order to argue that the respondent's decision was unlawful.  It  was
    not argued that they satisfy  the  requirements  of  part  7.1  of  the
    Appendix ECAA. He was  under  no  obligation  to  embark,  of  his  own
    volition, upon the  exercise  of  considering  whether  the  appellants
    satisfied the requirements of part 7.1 of the Appendix ECAA.

44. I therefore reject ground 1 on this alternative basis.

45. In relation to ground 2, the judge's reasoning at para 22  simply  does
    not make sense as it  runs  counter  to  the  logic  of  the  Chikwamba
    principle. It is clear from R (Agyarko) and others v SSHD  [2017]  UKSC
    11 that  an  individual's  ability  to  meet  the  requirements  for  a
    hypothetical  entry  clearance  application  remains  is   a   relevant
    consideration when considering proportionality. At para 51 of  Agyarko,
    Lord Reed said "If ... an applicant  -  even  if  residing  in  the  UK
    unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted  leave  to  enter,  at
    least if an application were made from outside the UK, then there might
    be no public interest  in  his  or  her  removal"  (my  emphasis).  The
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in Tikka v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 642  is
    more recent confirmation of the Chikwamba principle.

46. However, the judge's failure to consider  the  Chikwamba  principle  is
    simply immaterial on the facts of the instant case. Even if  the  judge
    had  had  jurisdiction  to  consider  whether  the  appellants  satisfy
    Appendix ECAA, contrary to my conclusion above, Appendix ECAA does  not
    apply to entry clearance applications. It is evident from a perusal  of
    Appendix ECAA that it only applies to in-country applications for  LTR.
    Any hypothetical application for entry clearance under Appendix FM  was
    bound to fail on the evidence before the judge because  the  appellants
    had not submitted any English language test certificates.  Mr  Canter's
    submissions, summarised at my para 26 above,  simply  ignore  the  fact
    that entry clearance must be certain to be granted for the Chikwamba to
    be applied, as is clear from para  51  of  Agyarko.  Even  where  entry
    clearance is certain to be granted, proportionality  still  has  to  be
    considered.

47. I therefore reject ground 2.

48. In summary, therefore:

    (i)     I reject ground 1 because the judge did not  have  jurisdiction
        to consider whether the  appellants  satisfy  the  requirements  of
        Appendix ECAA.

    (ii)    Even if the judge did have jurisdiction to consider whether the
        appellants satisfied the requirements of Appendix  ECAA,  I  reject
        ground 1 on the alternative basis that it was not argued before him
        that the appellants satisfied the requirements of Appendix ECAA.

    (ii)    In relation to ground 2, I accept that the judge erred  in  law
        in failing to consider whether the Chikwamba principle applied  but
        the error was not material because the evidence  submitted  to  the
        judge did not establish that entry  clearance  was  certain  to  be
        granted to the appellants.

      Decision

    The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kelly did not  involve
    the making of any error of law sufficient  to  require  it  to  be  set
    aside.





[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill         Date: 31 January 2019
