








UPPER Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal NumberS: HU/10589/2018
                                                               HU/10591/2018
                                                               HU/10597/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 16 May 2019                   |On: 23 May 2019                          |

                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                           entry clearance officer

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Fozle [A]
                                    [S B]
                                    [T B]
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                 Respondents

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr I Khan, counsel, instructed by Lumbini Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer to  the  appellant  as  'the
      entry clearance officer' and to the respondents  as  'the  claimants'.
      The claimants are nationals of Bangladesh born on 13 January 2000,  16
      December 2003 and 7 August 2002 respectively.

   2. The entry  clearance  officer  appeals  with  permission  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Place promulgated on 28 February
      2019 allowing the  claimants'  appeals  against  the  entry  clearance
      officer's refusal dated 1 April 2018 to grant them leave to enter  the
      UK pursuant to paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules, as the children
      of their claimed father, Mr Mohammad [A].

   3. In refusing their applications, the entry clearance  officer  was  not
      satisfied that there was sufficient  evidence  that  Mr  [A]  and  the
      claimants were related as claimed. Nor was the entry clearance officer
      satisfied that Mr [A] had sole responsibility  for  the  claimants  or
      that there were very serious and compelling family reasons which  made
      their exclusion undesirable. The entry clearance  officer  noted  that
      the claimants' mother is  still  living  but  stated  that  there  was
      insufficient detail regarding her role in their upbringing.

   4. Judge Place considered the evidence of Mr [A] and found him  to  be  a
      consistent and credible witness. Mr [A] stated that the claimants  are
      the eldest of his  five  children.  Their  mother  has  mental  health
      problems and is unable to care for them. Since he left  Bangladesh  in
      2006, his wife and children have moved from their family home  to  the
      two room house owned by his wife's brother.

   5. He used to take care of the children when he was  in  Bangladesh.  His
      wife has had mental problems for some time but they have become  worse
      in the last year or so. He has full  control  over  matters  including
      their education, religion and medical care. He is in  regular  contact
      with their school and religious teachers and their doctor.

   6. He has not provided DNA evidence as he cannot afford it.

   7. He was not applying for his wife to join him in the UK.  She would not
      be able to pass the English language test as a result  of  her  mental
      health problems.

   8. Judge Place noted that he sends money to his wife on a fairly  regular
      basis.

   9. She found,  relying  on  his  "compelling  oral  evidence",  which  is
      supported by birth certificates, that the claimants are  his  children
      [15]. Although the entry clearance  officer  has  questioned  why  the
      birth certificates were issued  several  years  after  the  claimants'
      births, no evidence had been adduced to  suggest  that  they  are  not
      authentic.

  10. She also accepted Mr [A]'s evidence, backed up  by  a  brief  doctor's
      letter, that his wife has been suffering from mental  health  problems
      for some time which have become worse over the last  year  or  so  and
      which have left her unable  to  care  at  all  for  any  of  her  five
      children, including the claimants.

  11. She found that Mr [A] gave compelling evidence about the role he plays
      in their lives,  unhesitatingly  naming  their  various  teachers  and
      doctor [16]. He also regularly provides financially for his  wife  and
      the claimants.

  12. She found the circumstances of this case to be  unusual  in  that  the
      claimants' mother is still present in Bangladesh  and  living  in  the
      same house as them. She was however persuaded that she is not  capable
      of caring for them physically or emotionally. She found that as at the
      date of the applications and decision, Mr [A] had  continuing  control
      and direction over the claimants'  upbringing,  including  making  all
      important decisions in their lives [19].

  13. She accordingly found that as at  the  date  of  the  entry  clearance
      officer's decision, the claimants met the requirements under paragraph
      279(i)(e) of the Immigration Rules.

  14.  She  considered  whether  the  entry  clearance  officer's   decision
      constituted a breach of their right to family life under Article 8  of
      the Human Rights Convention. She took account of  the  fact  that  the
      first claimant is now 19. However,  he  is  still  at  school  and  is
      dependent on his father. He does not  have  an  independent  life  and
      family life for the purpose  of  Article  8  exists  between  all  the
      claimants and their father.

  15.  She  considered  whether  the  decision  was  proportionate  in   the
      circumstances. As she found that the claimants met the requirements of
      the Immigration Rules at the date of the decision, there is no  public
      interest in excluding them from the UK. The balance of proportionality
      is in favour of the claimants.

  16. In granting the entry clearance officer permission to  appeal,  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Davies stated with regard to the  contention  that
      fraudulent documents were submitted by the claimants, that the  burden
      of  proof  is  on  the  entry  clearance  officer.  Nor  was  there  a
      requirement that the claimants must establish  their  relationship  by
      way of DNA evidence.

  17. He found it arguable however that the  Judge  had  not  conducted  the
      proportionality test with  the  thoroughness  that  it  required.  She
      should have made clear what matters were weighed in  the  balance.  On
      that basis, she had arguably made an error of law.

  18. At the commencement of the hearing before me, Mr Khan produced  a  DNA
      report, recently commissioned, which concluded that the claimants were
      related to Mr [A] as claimed.

  19. Mr Walker accepted that now that the DNA evidence had  been  produced,
      the entry clearance officer's complaint  fell  away.  Accordingly,  so
      must the complaint regarding the proportionality assessment fall away.



  20.  The  claimants  had  accordingly  satisfied  the  requirements  under
      paragraph 297(i)(e) of the Immigration Rules. He accordingly  accepted
      that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge should stand.

      Assessment

  21. There has been no challenge  to  the  assertion  that  the  claimants'
      father has been  solely  responsible  for  their  upbringing.  He  has
      regularly and consistently provided financial support.

  22. On the basis of the DNA report produced, I am satisfied that Mr Walker
      has properly conceded that there has been no error of law.

      Notice of decision

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any error on a point of law. It shall accordingly stand.

      No anonymity directions made.










            Signed                             Dated 22 May 2019


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C Mailer








