
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10354/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Microsoft   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Teams                                |                                     |
|On Thursday 27 May 2021              |On 22 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                          MR SHAH MD JAHANGIR ALAM
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M West, Counsel instructed by Kalam solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Obhi promulgated on 29 October 2019 ("the Decision"). By the Decision,
   the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's
   decision dated 30 May 2019, refusing his human rights claim founded on
   Article 8 ECHR based on the Appellant's family life.  The Appellant is
   married to a British national, Ms Sharmin Khatun.


2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  He came to the UK on 17 July
   2007 with entry clearance as a visitor.  He overstayed following the
   expiry of his leave.  He applied in 2012 to remain based on his family
   and private life.  That application was refused with no right of appeal.
   A further application made in 2018 was similarly refused and his claim
   certified as being clearly unfounded.  Following a judicial review
   challenge, the refusal was maintained by the decision under appeal, but
   the Appellant was given a right of appeal.

3. The Judge accepted that the Appellant's relationship with Ms Khatun is
   genuine.  She also accepted that the couple meet the requirements of the
   Immigration Rules ("the Rules") with the exception of the provisions as
   to the Appellant's immigration status.  She did not accept that there
   would be insurmountable obstacles to family life being continued in
   Bangladesh.  Accordingly, she concluded that paragraph EX.1 of Appendix
   FM to the Rules ("Paragraph EX.1") was not met.  The claim therefore
   failed under the Rules.  Outside the Rules, balancing the interference
   with the rights of the Appellant and Ms Khatun against the public
   interest, the Judge concluded that the Respondent's decision was not
   disproportionate.  Accordingly, the claim also failed outside the Rules.

4. The Appellant appealed initially on two grounds as follows:

   Ground one: The Judge failed to consider the Appellant's claim under
   Article 8 in the context of whether he would succeed were he to return to
   Bangladesh to obtain entry clearance.  That claim was based on the
   principle first enunciated in Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the Home
   Department [2008] UKHL 40 ("Chikwamba").
   Ground two: The Judge failed to provide adequate reasons for her findings
   under Paragraph EX.1.

5. Permission to appeal was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin as a
   First-tier Tribunal Judge on 10 March 2020 in the following terms so far
   as relevant:

         "... 2.  The grounds are without merit.


         3.   The grounds challenge the judge's reasoning and findings under
         Article 8.  The judge considered the case under Appendix FM and
         found, for detailed reasons, that there were no insurmountable
         obstacles to the appellant integrating in Bangladesh nor any very
         significant obstacles to family life continuing in Bangladesh.  On
         the facts that is unsurprising.  The Judge also considered Article
         8 outside the Immigration Rules and applying appropriate case law
         and s.117 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 found the
         appellant's removal proportionate.


         4.   This case was one where the appellant could have had no
         realistic expectation of success having overstayed and thus in the
         UK unlawfully when he commenced his relationship and there being no
         real obstacles to the couple living in Bangladesh.


         5.   Neither the grounds nor the Decision and Reasons disclose any
         arguable error of law."

6. The Appellant renewed on grounds one and two as set out above.  He added
   an additional ground as follows:
   Ground three: The Appellant relied on a "new matter" which was not raised
   before either the Respondent or Judge Obhi.  The Appellant pointed out
   that the Upper Tribunal in Birch (Precariousness and mistake; new
   matters) [2020] UKUT 86 (IAC) ("Birch") decided that the prohibition on
   raising a new matter contained in section 85 Nationality, Immigration and
   Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") did not apply to proceedings in the
   Upper Tribunal.  That prohibition is confined to the First-tier Tribunal.
    The "new matter" relied upon is that Ms Khatun is said to be a NHS
   worker and therefore a key worker during the Covid-19 pandemic.  It is
   said that she is a frontline worker. The Appellant submits that this
   alters the balance outside the Rules and also impacts on the Paragraph
   EX.1. issue as it is said that Ms Khatun cannot now reasonably be
   expected to follow the Appellant to Bangladesh.


7. Permission to appeal was granted on grounds one and two only by Upper
   Tribunal Judge Keith on 1 June 2020.  He expressly refused permission on
   ground three on the basis that "the 'new matter' in that ground is only
   relevant on a remaking decision".  His reasoning reads as follows (so far
   as relevant):

         "... 3.  While consideration of ground (3) only appears to be
         arguably relevant to a remaking decision (see Birch (precariousness
         and mistake; new matters) [2020] UKUT 00086 (IAC) (at [19]) the FtT
         arguably erred in relation to ground (1) in failing to make a
         finding in relation to whether the appellant did or did not satisfy
         the rules for entry clearance, having raised the issue at [25].
         The FtT also further arguably erred in explaining what was said to
         be the gap in evidence needed to make an assessment in relation to
         the spouse's personal history at [33].


         4.   Ground (3) does not identify any error of law and so
         permission in relation to the error of law challenge is refused."

   Judge Keith reached a provisional view that it would be appropriate for
   the error of law issue to be determined on the papers.  He invited
   written submissions from both parties.


8. The Respondent submitted an extensive Rule 24 reply on 28 August 2020
   ("the Rule 24 Reply").  I will come to the substance of that reply when
   dealing with the competing arguments below.  The Appellant provided
   further written submissions dated 31 August 2020 ("the Further
   Submissions") which are also considered below.  Although neither party
   suggested that it would not be possible to determine the error of law
   issue on the papers without a hearing, Upper Tribunal Judge Blum reviewed
   the file on 8 January 2021 and determined that it would be appropriate to
   consider that issue at an oral hearing to be heard by remote means.


9. So it was that the hearing came before me.  The hearing took place via
   Microsoft Teams.  The hearing was attended by representatives for both
   parties as above and by the Appellant and Ms Khatun who appeared
   separately as she was, as I understand it, at work. There were no major
   technical problems affecting the conduct of the hearing.


10. In addition to the written submissions to which I have referred above
   and the core documents in the appeal, I had before me the Appellant's
   bundle before the First-tier Tribunal (to which I refer hereafter as
   [AB/xx]), Mr West's skeleton argument as before the First-tier Tribunal
   and the Respondent's bundle.


11. The matter comes before me to determine whether the Decision contains
   an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make the decision or
   remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.


DISCUSSION

12. Mr West confirmed that he did not pursue ground three on the basis that
   he accepted that the "new matter" there raised could only be relevant on
   re-making as confirmed by the Tribunal in Birch.  It stands to reason
   that a Judge's decision can only be challenged as containing an error of
   law on the basis of evidence and arguments put before him or her (unless
   the new arguments are ones which could be said to be ones which the Judge
   should have raised of his or her own volition which is not the case
   here).  I therefore deal only with grounds one and two.  However, I deal
   with those grounds in reverse order. That is because the Judge's
   reasoning in relation to the claim under the Rules is relevant to the
   reasoning and in particular the public interest when one comes to look at
   the claim outside the Rules.

Ground Two


13. Although the way in which this ground was initially summarised was on
   the basis of an inadequacy of reasoning, a procedural point was raised
   concerning the Judge's approach to the evidence.  It was said that the
   Judge held against the Appellant and Ms Khatun an evidential
   insufficiency which should have been raised with them as a concern if
   that were to be the basis of the Judge's findings. The written and oral
   submissions therefore focussed on this issue rather than the failure to
   provide reasons.


14. I begin with the Judge's reasoning on the Paragraph EX.1. issue at [19]
   to [21] of the Decision as follows:

         "19. The appellant cannot meet the Immigration Rules as he entered
         the United Kingdom on the basis of a visit visa, undertaking to
         return home when the visa expired but failed to do so.  Under the
         Immigration Rules, even where he is in the UK illegally, if he has
         a subsisting relationship with a British national, he may be
         granted permission to remain if he meets the requirements of the
         exception at EX.1 of the Immigration Rules.  In order to do so he
         has to show that there are insurmountable obstacles to him
         returning to live in his country of origin.  The appellant invites
         me to find that to be the case here.  He claims that he is now in a
         relationship with a British national, a young woman whose parents
         originate from Bangladesh so she is of Bangladeshi ethnicity, but
         who is herself estranged from her family and has been a Looked
         After Child by the local authority on the basis that her parents
         were unable to care for her.  I do not know the circumstances of
         her coming into care, save that it happened when she was 13 years
         of age.  I note from a letter dated the 27 October 2015 written by
         her key worker Ning Sun that she married the appellant on the 22
         October 2013 'despite being advised by professionals not to go
         ahead with the marriage', and that she remained in local authority
         care after her marriage until she was 18 years of age.  She moved
         into semi-independent accommodation on the 1 June 2015 and the
         appellant was allowed to have contact with her on two nights a week
         at that flat.  The letter states that she has 'matured a lot,
         managing her relationship and continuing her further education.'
         There is nothing more recent from the local authority or from her
         foster carer.  I do not know why she was advised not to marry the
         appellant, in 2013 she would have been aged just 16 years.  She was
         at that time particularly vulnerable and probably still is.  The
         letter does not explain how and why she came into care, whether it
         was because she was beyond the care of her parents through
         challenging behaviour or whether there were allegations of abuse.
         I do not know whether she was subject to a care order or whether
         she was looked after under Section 20 of the Children Act 1989 with
         the consent of her parents.  I know very little about the
         appellant's wife.  Although I am invited to find that the appellant
         gives her stability, I cannot make such a finding in the absence of
         more detailed information about the appellant's wife and how and
         why she came into care, why she was counselled against a marriage.
         The fact that she married at the age of 16 years, a man who did not
         initially tell her that he was in the UK illegally, and someone who
         is 11 years older than her, causes me some concern.  On the face of
         it they are very different, she does not even speak the language as
         fluently as he does, she has been brought up in a white English
         foster home during her teenage years, although she is from a
         Bangladeshi family; again I make the point that I simply do not
         know enough about the appellant's wife.


         20.  I note from the appellant's statement at paragraph 14 that he
         met Ms Khatun on Facebook in 2012.  At that point she would have
         been 15 years, and he was 26 years of age.


         21.  I am invited to find that as a result of Ms Khatun's
         background and status of a looked after child, it would be
         impossible for her to live with her husband in Bangladesh.  For the
         reasons which I give in the preceding paragraph, I simply do not
         know enough about her.  On the face of it, she has chosen to marry
         someone who is from Bangladesh, and who has not had the same
         upbringing as herself, she appears to have immersed herself into
         his culture, so although she is a young woman who was born in the
         UK, she has already culturally adapted to the appellant's culture
         and language.  I do not accept that living in Bangladesh would be
         unduly harsh for her based on the information that I have.  In
         relation to the appellant he is now 32 years of age.  He is
         familiar with the culture and although many members of his family
         are in the UK, there are also family members in Bangladesh.  There
         is no reason why he cannot apply for entry clearance if he wishes
         to return and provide the evidence to the respondent that would be
         required from any appellant seeking to enter the UK.  The appellant
         claims in his statement at paragraph 17 that his wife's support
         network are in the UK; however the fact that she has no contact
         with her birth family, was a looked after child and her closest
         relationship is with a former foster carer suggests that in reality
         she does not have the support network that he alludes to."

15. The Respondent deals with ground two at [9] to [11] of the Rule 24
   Reply.  She says that the grounds "misconstrue the point made by the
   FTTJ".  Having referred to [19] of the Decision as set out above, the
   Respondent goes on to submit that "[t]he burden of proof remained on the
   appellant to provide evidence to support his case".  The Respondent
   submits that the Judge "is simply commenting on the limits of the
   evidence relied upon in supporting the claim that the wife, due to her
   history/background, could not live in Bangladesh".  The Respondent
   therefore asserts that there is no procedural error. The Respondent also
   points to the finding made at [21] of the Decision that the evidence did
   not show that it would be unduly harsh for Ms Khatun to live in
   Bangladesh, which finding it is said is not challenged and to the
   repetition of that finding when the claim is considered outside the
   Rules.


16. The Appellant in the Further Submissions repeats the point that, "[i]f
   the FTTJ proposed to take issue with this aspect of the appeal as being a
   gap in the evidence then the FTTJ ought properly to have given the
   appellant/the Sponsor wife an opportunity to clarify/give evidence on
   that issue".  It is also said that the Judge failed to identify the gaps
   in the evidence.  Mr West submitted orally that there was evidence in the
   statement of the social worker which supported the Appellant's case.


17. Given the way in which ground two has been developed, it is appropriate
   to begin with the way in which the Appellant argued his case before Judge
   Obhi and the evidence which was presented to her.  Mr West's skeleton
   argument sets out the Appellant's case on this issue at [13] to [16] as
   follows:

         "13. The appellant's wife is a British national and was born in
         London.  She has lived her entire life in the UK.  She has never
         held any other nationality.  She has never been to Bangladesh and
         nor does she speak or write the language.


         14.  The appellant's wife gives details at paragraph 6 of her
         witness statement dated 7 October 2019 about how she was in the
         care system between the ages of 13 and 19 due to a previous abusive
         relationship.  She has lived in numerous foster placements and is a
         vulnerable individual (see pages 24-25 of AB).  She is only 22
         years of age at present.


         15.  She was furthermore in full-time and permanent employment with
         Look Ahead Care, Support and Housing working as a Support Worker.
         Her annual gross salary from her employment was �20,280.  She now
         works for Tower Hamlets community intervention service earning
         �21,944 per annum (see page 163-164 of AB).  The appellant's wife
         performs a vital public service.


         16.  There are, on the balance of probabilities, insurmountable
         obstacles to the appellant and his wife continuing their family
         life in Bangladesh for those reasons."

18. It cannot sensibly be suggested that the fact of Ms Khatun being a
   British national and having lived in the UK for her entire life nor her
   age are factors which of themselves demonstrate that there would be
   insurmountable obstacles to her living in Bangladesh.  Those are factors
   common in these sorts of cases. As is pointed out by the Supreme Court in
   Agyarko and Ikuga v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]
   UKSC 11 ("Agyarko") at [33] by reference to the Court of Appeal's
   judgment "[t]he mere facts that .... is a British citizen, has lived all
   his life in the United Kingdom and has a job here - and hence might find
   it difficult and might be reluctant to relocate to ...to continue their
   family life there - could not constitute insurmountable obstacles to his
   doing so."  In any event, Judge Obhi took into account at [19] to [21] of
   the Decision those factors including Ms Khatun's limited ability to speak
   the Appellant's language.


19. The focus of the Appellant's case in relation to EX.1 was Ms Khatun's
   vulnerability as a former looked after child.  That is the case which the
   Judge considered at [19] of the Decision.

20. As to the evidence on this issue, paragraphs [3] to [5] of Ms Khatun's
   statement at [AB/7-8] deal with the factors which I have already
   mentioned - her citizenship of the UK, her ties to this country and the
   problems which she would face in relocating specifically in relation to
   her medical condition (asthma), lack of familiarity with the country and
   inability to speak or write the language.


21. Ms Khatun moves on at [6] of her statement to deal with the relevance
   of her former care as follows:

         "I am individual who was born and brought in the United Kingdom.  I
         was under social service from the age of 13 till the age of 19.  I
         lived in care in the United Kingdom.  I do not speak to my
         biological family.  I had lived in lots of foster placement due to
         the relationship breaking down.  Due to this I am very wary of
         relationships and have felt I never fitted in anywhere until I met
         my husband.  My husband has always made me feel the sense of
         belonging somewhere and his family have done the same and made me
         part of the family.  I have come very far in life due to my husband
         as he supported me throughout her relationship together.  My
         husband has kept on pushing me to become strong independent women
         and helped me back into studying.  I am currently studying and
         complete my level 3 in Health and Social Care.  After this I will
         like to become a mental health nurse.  I am trying to work hard and
         provide for this country by becoming a civil servant and I feel
         SSHD should take this case into special consideration."

   I am bound to observe that the focus of this paragraph is on the benefit
   to Ms Khatun of the relationship with the Appellant rather than where the
   relationship is to be continued.


22. Turning then to the other evidence mentioned in Mr West's skeleton
   argument (as set out above) and in his oral submissions, that is
   contained in a letter dated 27 October 2015 from Ning Sun dated 27
   October 2015 (at [AB/24-25]) which reads as follows:

         "My name is Ning Sun and I was the allocated Social Worker for Miss
         Sharmin Khatun ... from March 2013 till 19/07/2015 when Sharmin
         turned 18 years old.


         I am writing to confirm that Miss Khatun had Islamic marriage with
         Mr Alam on 22/10/2013 despite being advised by professionals not to
         go ahead with the marriage.


         Miss Khatun remained in the Local Authority's care after her
         Islamic marriage till she turned 18.  She stayed at her foster
         placement for 4 nights a week; and she stayed overnight with Mr
         Alam for 3 nights a week.  On a whole, Miss Khatun has matured a
         lot managing her relationship and continuing her further education.


         Miss Khatun moved to a semi independent accommodation on 01/06/2015
         at ...Mr Alam is allowed to have overnight stays twice a week at
         her flat.


         If you have further questions about this matter, please do not
         hesitate to contact me."

23. As Judge Obhi points out, that letter was, by the time of the hearing
   before her, about four years' old.  There was no up-to-date evidence,
   presumably because Ms Khatun no longer had a dedicated social worker.
   There was no evidence from any of Ms Khatun's foster carers.  The
   evidence was therefore to the effect that Ms Khatun had been in care
   (without providing any detail as to the reasons or any vulnerability
   arising from those reasons), that she had entered into a relationship
   with the Appellant (albeit contrary to the advice of those supporting
   her) and that, since the relationship, she had (consistently with her own
   statement) matured a lot.  None of that evidence points to why Ms
   Khatun's previous care status should impact on her ability to move to
   another country to remain with her husband.  Moreover, all of that
   evidence is reflected in what is said by the Judge at [19] of the
   Decision.


24. Mr West submitted at one point that it was difficult to challenge what
   was said at [19] of the Decision directly because there is a lack of any
   finding.  That is to misunderstand the nature of the Judge's task which
   is to assess the evidence by relevance to the test which applies rather
   than to make individual findings of fact, particularly where, as here,
   there is no issue taken with credibility.


25. The Appellant does not dispute that he bears the burden of
   demonstrating the strength of his family life with Ms Khatun and the
   extent of the interference with that family life.  It is not suggested
   that it is not for him to show that there are insurmountable obstacles to
   family life continuing in Bangladesh.  As I have already observed, the
   evidence about the relevance of Ms Khatun's former status is dealt with
   in her statement by reference to the impact of her relationship rather
   than how moving to Bangladesh would affect her for that reason.  Leaving
   that aside, the Appellant and Ms Khatun were putting forward a case that
   her former status was relevant to their ability to move their family life
   to Bangladesh.  It was for them to provide the evidence that this is so.


26. The Appellant puts his case on ground two as being a breach of
   procedural fairness on the basis that the Judge should have put her
   concerns about lack of information to him or Ms Khatun.  However,
   fairness has to be considered in context.  The Appellant and Ms Khatun
   were alive to the issues at stake.  They had legal professional help in
   putting together and presenting their evidence.  If Mr West (who
   represented the Appellant before Judge Obhi) had concerns that the
   evidence did not fully reflect the nature of the Appellant's case, it was
   open to him to ask the Judge to permit supplementary questions.  It was
   not for the Judge to put questions to elicit relevant evidence.


27. The cases on which the Appellant relies in his grounds are not on
   point. The case of Secretary of State for the Home Department v
   Maheswaran [2002] EWCA Civ 173 ("Maheswaran") concerned an issue of fact
   where credibility was in doubt.  So much is evident when [4] of the
   judgment (as relied upon by the Appellant) is read with what is said at
   [5] and [6] of the judgment as follows:

         "4.  Undoubtedly a failure to put to a party to litigation a  point
         which is decided against him can be  grossly  unfair  and  lead  to
         injustice. He must have a  proper  opportunity  to  deal  with  the
         point. Adjudicators must bear  this  in  mind.  Where  a  point  is
         expressly conceded by one party it will usually be unfair to decide
         the case against the other party on the basis that  the  concession
         was wrongly made, unless the tribunal indicates that it  is  minded
         to take that course. Cases can occur when fairness will require the
         reopening of an appeal because some point of significance - perhaps
         arising out of a post hearing  decision  of  the  higher  courts  -
         requires it. However, such cases will be rare.


         5.   Where much depends on the credibility of a party and when that
         party makes several inconsistent statements which  are  before  the
         decision maker, that party manifestly has a forensic problem.  Some
         will choose to confront the inconsistencies straight  on  and  make
         evidential or forensic submissions on them. Others will  hope  that
         'least  said,  soonest   mended'   and   consider   that   forensic
         concentration on the point will only make matters worse and that it
         would be better to try and switch the tribunal's attention to  some
         other aspect of the case. Undoubtedly it is open  to  the  tribunal
         expressly to put a particular inconsistency to a witness because it
         considers that the witness may not  be  alerted  to  the  point  or
         because  it  fears  that  it  may  have  perceived   something   as
         inconsistent  with  an  earlier  answer  which  in  truth  is   not
         inconsistent. Fairness may in some circumstances require this to be
         done but this will not be the usual  case.  Usually  the  tribunal,
         particularly if the party is represented, will  remain  silent  and
         see how the case unfolds.


         6.   The requirements of fairness are very much conditioned by  the
         facts of each case. This has been stressed in innumerable decisions
         - see the many citations to this effect in Rees v Crane [1994]  2
         A.C.173. We have no doubt that the claimant's submission is  framed
         in terms which are far too wide and in words which are  not  to  be
         rigidly applied to every situation. Whether a particular course  is
         consistent with fairness is essentially an intuitive Judgment which
         is to be made in the light of all the circumstances of a particular
         case - see R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte
         Doody [1994] 1 AC 531 per Lord Mustill at p.560D. ..."


         [my emphasis]

28. The points made by the Court of Appeal in Maheswaran have no bearing on
   this case. As I have already pointed out, the task for the Judge was to
   assess the evidence in the context of the issue she had to decide and not
   to make findings of fact save where such were relevant.  In this case, no
   issue was taken with the credibility of either the Appellant or Ms
   Khatun.  The Judge was simply assessing the evidence based on the facts
   as relied upon being true.  As I have already said, and as is mirrored in
   the Court of Appeal's judgment in Maheswaran, fairness depends on
   context.


29. Similarly, the case of Re D [1995] UKHL 17 ("Re D") is not relevant.
   The Appellant places reliance on [7] of the judgment as follows:

         "My Lords, it is a first principle of fairness that each party to a
         judicial process shall have an opportunity to answer by  evidence
         and argument any adverse material which the tribunal may take  into
         account when forming its opinion. This principle  is  lame  if  the
         party does not know the substance of what is said against  him  (or
         her), for what he does not know he cannot answer.  The  requirement
         of openness is particularly important in proceedings for  adoption,
         not only because it may lead to the deprivation of parental rights,
         in the self-centred meaning of that word, but because a  successful
         application to adopt brings about a total  rupture  of  the  mutual
         relationship of responsibility and dependency which is the  essence
         of the parental bond. The  unique  character  of  the  relationship
         which the parent will lose, and the generally  irreversible  nature
         of the loss, make it specially important that in simple fairness to
         the parent he or she is aware of anything which may tend  to  bring
         it about. There is more to it than this, however, since fairness to
         a parent is a reflection of fairness to the child. The  erasure  of
         the bond with the natural parent and the creation  of  an  entirely
         new set  of  responsibilities  and  dependencies  shared  with  the
         adopters is an event of critical importance  in  the  life  of  the
         child, whose paramount welfare demands that such a  momentous  step
         is taken only after a process which is as fair and thorough as  can
         be devised."


         [my emphasis]

30. Re D concerned a point which had been taken against the appellant of
   which she had no knowledge based on material which she had not seen. That
   is not this case.  Here the Appellant and Ms Khatun were the ones
   providing the evidence put before Judge Obhi.  They had control over and
   were responsible for making out their case.  If, with the benefit of the
   legal assistance they had throughout, they did not adequately evidence
   their case that was not because of any error made by the Judge.


31. Nor can it be said that the Judge failed to consider the evidence put
   forward or to provide adequate reasons for her assessment.  As I have
   already pointed out, if anything, the Judge has taken into account the
   fact of Ms Khatun's former care status as reason why she might not be
   able to move to Bangladesh even where that is not reflected in the
   evidence itself.  She has provided reasons which are adequate to explain
   why she did not accept that this factor (and the others relied upon)
   amounted to an insurmountable obstacle to the Appellant and Ms Khatun
   relocating to Bangladesh.


32. For the sake of completeness, I also deal with the point made at [37]
   to [42] of the grounds that, when considering the test under Paragraph
   EX.1 at [19] of the Decision, the Judge has erred by considering only the
   obstacles to the Appellant's return and not those impacting on Ms Khatun.




33. Although the Judge says at [19] of the Decision that the Appellant "has
   to show that there are insurmountable obstacles to him returning to live"
   in Bangladesh, it is evident that what follows is considering only the
   position of Ms Khatun.  That is unsurprising since the impact on Ms
   Khatun was at the heart of the Appellant's case as recorded at [18] of
   the Decision.  I do not accept that the use of the words "unduly harsh"
   at [21] of the Decision reflect any error of law.  Those words import the
   same high threshold as "very significant difficulties" or "very serious
   hardship".  Whilst ideally the Judge should have used the same wording as
   in Paragraph EX.2, this does not amount to any misdirection in law. The
   Judge has explained at [21] of the Decision why the situation which Ms
   Khatun would face in Bangladesh (her cultural adaptation and availability
   of support from the Appellant and his family to adapt as well as the lack
   of evidence of any ties beyond the Appellant in the UK) does not meet the
   threshold.  There is no inadequacy of reasoning.


34. For those reasons, there is no error of law disclosed by ground two.

Ground One


35. I move on then to ground one which was the main focus of Mr West's
   submissions before me.


36. The Judge summarised the Appellant's submissions in relation to the
   Chikwamba principle at [24] and [25] of the Decision as follows:

         "24. The appellant does not wish to return to Bangladesh.  The only
         reason he gives for wanting to stay in the UK, apart from the fact
         that he decided in 2007 when his visa expired that he was just not
         going to return, is his relationship with his wife.  Mr West
         invites me to place little weight on the fact that he is in the UK
         illegally and to consider whether, at the date of this hearing, he
         meets the Immigration Rules and if he does to find that as he is
         certain to get entry clearance there is little point in returning
         him to Bangladesh.  In considering the case of both Agyarko and
         Hesham Ali there is support for this argument.  I am invited to
         find that the appellant's wife can demonstrate through the letter
         from her employer that she meets the maintenance requirement of a
         minimum salary of �18600 per annum and that he has passed the
         English language test and hence he meets the rules and so should be
         granted leave to remain, as there is no public interest in
         requiring someone to return simply to be granted entry clearance
         once they have returned.


         25.  In order for me to be satisfied that this is the case, I would
         have to assess the financial information provided in this case by
         reference to Appendix FM-SE.  In addition to that, I have concerns
         about the relationship to which I have referred earlier in this
         decision."

37. I begin by observing that the Judge considered the Chikwamba issue when
   assessing the Appellant's outside the Rules (as she was obliged to do).
   As such, the finding that Paragraph EX.1 was not met and therefore that
   the Appellant could not satisfy the Rules was relevant to the Judge's
   consideration also of this issue. Indeed, the Judge noted as much at [28]
   of the Decision when recording what was said by the Supreme Court in
   Agyarko.  The Judge also recorded at [27] of the Decision that she was
   required to place little weight on a relationship formed with a
   qualifying partner at a time when the appellant was in the UK unlawfully"
   (as is required by Section 117B of the 2002 Act - "Section 117B").  I
   will come on to the importance of those factors below when considering
   the case-law.


38. It is also important to note, as did the Judge at [31] of the Decision,
   that, when assessing the claim outside the Rules, the context involves a
   "balancing exercise between the private rights of the appellant and the
   public interest".  That self-direction is entirely consistent with the
   approach advocated by the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v Secretary of
   State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60 ("Hesham Ali").


39. The Judge dealt with that balancing exercise at [32] and [33] of the
   Decision as follows:

         "32. I have considered whether there are any compelling
         circumstances in this case.  I am invited to find that the sponsor
         is now earning sufficient money to maintain them both and that they
         meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules in relation to
         maintenance and in relation to the appellant speaking English.  I
         have considered whether this is a Chikwamba situation, as the case
         of Agyarko stated clearly that in a case in which there was little
         point in returning an individual simply to force them to make an
         entry clearance application which was going to be successful, or to
         use the words from Agyarko if an applicant, 'even if residing in
         the UK unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted leave to
         enter at least if an application were made from outside the UK,
         then there might be no public [interest] in his or her removal'.


         33.  In applying the guidance from the case law, and in carrying
         out a balancing exercise I note the following.  In the appellant's
         favour is that he appears to be in a subsisting relationship with
         Ms Khatun, who is able to maintain him.  I place due weight on the
         fact that she has been a looked after child and claims to have no
         contact with her birth relatives, but as I have commented above, I
         just do not know enough about her history to make an assessment of
         the circumstances of her past and her marriage.  The fact that she
         has been a looked after child, does not, as the appellant suggests
         in his statement make her 'abnormal'.  The comment in the social
         worker's statement about her being advised against the marriage is
         concerning.  The information presented by the appellant is
         selective.  Against his interests is the fact that he has blatantly
         disregarded the undertaking given to the ECO when he came to the
         UK, namely that he would return to Bangladesh when his visa
         expired.  As Ms Lambert pointed out, such behaviour undermines the
         immigration system and creates a mistrust of genuine visitors.  I
         am satisfied that the appellant's private rights are not such that
         the wider public interest should be set aside.  There is a public
         interest in reminding the appellant and others in his position that
         there are Article 8 compliant rules in relation to family life, and
         that if he wishes to make a family life in the UK, he can do so, by
         making the same applications as others in his position; there is
         nothing exceptional in his case which entitles him to be treated
         differently to those who comply with the law."

40. The Appellant's ground one relies on the exposition of the Chikwamba
   principle by the Supreme Court in Agyarko.  The Judge set out her
   understanding of that judgment at [28] of the Decision.  The Appellant
   places reliance on [51] of the judgment in Agyarko as follows:

         "51. Whether the applicant is in the UK unlawfully, or is entitled
         to remain in the UK only temporarily, however, the significance of
         this consideration depends on what the outcome of immigration
         control might otherwise be. For example, if an applicant would
         otherwise be automatically deported as a foreign criminal, then the
         weight of the public interest in his or her removal will generally
         be very considerable. If, on the other hand, an applicant - even if
         residing in the UK unlawfully - was otherwise certain to be granted
         leave to enter, at least if an application were made from outside
         the UK, then there might be no public interest in his or her
         removal. The point is illustrated by the decision in Chikwamba v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department."

41. It is important to note however the context in which this is said.
   This paragraph appears in the context of consideration of the importance
   of the precariousness of the foreign national's status at the time of
   application and the importance of the parties' knowledge about that
   status.  At [49] of the judgment, the Supreme Court pointed out that the
   ECtHR, in its case law, places importance on that knowledge as a relevant
   consideration because family life has been developed in the knowledge by
   the parties that the foreign national spouse might not be entitled to
   stay.  As the Supreme Court there observed, the Grand Chamber had said
   that "[w]here this is the case, the court said, 'it is likely only to be
   in exceptional circumstances that the removal of the non-national family
   member will constitute a violation of article 8'."  The Supreme Court was
   making the point that the relative importance of this factor might be
   diminished from a level of being "very considerable" to one where the
   public interest did not require removal.  The Respondent has emphasised
   in the Rule 24 Reply the Supreme Court's use of the word "might".


42. I recognise that in this case, the Judge accepted that Ms Khatun was
   not aware from the outset that the Appellant was in the UK unlawfully.
   Her evidence, recorded at [16] of the Decision, is that she knew
   initially that he was from Bangladesh but not that he was here
   unlawfully.  However, he told her afterwards and "she was okay with it".
   It is there recorded that "she was concerned about him being in the UK
   unlawfully but that she thought there would be a way of him staying in
   the UK because of their relationship." However, the issue for the Judge
   was whether the public interest required removal taking into account all
   factors.  Indeed, the Judge recognised that point in her citation of [57]
   of the judgment in Agyarko at [29] of the Decision.


43. The Appellant also places reliance in the grounds on what is said by
   the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali as follows:

         "34. It is, however, necessary to bear in mind that whether the
         continuation of family life in the UK is uncertain may be a more
         complex question than it might appear at first sight. For example,
         where a person was residing in the UK unlawfully at the time when
         the relationship was formed, but would have been permitted to
         reside here lawfully if an application were made from outside the
         UK, the latter point should be taken into account. That example
         illustrates how the distinction between settled migrants and aliens
         residing in the host country unlawfully may be, in some situations,
         of limited practical importance when translated into the context of
         UK immigration law (see, for example, Chikwamba v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 40; [2008] 1 WLR 1420)."

44. That passage also has to be read however in context of what precedes it
   as follows:

         "33. Considering next the factors which should be taken into
         account, those mentioned in the Boultif line of cases have a
         bearing on the proportionality of the deportation of foreign
         offenders, whether they are settled migrants or not. Where they are
         not settled migrants, it will also be necessary to have regard to
         the factors mentioned in Jeunesse, so far as relevant and not
         already taken into account: notably, whether there are
         insurmountable obstacles or major impediments in the way of the
         family living in the country of origin of the alien concerned;
         whether there are factors of immigration control, such as a history
         of breaches of immigration law; and whether the family life was
         created at a time when the persons involved were aware that the
         immigration status of one of them was such that the persistence of
         that family life within the host state would from the outset be
         precarious. Those factors were mentioned in Jeunesse in a context
         where family life was relied on to defeat immigration control at
         the point of admission to the host country. But it is also relevant
         to consider, in the context of liability to deportation because of
         criminal behaviour, whether the offender has a bad immigration
         history, or whether there are major impediments to continuing
         family life in his country of origin, or whether family life was
         established in the knowledge that, because of the immigration
         status of one of the persons involved, its continuation in the UK
         was uncertain. If that were not so, the perverse consequence would
         follow that these matters would be liable to carry greater weight
         if a non-offender were sought to be removed on account of his
         irregular immigration status than if an offender with the same
         immigration status were sought to be removed on account of serious
         criminal conduct."

45. Hesham Ali was a deportation case; hence the reference to the need to
   have regard to the same factors as arise in a non-deportation case.  As
   the Supreme Court later pointed out in Agyarko, as I have noted above,
   the precariousness of family life is one factor to be weighed in the
   balance.  The other is whether family life could be continued in the
   foreign national's country of origin.  That consideration is now
   expressly stated in Paragraph EX.1.  In this case, the Judge had found
   that the Appellant was unable to satisfy Paragraph EX.1 because family
   life could be continued in Bangladesh.  That was not the situation in
   Chikwamba where the appellant's husband was a recognised refugee from
   Zimbabwe and could not be expected to return there with his wife.
   Overall, as I have already observed, the Chikwamba issue is one factor to
   be dealt with alongside others when assessing the public interest in
   removal and how that is to be balanced against the interference with
   family life.


46. The Appellant's grounds also refer to the Court of Appeal's judgment in
   VW (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ
   5 at [43] where Sedley LJ described as "false logic" the Respondent's
   submission that, if the foreign national is bound to be granted entry
   clearance on an application to return, this renders removal
   disproportionate (in essence because the family separation will be
   temporary only).  Sedley LJ observed that the opposite was likely to be
   true (because the public interest would not bear so much weight).  Again,
   though, that has to be read in the context of the argument which was
   being put forward rather than supporting any general proposition of law
   that the public interest does not require removal where a person is
   likely or even certain to succeed on an application to return.


47. That brings me on to Mr West's somewhat surprising oral submission
   which could be summarised as being that in any case where a foreign
   national is certain to obtain entry clearance if an application is
   properly made, then the public interest would not require removal. That
   goes too far.  It is merely one of the factors which may need to be
   considered depending on the circumstances (as the Supreme Court's
   judgments in Agyarko and Hesham Ali make clear).

48. Mr West relied in this regard on the judgment of Turner J in R (oao
   Shuai Zhang) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 891
   (Admin) ("Zhang").  That was a judicial review challenge and not an
   appeal.  As such, the Judge was there considering only whether the
   Respondent's decision was unlawful applying public law principles rather
   than deciding the Article 8 issue for himself.  The factual context is
   also important as the Judge was there considering a blanket requirement
   under the Rules for a person in the applicant's situation to return to
   her home country in order to "switch" status.  That is the context in
   which the Judge made the observation that it would "be rare indeed" that
   removal would be proportionate.  The applicant in that case was a person
   who had remained in the UK with lawful status which was extant when she
   formed her family life.  The absence from the UK would be, on the
   Respondent's own argument, temporary only which the Judge considered to
   be relevant to the public interest in removal (as had Sedley LJ in VW
   (Uganda)).  That is not this case.  Here, the Appellant is here
   unlawfully, has entered into his family life with Ms Khatun when he knew
   that he had no right to be here, and the Judge has found that family life
   can be expected to be continued in Bangladesh (such that a permanent
   absence from the UK could be enforced without a breach of Article 8
   ECHR).


49. VW (Uganda) and Zhang are cases which pre-date not only both of the
   Supreme Court judgments to which I have made reference but also the
   statutory requirement for Judges to have regard to the public interest
   factors in Section 117B.  The public interest factors to which a Judge is
   bound to have regard include not only the precariousness of the family
   life but also the public interest in the maintenance of effective
   immigration control.

50. The Respondent for her part relies on this Tribunal's decision in
   Younas (section 117B(6)(b); Chikwamba; Zambrano) [2020] UKUT 00129 (IAC)
   ("Younas"). She cites in the Rule 24 Reply paragraphs [78] to [90] of the
   Decision.  I do not need to set out paragraphs [78] to [84] which are
   largely concerned with what is said in Chikwamba and Agyarko.  I have
   already dealt with what is said in those cases. I have regard however to
   paragraphs [85] to [90] which make reference to other cases about the
   extent of the application of the Chikwamba principle as follows:

         "85.   If, as the appellant claims, the principle of Chikwamba is
         that, irrespective of individual circumstances, there is no  public
         interest in requiring a person to leave the UK simply in  order  to
         make  a  successful  application  for  entry  clearance,  then  the
         individual circumstances of an appellant (including issues such  as
         the difficulties they might face on return)  would  be  irrelevant.
         All an appellant would need to show is that he or she would succeed
         in the application from abroad  as  that  would  be  sufficient  to
         establish  that  there  is  no  public  interest  in  removal  (and
         therefore removal is disproportionate). The  difficulty  with  this
         interpretation of Chikwamba is that it does not explain why  Lord
         Brown engaged in a detailed consideration  of  the  individual  and
         particular circumstances of the appellant (specifically,  that  the
         conditions in Zimbabwe were 'harsh and  unpalatable',  her  husband
         could not accompany her and she would need to bring to  Zimbabwe  -
         or be separated from - her child). These factors, which  form  part
         of Lord Brown's reasoning to support his conclusion that there  was
         not a public interest in the appellant's removal, would  have  been
         irrelevant if all that mattered was that  the  appellant  would  be
         granted entry clearance.


         86.   The appellant's interpretation of Chikwamba also ignores the
         analysis of Lord Brown at paragraphs 41-42 where he made clear that
         in some cases there will be a public interest in removing  (and  it
         will not be disproportionate to remove) a person from the  UK  even
         though they will be granted  entry  clearance  when  applying  from
         abroad. He noted that the appellant in R (Ekinci)  v  SSHD [2003]
         EWCA Civ 79 (a person with an  appalling  immigration  history  who
         would only be required to travel to Germany for  one  month  for  a
         decision on his application) was such a  person.  In  addition,  he
         identified  factors  relevant  to  both  whether  there  is  public
         interest in removal (a person's immigration  history)  and  whether
         temporary removal would be disproportionate (the prospective length
         and degree of family  disruption,  and  the  circumstances  in  the
         country of temporary return).


         87.   The Court of Appeal, when interpreting Chikwamba, has been
         clear that the case does not stand for the proposition that  it  is
         sufficient, in order to resist removal under article 8 ECHR, for an
         appellant to show  that  he  or  she  would  succeed  in  an  entry
         clearance  application.  In Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
         Department v Hayat (Pakistan) [2012] EWCA Civ 1054,  for  example,
         the Court of Appeal upheld  a  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  that
         removal would be proportionate,  even  though  an  entry  clearance
         application would succeed. Elias LJ found  at  para.  52  that  the
         individual circumstances of the case  (where  separation  would  be
         short, family life could continue outside the UK, the appellant had
         no  legitimate  expectation  of  a  right  to   remain,   and   the
         consequences of separation would be  far  less  serious  than  that
         in Chikwamba) were such that ' there were cogent factors justifying
         the conclusion that Article 8 was not infringed  by  requiring  the
         appellant to return to Pakistan.'


         88.   Mr Lindsay drew our attention to  a  more  recent  Court  of
         Appeal   judgment   in   which   the Chikwamba principle   was
         considered: Kaur, R (on the application of) v Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1423.  The  appellant's
         argument raising the Chikwamba principle was not ultimately decided
         by the Court  but  the  nature  of  the  principle  was  discussed.
         Holroyde LJ noted that the facts  in Chikwamba were  'stark'.  At
         paragraph 45 he stated:


             'I have quoted in paragraph 26 above the passage in which Lord
             Reed (at paragraph 51 of his  judgment  in Agyarko)  referred
             to Chikwamba. It is relevant to note that he there spoke of an
             applicant who was 'certain to be granted leave to enter' if an
             application were made from outside the UK, and  said  that  in
             such a case there might be no public interest in removing the
             applicant. That, in  my  view,  is  a  clear  indication  that
             the Chikwamba principle  will  require   a   fact-specific
             assessment in each case, will only apply in a very clear case,
             and even then will not necessarily result in a grant of  leave
             to remain.'


         89.   The Upper Tribunal considered the Chikwamba principle in R
         (on the application of Chen) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department) (Appendix FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary  separation  -
         proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC). Upper  Tribunal  Gill
         observed that Lord Brown was not laying down a legal test  when  he
         suggested in Chikwamba that  requiring  a  claimant  to  make  an
         application for entry clearance would only  'comparatively  rarely'
         be proportionate in a case involving  children,  and  that  in  all
         cases it  will  be  for  the  individual  to  demonstrate,  through
         evidence, and based on his or her  individual  circumstances,  that
         temporary removal would be disproportionate.


         90.   Chikwamba pre-dates Part 5A of the Nationality  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act'), which  was  inserted  by  the
         Immigration Act 2014. Section 117A(2) of the 2002 Act provides that
         a  court  or  tribunal,  when  considering  'the  public   interest
         question,' must have regard to the considerations listed in section
         117B (and 117C in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
         criminals, which is not  relevant  to  this  appeal).  The  'public
         interest question' is  defined  as  'the  question  of  whether  an
         interference with a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
         family life is justified under article 8(2)'. There is no exception
         in Part 5A of the 2002 Act (or elsewhere) for  cases  in  which  an
         appellant, following removal, will succeed in  an  application  for
         entry clearance. Accordingly, an appellant in an  Article  8  human
         rights appeal who argues  that  there  is  no  public  interest  in
         removal because after leaving the UK he  or  she  will  be  granted
         entry  clearance  must,  in  all  cases,   address   the   relevant
         considerations in  Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act  including  section
         117B(1),  which  stipulates  that  'the  maintenance  of  effective
         immigration  controls  is  in  the   public   interest'.   Reliance
         on Chikwamba does not obviate the need to do this."

51. The final two sentences of [90] of the decision in Younas are repeated
   in [1] of the headnote for which the case is reported.  What is said in
   that paragraph is consistent with my observations above concerning VW
   (Uganda) and Zhang. The other cases mentioned in the decision for the
   most part post-date those judgments.   The citation at [88] of the
   decision reflects the Respondent's reliance on the use of the word
   "might" in the Supreme Court's judgment in Agyarko.  The point made at
   [85] of the decision undermines Mr West's wider submission that removal
   in circumstances where an appellant would be certain to obtain entry
   clearance is the exception rather than the rule (my paraphrase).  As the
   decision in Younas makes clear, the Chikwamba principle is merely part of
   an overall consideration of where the public interest lies in a
   particular case.


52. This brings me on to the way in which the Judge dealt with the
   Chikwamba issue in this case and the Appellant's criticism of her
   reasoning.

53. I accept that the Judge did not make a finding whether the financial
   requirements of the Rules were met, having recorded the Appellant's
   submissions on that point as set out at [25] of the Decision (as cited
   above).  However, that is because she did not need to for reasons I will
   come to.  In any event, as Mr Tufan pointed out, the Respondent had not
   taken issue in the decision under appeal with any of the requirements of
   the Rules. The Respondent expressly accepted that the Appellant met the
   Rules in relation to financial eligibility and English language.  She
   also accepted the genuineness of the relationship with Ms Khatun.  She
   had concluded however that family life could be continued in Bangladesh,
   that Paragraph EX.1 was not therefore met and for that reason removal
   would be proportionate.


54. As I have pointed out, the Judge correctly considered the Chikwamba
   issue as one of the factors which was relevant to the overall
   proportionality balance.  She had recorded the Appellant's submission as
   being that the Appellant would be certain to meet the Rules.  However,
   due to his immigration status, she had found that he could not meet the
   Rules. The Judge had found that the Appellant did not meet Paragraph
   EX.1.  As such, under the Rules, he could be required to leave the UK
   permanently without any breach of Article 8 ECHR.  It would thereafter be
   a matter for him whether to apply to re-enter the UK as Ms Khatun's
   husband or whether they should remain in Bangladesh.  The Judge also
   placed emphasis on the word "certain" in her citation from Agyarko at
   [32] of the Decision (that word is not emphasised in the Supreme Court's
   judgment).  As I have already recorded, the Supreme Court in Agyarko had
   made the point that, even where a grant of entry clearance might follow,
   that only "might" impact on the public interest.  It is not necessarily
   the case.  The public interest has to be considered as a whole.


55. The relevance of the Chikwamba principle was therefore one of the
   factors which the Judge considered at [33] of the Decision when assessing
   the public interest in removal.  She there noted the importance of the
   Appellant's unlawful immigration status in the context of the public
   interest.  He had overstayed his leave having told an entry clearance
   officer that he intended to return to Bangladesh on the expiry of that
   leave.  She had already noted the precariousness of family life and the
   relevance of that and the finding that the family life could be continued
   in Bangladesh.  For that reason, the Judge concluded, in the final
   sentence of [33] of the Decision that the public interest legitimately
   required that the Appellant return to Bangladesh to make an application
   as any other spouse in his position and if the couple chose not to return
   to live in Bangladesh permanently.


56. Having placed the Chikwamba principle alongside other factors favouring
   the public interest in removal and concluded that it did not alter the
   public interest balance for removal, there would be no point in making
   any findings whether the Appellant would qualify for entry clearance were
   he to make an application to return as Ms Khatun's spouse.

57. For that reason, the Judge did not err in her consideration of the
   Chikwamba principle and its application in this case.  Ground one does
   not disclose any error of law.

CONCLUSION

58. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that there is no error of law
   in the Decision.  I therefore uphold the Decision with the result that
   the Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.

DECISION

The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi promulgated on 29 October
2019 does not involve the making of an error on a point of law. I therefore
uphold the Decision.


Signed: L K Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated:  17 June 2021

