
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10829/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 September 2020               |On 6 October 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                         TANCHHO HANG NEMBANG LIMBU

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                       For the ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent



Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     Goulds Green Chambers

For the respondent:    No submissions received



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

1.   This appeal comes before  me  following  the  grant  of  permission  to
appeal to the respondent by First-tier Tribunal Judge  O'Brien  on  8  April
2020 against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Suffield-
Thompson, promulgated on 14 January 2020 following a hearing at  Newport  on
10 January 2020. For convenience, I shall refer to the parties as they  were
before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant is a Nepalese national born on 18 March  2001.  He  seeks
entry clearance as the adopted son of the sponsor and his wife  who  is  the
appellant's  biological  mother's  sister.  The   respondent   refused   the
application on 30 May 2019 because (i) as a non-Hague adoption, it  was  not
recognised in the UK; (ii) it was  not  a  de  facto  adoption  because  the
appellant had not lived with his adoptive parents for a  minimum  period  of
18 months of which 12 months preceded the application; (iii)  there  was  no
evidence  of  a  genuine  transfer  of  parental  responsibility  from   his
biological to his adoptive parents;  (iv)  it  was  not  accepted  that  the
adoption was not one of convenience; (v) no certificate of  eligibility  had
been adduced from the DCSF in the UK; (vi) the appellant still  had  contact
with his biological parents; (vii) there  were  no  serious  and  compelling
considerations that made his exclusion from the UK  undesirable;  and  (vii)
article 8  was  not  breached.  The  decision  was  reviewed  by  the  Entry
Clearance Manager but  maintained  on  9  October  2019.  According  to  the
respondent's chronology, this is  the  appellant's  fourth  entry  clearance
application[1]. It was  made  on  10  March  2019  a  few  days  before  the
appellant's 18th birthday. Two previous appeals against two of  the  earlier
decisions were dismissed.

3.    The  appeal  came  before  Judge  Suffield-Thompson.  She  heard  oral
evidence from the sponsor and allowed the appeal. She  found  that  although
the adoption was not recognised in the UK, the appellant  had  been  legally
adopted in Nepal. She found that he did not have  the  DCSF  certificate  of
assessment as required but that in any event, as he was over  18,  he  could
not be adopted in the UK. The judge found that the appellant had  not  lived
with his adoptive parents for a minimum of 18 months of  which  12  preceded
the application. She found the sponsor to be an honest witness and  accepted
that the appellant's parents had relocated to another area. She  noted  that
the appellant felt depressed and anxious, had fallen behind  at  school  and
was no longer in education,  that  his  grandmother  had  died  and  he  was
unhappy about being alone in Nepal with  just  a  guardian  who  was  not  a
family member. The judge found that he  was  suffering  from  mental  health
issues and it would be better for him to be with his family in the  UK.  She
found that he was wholly dependent upon the sponsor, that  the  sponsor  and
his wife made all the decisions for him and that the  guardians  he  had  in
Nepal and India, where he had been studying, would not  make  any  decisions
without their approval. Evidence  of  phone  records  to  show  contact  was
adduced. The sponsor confirmed that the reason for the adoption was  because
Nepalese law did not allow daughters to inherit family property  and  as  he
only had one daughter he had no one to leave his property and money to.  The
judge found that there was adequate accommodation for the appellant  in  the
UK and that there were adequate funds to support him.  The  judge  concluded
that there were serious and compelling family or other considerations  which
made the exclusion of  the  appellant  from  the  UK  undesirable  and  that
suitable arrangements had been made for his care.  She  proceeded  to  allow
the appeal  under  paragraph  297(i)(f).  She  then  considered  article  8,
relying on her earlier findings. She found that  the  appellant  had  family
life in the UK and that the refusal interfered  with  that.  In  considering
proportionality, she found that the rules had been met, that  the  appellant
spoke English and was of good character,  that  he  would  be  coming  to  a
family that could support him and that he would not, therefore, be  a  drain
on the public purse. She had regard to the public interest in maintaining  a
fair but firm immigration policy but  found  that  it  was  unreasonable  to
expect the appellant to remain in Nepal away  from  his  family.  She  found
that having to lead a separate life was having  a  profound  impact  on  his
mental health. She found there was more than mere hardship  in  this  appeal
and that the balance came down strongly in favour of the  article  8  rights
of the appellant and his family. Accordingly the appeal  was  allowed  under
article 8 as well as under the immigration rules.

4.   The respondent successfully sought permission to  appeal.  She  argued:
(i) that the judge had mistakenly allowed the appeal on the basis  that  the
appellant was still a child, that her assessment of the facts was  therefore
unreliable and her conclusion fatally flawed; (ii)  that  as  the  appellant
was 19 at the date of the decision, it  was  incumbent  upon  the  judge  to
provide reasons for why the parental relationship was considered to be  over
and above one  that  demonstrated  normal  emotional  ties  particularly  in
circumstances where the sponsor and the appellant  had  not  lived  together
for any substantial period of time and  the  appellant  had  not  formed  an
integral part of their family unit; and (iii) that the judge had  failed  to
engage with the  respondent's  contention  that  the  adoption  was  one  of
convenience particularly when the sponsor's own evidence was  that  it  took
place so that he could have a son to inherit his property.

Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

5.   The matter would ordinarily have been listed for a  hearing  after  the
grant of permission but due to  the  Covid-19  pandemic  and  need  to  take
precautions against its spread, this did not happen and  instead  directions
were sent to the parties with the grant of permission on 4  June  and  again
on 29 July 2020. They were asked to present any  objections  to  the  matter
being dealt with on the papers and to make any further  submissions  on  the
error of law issue within certain time limits.

6.   The Tribunal has received a response from the appellant which  confirms
reliance on the grounds for  permission.  The  representatives  also  submit
that a remote hearing would not be suitable because they do not  have  Skype
for Business, because the sponsor would like to be present  on  the  day  to
give oral evidence and it would be  convenient  to  produce  "all  sorts  of
evidence" in support of the case if and when required.  There  has  been  no
reply from the respondent. I now  consider  whether  it  is  appropriate  to
determine the matter on the papers.

7.   In doing so I have regard to the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn v The Parole Board  [2013]
UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 2020: Arrangements  during  the
Covid-19 pandemic (PGN) and the Senior President's Pilot Practice  Direction
(PPD). I have regard to the overriding objective which is defined in rule  2
of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as  being  "to  enable
the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and  justly".  To  this  end  I
have considered that  dealing  with  a  case  fairly  and  justly  includes:
dealing with it in ways that are proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the
case, the complexity of the issues, etc; avoiding unnecessary formality  and
seeking flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring,  so  far  as  practicable,
that the parties are able to participate fully  in  the  proceedings;  using
any special expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  effectively;  and  avoiding
delay, so far as compatible with proper consideration of  the  issues  (Rule
2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

8.   I have had regard to the appellant's brief submissions. The  fact  that
the appellant's representatives do not have Skype  for  Business  facilities
does not impact  upon  the  issue  of  whether  the  error  of  law  can  be
determined on the papers. The facility is, however, easily downloadable  and
no reason is offered as to why the representatives  cannot  access  it.  The
sponsor is not required  to  give  oral  evidence  at  this  stage  and  the
Tribunal is able to refer to the evidence on file in order to determine  the
issue at hand. The appellant  has  had  the  opportunity  to  reply  to  the
respondent's grounds for permission but has chosen to remain silent  on  the
issues raised, despite plainly having received the directions (as a  partial
response has been made). I am satisfied that the respondent's  grounds  have
been clearly set out, that a speedy determination of this matter is  in  the
appellant's best interests, given  the  long  history  of  applications  and
appeals, and that I am able to fairly and justly deal with  this  matter  on
the papers.

Discussion and conclusions

9.   I have carefully  considered  the  respondent's  grounds  and  all  the
evidence before making a decision.

10.  I do not accept the respondent's contention that the judge allowed  the
appeal on the mistaken belief that the appellant was still a  child  at  the
date of the hearing. She was clearly aware that he was over 18 at  the  date
of the decision as she specifically says so in her determination  (at  18(i)
and 24). The appellant was, however, under 18 and still a minor at the  date
of his application and the judge was entitled to, and  indeed  required  to,
consider  him  as  such  when  assessing  whether  the  provisions  of   the
Immigration Rules had been met. When citing  paragraph  43  of  the  judge's
determination, the respondent, in her grounds, fails entirely to  appreciate
that the appellant was a minor when he  made  his  application.  There  has,
therefore, been no error as to a material fact as the grounds argue.

11.  In her second ground, the respondent argues  that  the  judge  did  not
give reasons for why she found  that  there  was  family  life  between  the
appellant and his adoptive parents given the appellant's  age.  The  judge's
reasoning is, however, detailed and extensive and we know that  family  life
does not suddenly come to an end just because a child turns  18.  The  judge
found that the appellant had been legally adopted in Nepal in 2009,  aged  7
or 8, and that from then on he had been seen as the sponsor's legal  son  by
the authorities and by the  sponsor  and  his  wife.   She  found  that  the
adoption papers were genuine and the respondent had not suggested that  they
were not (at 23). She found that the sponsor  and  his  wife  had  regularly
visited Nepal and had stayed with  the  appellant  for  several  weeks  each
time; they were restricted as to the duration of their visits by  employment
commitments (at 25). The judge had regard to the two  earlier  decisions  by
the Tribunal but found that circumstances had changed  since  then  in  that
the appellant's grandmother had died and his biological  parents  had  moved
away (at 30 and 35). She had the benefit of oral evidence from  the  sponsor
and found him to be an honest and open witness (at 33). She  had  regard  to
the appellant's mental health issues,  his  depression  at  being  alone  in
Nepal and the impact this  had  had  on  his  schooling,  all  confirmed  by
medical evidence which she found to be genuine and which does not appear  to
have been challenged by the respondent at the hearing  (at  36).  She  found
that the appellant's  depression  and  anxiety  was  caused  by  the  family
separation (at 37). She accepted  there  was  regular  contact  between  the
parties and that it would be best if the family  were  to  be  reunited  (at
37). The judge was satisfied that the sponsor would be able to  support  and
accommodate the appellant without recourse to public funds (at 38  and  42).
She accepted the evidence regarding  the  appellant's  guardians  and  noted
that they carried out decisions made by the sponsor and his  wife  (at  40).
She had regard to the respondent's submission that the adoption was  one  of
convenience but found that  the  appellant  was  a  genuine  member  of  the
sponsor's family (at 41 and 43).

12.  Having found that the Immigration Rules were satisfied the  judge  then
moved on to considering article 8. Relying  on  her  earlier  findings,  she
found that there was family life between the appellant and the  sponsor  (at
46). She considered the public interest factors  (at  49-50)  and  concluded
that it was not reasonable for the appellant to stay away  from  his  family
and be forced to live a separate life without them (at 52). She  found  that
the appellant was suffering from mental health  problems  as  a  result  and
that this amounted to more than  mere  hardship  (ibid).    These  were  all
findings that  were  entirely  open  to  her  on  the  largely  unchallenged
evidence.

13.  The important point to note  in  this  case  when  considering  whether
family life continues between the sponsor and his now adult adopted  son  is
that this is  not  a  recent  attempt  to  bring  him  to  the  UK  but  the
culmination of attempts covering seven years.  The  appellant  was  a  minor
when  he  was  adopted  and  remained  so  until  just  after  this   fourth
application for entry clearance was made. The sponsor has not  given  up  on
his wish to be reunited with the boy he has considered to be his  son  since
2009 and nothing has changed for the  appellant  between  the  date  of  his
application when he was still a minor and the  attainment  of  his  majority
such as to end the family life that he would have been  accepted  as  having
with the sponsor whilst he was a child. The judge has,  in  my  view,  given
detailed and wholly sustainable reasons for why  she  concluded  that  there
was continuing family life between the appellant and  the  sponsor  and  why
she found that in these specific circumstances the balance came down  firmly
in favour of the article 8 rights of the appellant and  his  family  in  the
UK.

14.  The respondent's last ground is that the judge did not have  regard  to
the respondent's submission  that  this  was  an  adoption  of  convenience.
Reference to this is made in the decision notice,  as  pointed  out  in  the
grounds, however the requirement in the rules under  paragraph  316A  (viii)
is that the adoption must not be  one  of  convenience  made  to  facilitate
admission to the UK. On the sponsor's own evidence at  the  hearing,  relied
on by the Presenting Officer, the reason for the adoption was  so  that  the
sponsor would have a male heir to leave his property to. Clearly, then,  the
adoption  was  not  undertaken  in  order  to  facilitate  the   appellant's
admission to the UK. Had that been the case, the  sponsor  would  not  doubt
have commenced the attempts to obtain entry clearance for the  appellant  in
2009 when the adoption took place instead of waiting  until  2013.   In  any
event, the respondent's complaint that the judge  did  not  have  regard  to
this part of the  decision  is  not  made  out  as  the  judge  specifically
referred to this at 41.  Plainly,  she  had  it  in  mind  when  making  her
findings but still considered the adoption to be  genuine  and  sincere  for
all the reasons summarized above.

15.  It follows that the judge was entitled  to  find  that  article  8  was
engaged and to allow the appeal on human  rights  grounds.  I  can  find  no
errors of law in that decision.

16.  Although not raised in the  respondent's  grounds,  the  judge  had  no
jurisdiction, however, to allow the appeal under paragraph 297(i)(f) of  the
Immigration Rules as she purported to so at paragraphs 43  and  at  54.  She
had before her a human rights appeal and that was the only basis on which  a
decision could have  been  made.  I  find,  however,  that  given  her  self
direction at paragraph 20, what she meant was that the rules were met in  so
far as they pertained to the proportionality assessment  of  article  8.  In
those circumstances, whilst the decision  to  allow  the  appeal  under  the
Immigration Rules was an error, it  is  immaterial  as  those  findings  are
subsumed within the article 8 assessment.

17.  I am reinforced in that view by  the  respondent  not  having  included
that as an error  in  her  grounds  for  permission.  The  error  is  easily
corrected by setting aside that part of her decision.

18.  The decision to allow the appeal on human rights grounds is upheld.



Decision

19.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the  appeal  on  human
rights grounds contains no errors of law and  is  upheld.  The  decision  to
allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules is set aside.



Anonymity

20.  No request for an anonymity order has been made at any stage and I  see
no reason to make one.


Signed

R. Keki?
Upper Tribunal Judge

Date: 30 September 2020
-----------------------
[1] The judge was wrong to find there had been only two previous
applications (at 18(ii)).



