
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/10097/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 September 2019                 |On 8 October 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 Analin [Y]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Duheric & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the  Philippines,  born  on  18  February
    1976.  She is separated from her husband.  She has three sons, two  now
    adult and one still a child, in the Philippines.  She began to work  in
    Hong Kong in October 2012 as a domestic worker for Mr and Mrs  [M],  an
    airline pilot and a pharmaceutical researcher.  She has  remained  with
    them, principally as a nanny to their children [S1], now aged  10,  and
    [S2], 7, since they moved to Scotland in May 2014.

 2. The appellant had leave as a domestic worker from May to November 2014,
    and was granted further such leave until February 2016.  The respondent
    says the further leave was granted in  error,  as  the  rules  did  not
    provide for it, which the appellant does not dispute.   On  4  February
    2016 she sought further leave.  The covering letter  from  agents  then
    acting for her appears to recognise that her application could  succeed
    only outside the rules.  It founds principally upon the needs of  [S1],
    who is autistic, and particularly attached to the appellant, and on the
    pay (above minimum wage) and accommodation provided by Mr and Mrs  [M],
    which take the appellant out of any reliance on public funds.

 3. The respondent's decision dated 21 March 2016 says that the application
    cannot succeed under the rules, which is common ground, and goes on  to
    consider whether compassionate factors might warrant leave outside  the
    rules.  It states:

         "... you have requested that the SSHD exercise her  discretion  due
         to the fact  that  you  have  become  an  integral  member  of  the
         employer's family, and that their son who is autistic  is  attached
         to you.  It  is  open  to  the  family  to  make  alternative  care
         arrangements, and if required, to employ  someone  not  subject  to
         immigration control. There is no  evidence  that  alternative  care
         arrangements could not be made."

 4. The appellant appealed to the FtT.   There  is  no  dispute  about  the
    facts.  Parties agreed that these could be taken as set  out,  in  more
    detail than above, in  the  decision  of  Judge  David  C  Clapham  SSC
    promulgated on 9 October 2017.

 5. The Judge had considerable sympathy for the case, expressed  at  [36  -
    37].  He said that the appellant was doing" important  and  responsible
    work" with the family, and was "no doubt ... a  valued  member  of  the
    household", difficult to  replace.   He  found  the  argument  for  her
    "attractive and appealing" at [36] and  again  at  [41].   However,  he
    thought that she could not be a family member, as her own family,  whom
    she would put first, was in the Philippines.  At [39], he said that  he
    "did not consider that what the appellant has built up in  Scotland  is
    family  life  or  private  life",  and  that  although  the   children,
    especially [S1], would find separation "very difficult"  that  did  not
    mean "that family / private life is engaged". At  [41],  he  said  that
    while family  relationships  "may  be  assumed  to  have  a  degree  of
    permanence ... a relationship  between  a  domestic  employee  and  the
    family she works for cannot have the same essential character", and  at
    [42] that in his view the appeal "requires to fail".

 6. The FtT and  the  UT  refused  permission  to  appeal.   The  appellant
    petitioned the Court for judicial review.  Parties entered into a joint
    minute agreeing that the refusal of permission should be  reduced.   In
    that light, the Vice President of  the  UT  granted  permission  on  15
    August 2019.

 7. Having heard representatives on error of  law,  I  indicated  that  the
    decision of Judge Clapham fell to be set aside.

 8. It was an error to find that article 8 was not engaged.  The  threshold
    for engagement is not high.  Proportionality is a different matter.

 9. Family life qualifying for article 8 protection is not limited  to  the
    core relationships of  adult  partners,  parents  and  minor  children.
    Circumstances   may   extend   that   protection   beyond    biological
    relationships.  Domestic employees do not usually come within the scope
    of article 8, but there is no rule such as stated by the Judge at [41].
     He was not bound to conclude that family life did exist, but it was an
    error to rule out even the possibility.

10. It was an error to find that the appellant had established  no  private
    life.  There were, at the least, strong private life  links  among  the
    parties.  Again, proportionality is a different matter.

11. Mr Govan's argument on error of law was that the Judge set out all  the
    salient facts, and reached a conclusion open to him on the facts.  That
    is correct, as far as it goes, but this was not a  case  with  such  an
    inevitable outcome that it does not matter that it rests  on  erroneous
    reasons.

12. Having held as above, the hearing proceeded to submissions on  remaking
    the decision, which was reserved.

13. Neither party referred to section 117B of the 2002 Act, but that  is  a
    crucial provision:

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
         the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)       Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
         established by a person at a time  when  the  person's  immigration
         status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.

14. Mr Caskie submitted that the appellant should be found to  have  family
    and not only private life in the UK, but also that the distinction  was
    an arid one, as all the same matters were to be  taken  account  of  as
    part of private life.  In some contexts, that is so,  but  in  applying
    section 117B there is a major difference.

15. Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58 establishes that anyone who,  not  being  a  UK
    citizen, is present in the UK and who has leave to reside  there  other
    than to do so indefinitely, has a precarious  immigration  status;  and
    that  the appellant's ability to speak English, and  non-imposition  on
    taxpayers, cannot be given significant weight in her favour.

16.  The same authority also explains how to apply section 117B(5):

         ... the effect of section 117A(2)(a) is clear. It  recognises  that
         the provisions of section 117B  cannot  put  decision-makers  in  a
         strait-jacket which  constrains  them  to  determine  claims  under
         article 8 inconsistently with the article itself. Inbuilt into  the
         concept of "little weight" itself is a small degree of flexibility;
         but it is in  particular  section  117A(2)(a)  which  provides  the
         limited degree of flexibility recognised to be necessary in para 36
         above. Although this court today defines a  precarious  immigration
         status for the purpose of [pic]section 117B(5) with  a  width  from
         which most applicants who rely on their private life under  article
         8 will be unable to escape, section 117A(2)(a) necessarily  enables
         their applications occasionally to succeed.  It  is  impossible  to
         improve on how, in  inevitably  general  terms,  Sales  LJ  in  his
         judgment described the effect of section 117A(2)(a) as follows:

             "53.      ... Although a court or tribunal should have  regard
             to the consideration that little weight  should  be  given  to
             private life established in [the specified] circumstances,  it
             is possible without violence to the language to say that  such
             generalised  normative  guidance  may  be  overridden  in   an
             exceptional  case  by  particularly  strong  features  of  the
             private life in question ..."

17. The nuclear family here comprises Mr and Mrs [M] and the two  children.
    The appellant has been with the two children for most of  their  lives.
    Even the older child, whose needs and attachment are greater, can  have
    little if any recollection of her not being there.   The  closeness  of
    the relationship with  [S1]  was  brought  out,  for  example,  by  the
    evidence  of  her  involvement  with  his  school.   The   headmistress
    specified turning to her for practical  help  when  needed  during  the
    school day.

18. It is unusual, but not impossible, to find family relationships  within
    article 8 even where the core of relationships among  two  parents  and
    their children is  in  place.   It  would  also  be  unusual,  but  not
    impossible, to find family relationships within article 8 even when the
    "additional" family member has primary family relationships elsewhere.

19. The appellant's relationship with the [M] family is economic, but  also
    more than that.  I do not think her relationship with the  children  is
    parental in nature, when they  have  mother  and  father  both  closely
    involved.

20. The issue is finely balanced but in my view the  evidence  crosses  the
    line of showing that the appellant is for article 8 purposes  a  member
    of the [M] family.  As I find that not to be a  parental  relationship,
    but something different, that does not automatically give her  a  right
    to remain.

21.  I  have  no  hesitation  in  finding  that  even  if  the  appellant's
    relationships in the UK do not constitute  family  life,  they  display
    particularly strong features, such as might enable her to benefit  from
    the limited degree  of  flexibility  available  when  applying  section
    117B(5).

22. Given those findings, would removal be proportionate?

23. Mr Govan did not suggest anything on the respondent's side in this case
    which goes beyond the  norm  of  recognising  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining the rules; an important interest,  but  one  which  can  be
    outweighed.

24. It is inevitable that relationships end, and children adapt.  I have no
    doubt that the parents would  cushion  the  blow  by  making  the  best
    available alternative arrangements.  There would be an adverse  effect,
    but not drastic long term damage.  It would be rather  better  for  the
    children, particularly [S1], if the appellant were to  stay  with  them
    into the medium term.

25. The appellant has been  here  longer  than  might  lawfully  have  been
    expected, partly due to an error of  the  respondent  in  applying  the
    rules.  There is no right for an appellant to have an error perpetuated
    in her favour, but the passage of time has deepened  the  relationships
    affected, and has diminished the significance of strict  insistence  on
    the rules.

26. In summary, the family (although not  parental)  relationships  of  the
    appellant in the UK, or  alternatively,  the  strong  features  of  her
    private relationships, and the best interests of the children involved,
    outweigh the public interest in enforcing the rules.

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, and the following
    decision is substituted: the appeal, as brought to the FtT, is allowed.

28. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.



    [pic]


    23 September 2019
    UT Judge Macleman
