
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10250/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On the 29th April 2019             |On the 13th May 2019               |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     IS
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z. Rahman, instructed on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity as the appeal concerns minor children No report of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him  or  his
    partner and children.  This direction applies both to the Appellant and
    to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
    contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal panel ("FtTJ panel"), promulgated on the  14th  September
    2018 dismissing his appeal against the decision  to  refuse  his  human
    rights claim based on his family life. Permission to appeal was granted
    by the Upper Tribunal (Judge Jackson) on the 3rd January 2019.


 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He entered the UK in May  2011
    with entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) student with  a  visa  valid
    until  June  2014.  Whilst  in  United  Kingdom  he  entered   into   a
    relationship with a British national in 2012 and they later married  in
    a religious ceremony in 2014  and  began  to  live  together.  She  had
    previously been married and there were  three  children  born  of  that
    relationship. The marriage between the parties ended and  the  children
    lived with their father. A Child Arrangements Order was made  in  April
    2013 relating to contact with their mother.

 3. The appellant applied for further leave to remain on the basis  of  his
    relationship with his partner, but that application was  refused  in  a
    decision taken on 20 August 2014. He appealed that  decision,  but  the
    appeal was dismissed on 7 July 2015 by the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. A further human rights application was made  in  2016  relying  on  his
    relationship and a change in circumstances since  the  previous  appeal
    determination. The application was refused, and which resulted  in  the
    decision letter under challenge in these proceedings (the  decision  of
    the respondent made on 29  August  2017  to  refuse  granted  leave  to
    remain).

 5. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal panel 22nd August  2018.
    The panel heard evidence from the  appellant  and  his  partner.  In  a
    decision promulgated on the 14th September 2018,  the  panel  dismissed
    his appeal on all grounds. The FtT panel found that the appellant could
    not meet the requirements of Appendix FM  as  he  could  not  meet  the
    requirements for leave to remain as either a partner or  a  parent  and
    found that EX1 was not met as there were no "insurmountable  obstacles"
    to family life in Pakistan. As to paragraph 276ADE, the panel  recorded
    that he did not appear to have sought to  claim  under  that  paragraph
    (see [23]).

 6. When considering Article 8  outside  of  the  Rules,  the  panel,  when
    applying the section 117B public interest factors,  took  into  account
    that the appellant's immigration status had  always  been  "precarious"
    and thus little weight was attached to the private  life  that  he  had
    established in the United Kingdom and the family life established  with
    his partner ( at [25]). The  panel  rejected  the  assertion  that  the
    appellant's partner could not  manage  without  the  appellant  (if  he
    returned to Pakistan) and that there were no reasons why he  could  not
    return to Pakistan apply for entry clearance to return.  They concluded
    that there were no compelling  reasons  why  leave  should  be  granted
    outside the rules and dismissed the appeal.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted on the  3rd
    January 2019 by Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal. Ms Rahman relied  upon
    a comprehensive skeleton argument which set out  all  the  matters  she
    wished to rely upon, and I heard oral submissions in the light of  that
    document.  Mr  Tufan,  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  provided   oral
    submissions in the absence of a Rule 24 response.

 9. I have had regard to the written grounds, the skeleton argument and the
    oral submissions when reaching a conclusion as to whether  the  deciosn
    of the panel involved the making of an error on a point of law.  It  is
    not necessary for me to set out all those submissions and I  intend  to
    make reference to the salient parts during my assessment  and  analysis
    of the issues raised.


Decision on the error of law:

10. I have carefully considered the competing submissions of the advocates,
    and having done so, I am satisfied that the decision  demonstrates  the
    making of an error on a point of law. I shall set out  my  reasons  for
    reaching that view.

11. In summary, it is submitted that the decision of the panel is  vitiated
    by material errors of law because, firstly, the panel took an erroneous
    approach to EX (1) (a) and EX2 and wrongly concluded that the appellant
    was unable to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. Secondly,
    in the alternative, the panel applied  an  erroneous  approach  to  the
    proportionality assessment of article 8 outside of the rules, including
    consideration of the section 117B public interest factors.

12. Mr Tufan on behalf of the respondent submitted that in relation to EX1,
    whilst the panel accepted he had a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with his wife, there was  a  lack  of  evidence  that  related  to  his
    partner's relationship with the children. The outcome of the order made
    by the family Court in January 2018 had not been provided and whilst it
    was accepted that she had contact with the children,  the  panel  could
    not conclude any further as to the level of that contact. He  submitted
    that there had been inconsistent evidence given by the witnesses as  to
    the level of contact. In relation to the appellants  partner's  medical
    condition, the panel were correct to identify that there was a lack  of
    up-to-date medical evidence. Consequently, the assessment under EX1 was
    therefore open to the panel to reach as it  had  not  been  shown  that
    there  were  any  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  family  life   being
    established in Pakistan, either under the Rules or outside of the Rules
    (applying the decision in Agyarko). As to the Chikwamba point raised in
    the grounds, it was open to the panel to reach the conclusion  that  he
    could apply for entry clearance from abroad given the previous decision
    of the FtT (Judge Obhi).


13. Dealing with the first ground, it is submitted that the  panel  applied
    an incorrect interpretation  of  EX1  in  the  context  of  the  Rules.
    Appendix FM sets out the requirements of leave to remain as a  partner,
    relying on either the five-year route or the 10-year route. There is no
    dispute that the basis upon which this application was made  was  under
    the 10-year partner route. At paragraph [8 ] the panel quoted from  the
    decision letter that it  been  accepted  by  the  respondent  that  the
    appellant met the suitability and eligibility  requirements  under  the
    Rules and then purported to apply the decision in Sabir (Appendix FM  -
    EX 1 not freestanding)[2014]UKUT 63 and  concluded  that  the  decision
    held that "the architecture of the Rules as regards  partners  is  such
    that EX1 is parasitic on the relevant  Rule  within  Appendix  FM  that
    otherwise grants leave to remain. Thus, we find  the  appellant  cannot
    succeed under paragraph EX1".

14. The submission made by Ms Rahman is that this is an error  because  the
    appellant relied on EX1, not as  a  freestanding  provision  but  as  a
    component of the requirement for leave to remain as the  appellant  met
    the eligibility and suitability requirements  and  therefore  the  only
    remaining requirement was whether EX1 applied.  She  therefore  submits
    the panel fell into error in its conclusion at paragraph 8.

15. In my judgment it is important to read the determination as a whole  as
    at paragraph 8 the panel correctly stated that whilst the appellant met
    the eligibility and suitability requirements "thus the question must be
    whether EX1 applies in the appellant's  case."  The  reference  to  the
    decision in Sabir is in that context; therefore  it  is  plain  at  the
    beginning of paragraph 8 that the panel correctly identified the issue,
    that is, whether EX1 applied. Where  the  panel  stated  "we  find  the
    appellant cannot succeed under EX1"  at  the  end  of  paragraph  8,  I
    consider that it should be read in the light  of  and  the  context  of
    paragraphs 9 - 15 where the panel then went  on  to  actively  consider
    factual findings relevant to EX1.

16.  Furthermore, even if it could be said that the decision of  the  panel
    is ambiguous in this respect, the panel nonetheless went on to state at
    [15] "if we were wrong in findings in relation to paragraph  EX1  above
    we now consider  that  paragraph.  For  the  reasons  given  above  the
    appellant cannot meet the requirements  of  EX1  (a)".  Therefore,  any
    error asserted on behalf of the appellant  that  the  panel  failed  to
    consider EX1 is not justified because the panel in the alternative went
    on to consider this issue.


17. In my  judgement  the  better  point  raised  in  the  grounds  and  as
    identified in the grant of permission, relates  to  whether  the  panel
    properly applied the test under EX1 in  the  light  of  the  particular
    factual circumstances. I have therefore considered this in the light of
    the material that was before the panel and the findings  of  fact  that
    they reached.

18. The approach taken in the decision letter was that EX1(a) did not apply
    because whilst the appellant's partner had children in the UK, she  did
    not maintain a "parental relationship" as she did not see them or  have
    contact to them. As regards EX1(b)  it  was  said  that  there  was  no
    evidence of any "insurmountable obstacles". Against that background the
    panel reached the following findings:
        . the appellant did not have a genuine and subsisting  relationship
          with any children in the UK;
        . the  panel  accepted  that  the  appellant's  partner  had  three
          children but that the appellant had only met one  child  in  2013
          (see [9]);
        . the panel accepted that the appellant's partner had some  contact
          with the children but for the reasons set out at paragraph  10  -
          14, whilst they accepted there was a level of contact, they could
          make no specific findings.
        . Against that  background  and  at  [15]  the  panel  reached  the
          conclusion that the appellant could not meet the requirements  of
          EX1(a).


19. As the panel correctly identified  on  the  evidence  before  them  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of EX1(a) because  he  failed
    to establish the first limb-he did not have a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with his partner's children given that he had  no
    contact since that date (see [9]). EX1(a) does not refer to whether the
    appellant's partner has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship.
    Therefore, the appellant fell at the first part of EX (1) (a) (i),  and
    there is no error in the  panels  finding  that  it  cannot  meet  that
    paragraph (see [15]). Although I would accept that the panel would have
    re-visited the issue outside of the Rules.


20. As to EX (1) (b) the panel set out their findings on the issue,  having
    taken into account the earlier findings at paragraphs 9 to  14  and  in
    addition made the following findings:
       . the appellant's partner was a British citizen although she had also
         retained Pakistani nationality,
       . the appellant had family members in Pakistan (see [17]);
       . the appellant's partner had some medical problems but there was  no
         up-to-date  evidence  to  demonstrate  that  her  health  would  be
         compromised if she lived in Pakistan;
       . the appellant had spent 25 years in Pakistan;
       . the appellant's  partner's  wish  not  to  accompany  him  was  not
         sufficient to constitute an "insurmountable obstacle";
       . consideration  should  be  given  to  the  best  interests  of  the
         children, but the panel were not satisfied as to the  actual  level
         of contact between the appellant's partner and children because  of
         the inconsistent evidence given and that  they  had  not  seen  the
         CAFCASS report;
       . any interruption in family life would be for a short period and  at
         the appellant and his partner could live in Pakistan as  a  holiday
         and apply for entry clearance as a spouse.
       . The  panel  therefore  found  that  there  were  no  insurmountable
         obstacles "to the appellant's return to Pakistan."


21. The panel therefore  found  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    threshold as to EX1(b) either.


22. The panel did not set out  the  case  law  relating  to  the  issue  of
    "insurmountable obstacles". However, it is  not  in  dispute  that  the
    Supreme Court considered the  issue  of  insurmountable  obstacles  and
    Article 8 in the decision of R (Agyarko) v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2017] UKSC 11.


23. At paragraph 43 the court considered  the  European  jurisprudence  and
    that the "words  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  be  understood  in  a
    practical and realistic sense,  rather  than  as  referring  solely  to
    obstacles which make it literally impossible for  the  family  to  live
    together in the country of origin of the non-national concerned".


24. However, the Court went on to  state:  "Insurmountable  obstacles"  is,
    however, the expression employed by the Grand Chamber; and the  court's
    application of it indicates that it is a stringent test.  In  Jeunesse,
    for example, there were said to be no insurmountable obstacles  to  the
    relocation of the family to Suriname, although the children, the eldest
    of whom was at secondary school, were Dutch  nationals  who  had  lived
    there all their lives, had never visited Suriname, and would experience
    a degree of hardship if forced to move, and the applicant's partner was
    in full-time employment in the Netherlands: see paras 117 and 119".


25.  Thus, the Court found that the requirement of insurmountable obstacles
    is a stringent test to be  met  and  this  was  not  incompatible  with
    Article 8.

26. In conclusion the Court held at [45] "By virtue of paragraph EX.1  (b),
    "insurmountable obstacles" are treated as a requirement for  the  grant
    of leave under the Rules in cases  to  which  that  paragraph  applies.
    Accordingly, interpreting the expression in the same sense  as  in  the
    Strasbourg case law, leave to remain would not normally be  granted  in
    cases where an applicant for leave to remain under  the  partner  route
    was in the UK in breach of immigration laws, unless  the  applicant  or
    their partner would face very serious difficulties in continuing  their
    family life together outside the UK, which could  not  be  overcome  or
    would entail very serious hardship".


27. When looking at the issue of Article 8 outside the Rules  at  paragraph
    [48] the Court stated:
         "[48]    As has been explained, the Rules are not a summary of  the
         European court's case law, but a  statement  of  the  Secretary  of
         State's policy. That policy is qualified by the scope  allowed  for
         leave to remain to be granted outside the Rules. If  the  applicant
         or his or her partner would face very significant  difficulties  in
         continuing their family life together outside the UK,  which  could
         not be overcome or would entail very  serious  hardship,  then  the
         "insurmountable obstacles" test will be  met,  and  leave  will  be
         granted under the Rules. If that test is not met, but  the  refusal
         of  the   application   would   result   in   unjustifiably   harsh
         consequences, such that refusal would not  be  proportionate,  then
         leave will be granted outside the Rules on the basis that there are
         "exceptional   circumstances".   In   the   absence    of    either
         "insurmountable  obstacles"  or  "exceptional   circumstances"   as
         defined, however, it is not apparent why it should be  incompatible
         with article 8 for leave to be refused. The Rules and  Instructions
         are therefore compatible with article 8. That is not, of course, to
         say  that  decisions  applying  the  Rules  and   Instructions   in
         individual cases will necessarily be  compatible  with  article  8:
         that is a question which, if a  decision  is  challenged,  must  be
         determined independently by the court or Tribunal in the  light  of
         the particular circumstances of each case".


28. The question is whether the panel failed to consider  the  relationship
    between the appellant's  partner  and  her  children  as  part  of  the
    assessment under EX1(b). In this context  Mr  Tufan  submits  that  the
    findings made as by the panel were open to them in  the  context  of  a
    lack of evidence.

29. It is plain from reading the judgment  that  they  had  made  tentative
    findings of fact as to the  nature  of  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant's partner and her children (see paragraphs  9  -  15  of  the
    decision). They accepted that she was  the  mother  of  three  children
    residing in the United Kingdom.  Whilst  the  panel  did  not  say  so,
    irrespective of whether the children resided  with  her,  she  retained
    parental responsibility for those children  as  their  mother.  In  any
    event, whilst the level of contact was not clear, it  was  accepted  by
    the panel that there was some contact taking place. As to the issue  of
    their relationship with their mother and  the  level  of  contact,  the
    panel was not assisted by the failure of the parties  or  earlier  case
    management decisions being made to provide  disclosure  of  the  family
    court documentation.


30. Where there is an issue as to the best interests of  relevant  children
    in the context of a human rights claim and it is known that  there  are
    previous Family Court proceedings that would provide relevant evidence,
    there is a mechanism available to obtain an order for disclosure.  That
    has recently been highlighted again in the decision of The Secretary of
    State for the Home Department v AB(Jamaica) and AO(Nigeria) [2019] EWCA
    Civ 66 by King LJ and that the Protocol and communication  between  the
    judges of the Family Court and the Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber  of
    the FtT  and  Upper  Tribunal  [2013]  Fam  Law  1197  is  designed  to
    facilitate the process of disclosure of relevant material.

31. The panel observed that there had been no compliance with the  protocol
    (see paragraph 10) and at 21 they made reference to having not seen the
    CAFCASS report.

32. There was important documentary evidence which was unavailable  to  the
    panel as to the factual circumstances of the  appellant's  partner  and
    her  relationship  with  the  children.  Whilst  the  panel  had   some
    documentary evidence, such as the order that was made in 2013 and 2018,
    this did not provide sufficient information for any assessment  of  the
    best interests of the relevant children.

33. Furthermore, it  would  have  assisted  in  providing  the  panel  with
    material so that the best interests of the children could  be  properly
    assessed. The panel at [21] made reference to  "consideration  must  be
    given to the best interest of the children" but as they  had  not  been
    satisfied as to the level of contact between the  mother  and  children
    and had not seen any of the family documentation, they made  no  actual
    findings as to the best interests of those children  concerned.  In  my
    judgement the panel were in error even on the  basis  of  the  material
    they had. Having found that the  appellant's  partner  was  maintaining
    contact with her children, it was incumbent upon the panel to  consider
    their best interests in their assessment of EX1.

34. I do not fully accept the submissions made by Ms Rahman that the  panel
    failed to make findings about  the  level  of  contact.  I  prefer  the
    submission made by Mr Tufan that the panel identified that the evidence
    before them as to the level of contact had not been consistent and gave
    sustainable reasons for reaching that view at paragraphs 10 - 14 due to
    the inconsistent evidence given in the letters from  the  children  and
    from the evidence given by the appellant's  partner.  It  was  for  the
    appellant and his partner to provide consistent evidence concerning the
    level of contact and there  was  a  lacuna  in  the  evidence  in  this
    respect. There was no further information in documentary form as to the
    re-establishment of contact post- dating the order in 2013 and much  of
    the evidence was undated (including letters from the children and  from
    the appellant's former partner). Therefore, it is not  surprising  that
    if the panel did misunderstand that evidence  that  there  was  ongoing
    unsupervised contact, it was because the evidence was either lacking in
    cogency or that it had not been properly explained.


35. Notwithstanding that I am satisfied that  the  panel  fell  into  error
    because having accepted that there was  ongoing  contact,  at  whatever
    level, they were  required  to  consider  the  best  interests  of  the
    children and go on to make an assessment of them, and to consider  what
    the consequences would be to the children of their mother relocating to
    Pakistan and consider whether this was an "insurmountable obstacle"  to
    family life being established out of the United Kingdom.  Those  issues
    were not considered in the panel's assessment.

36. Furthermore, as set out above if  relevant  evidence  was  missing,  as
    identified by the panel, an  order  could  have  been  made  under  the
    protocol. I recognise that it is for the appellant to  prove  his  case
    but where the  best  interest's  assessment  is  necessary  and  family
    documents are available, that could have been obtained either prior  to
    the hearing or by adjourning part heard.

37. A further issue identified in the grounds is that when considering  the
    issue of insurmountable obstacles, the panel  failed  to  consider  the
    medical circumstances of  the  appellant's  partner.  Again,  I  cannot
    accept the submission in its entirety. The medical circumstances of the
    appellant's partner were a relevant consideration under EX1(b) and also
    in any assessment outside of the Rules. However, there was a lack of up-
    to-date medical evidence before the panel. As Mr Tufan pointed out, the
    panel expressly referred to this at [18]. The evidence related to  2015
    and 2016 and that the only other evidence consisted of assertions  made
    by  the  appellant's  partner.  The  decision  in  SSHD  v  R  (on  the
    application of Kaur) [2018] 15th May  2018,  cites  with  approval  the
    earlier decision of the Court of Appeal in R  (Mudibo)  v  SSHD  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1949, where the  court  emphasised  the  distinction  (in  the
    context  of  insurmountable  obstacles)  between  evidence   and   mere
    assertion and in the light of the high threshold set by  EX1(b)  (  see
    paragraph 59 of that decision).

38. However, I accept that there was evidence available which gave a  clear
    understanding of the appellants partner's difficulties  which  was  not
    taken into account. The appellant's partner is in receipt  of  personal
    Independence Payments to assist in her daily living needs and  she  had
    been assessed as unfit to work (see 290AB). Whilst  that  evidence  was
    dated 2016 and the panel were correct to say there was nothing more  up
    to date, the oral evidence was  that  she  continued  to  receive  that
    benefit and other benefits as  a  result  of  her  medical  conditions.
    Whilst there was a lack of up-to-date evidence, it did not preclude the
    panel from taking into account and applying weight to the oral evidence
    of the appellant as to her present circumstances in the context of  the
    past documentary evidence. In this  context  there  was  no  assessment
    either under EX1(b) or outside  of  the  Rules  as  to  the  impact  of
    relocation or the availability of care and treatment in Pakistan.

39. The panel also erred in considering that  the  interruption  of  family
    life could only be temporary and that in essence, the appellant and his
    partner could go and live in Pakistan on a temporary  basis  whilst  he
    applied  for  entry  clearance  (see  [22]).   In   this   context   no
    consideration was given  to  the  separation  between  the  appellant's
    partner and her children and their best interests.


40. In the light of those matters  identified,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    decision is vitiated by errors of law and should be set  aside.  It  is
    not necessary to set out any further issues identified in  the  grounds
    relying on the Article 8 assessment outside of the Rules and assessment
    of the S117B public interest considerations given  the  errors  already
    identified which would have relevance for any assessment outside of the
    Rules. I therefore reached the conclusion that the decision  should  be
    set aside and that further findings of fact will need to  be  made  and
    further evidence placed before the Tribunal on the relevant  issues  as
    identified including to determine the best interests of  the  children,
    and any updated medical evidence and compliance with the  protocol  (if
    so advised by the parties).


41.  I have therefore reached the conclusion that  the  only  finding  that
    should be  preserved  is  that  at  [9]  relating  to  the  appellant's
    relationship with the  applicant's  children.  It  does  not,  however,
    preclude the FtTJ hearing the appeal to depart  from  that  finding  if
    there is any new evidence.

42. I have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice  Statement  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the  disposal  of
    appeals in this Tribunal. That reads as follows:
         "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal  is  likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the  case  to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
         that:
             (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or
             (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."


43.  Having done so, I am satisfied that it is  appropriate  to  remit  the
    appeal to the FtT. It will be necessary to make findings on the  issues
    identified above and in the light of  the  more  recent  case  law  and
    guidance.





Notice of Decision


44. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and is therefore set aside.  It is to be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him, his partner or children.   This  direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed [pic]
                                        Date    10 /5/2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
