
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
        (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10446/2019 (A)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 3 August 2020                     |On 11 August 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    N K M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. On 6 November 2019  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ross  ('the  Judge')
       dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.  Permission
       to appeal was  initially  refused  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin
       sitting as a judge of the First-tier Tribunal on  4  March  2020  but
       granted on a renewed application by Upper Tribunal Judge Owens on  20
       April 2020, on the basis it is said to be  arguable  that  the  Judge
       erred  in  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  in  respect  of  the
       appellant's arguments in relation to his historic 3C leave and  erred
       by failing to explain what weight if any he gave to  this  factor  in
       the Article 8 ECHR proportionality assessment.
    2. In light of the Covid-19 pandemic directions were sent to the parties
       indicating a provisional view that the question of whether the  Judge
       had made an error of law material to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
       appeal and whether the appeal should be set aside could be determined
       on the papers without a hearing, seeking their observations upon  the
       same and providing the opportunity for further submissions to be made
       within specified time periods. Both parties have responded.
    3. The Overriding Objective is contained in the Upper Tribunal Procedure
       Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing   with   a   case   fairly
       and   justly   includes:   dealing  with   it   in   ways  that   are
       proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the   case,   the  complexity
       of   the   issues,   etc;   avoiding   unnecessary   formality    and
       seeking flexibility  in  the  proceedings;  ensuring,   so   far   as
       practicable,  that the parties are able to participate fully  in  the
       proceedings; using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
       effectively; and avoiding delay, so far  as  compatible  with  proper
       consideration of the issues.
    4. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the  Upper  Tribunal  to
       further the overriding objective; and to  cooperate  with  the  Upper
       Tribunal generally.
    5. Rule 34  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
       provides:

           '34.-


           (1)    Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may
                make any decision without a hearing.


           (2)    The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed
                by a party when  deciding  whether  to  hold  a  hearing  to
                consider any matter, and the form of any such hearing.


           (3)    In immigration judicial  review  proceedings,  the  Upper
                Tribunal must hold a hearing before making a decision  which
                disposes of proceedings.


           (4)    Paragraph (3) does not affect  the  power  of  the  Upper
                Tribunal to-


                 (a)   strike out a party's case, pursuant to  rule  8(1)(b)
                    or 8(2);


                (b)    consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;


                (c)    determine an  application  for  permission  to  bring
                    judicial review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or


                (d)     make  a  consent  order  disposing  of  proceedings,
                    pursuant to rule 39, without a hearing.'

    6. I find it appropriate  in  all  the  circumstances  to  exercise  the
       discretionary case management powers found in rule 34 to allow me  to
       determine to question of whether the Judge has  made  material  legal
       error in the decision to dismiss the appeal on the papers,  in  light
       of there being no objection and no evidence of  prejudice  to  either
       party in proceeding in this manner.

Background

    7. The appellant was born on 29 June 1982 and is a citizen of India. The
       Judge clearly considered the evidence with  the  required  degree  of
       anxious scrutiny before setting out findings of fact  from  [12]  the
       decision under challenge in the following terms:

           "12.   I note that in respect of the refusal decision  dated  29
                March 2017, the appellant has already challenged by  way  of
                Judicial  Review.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley  refused
                permission on 18 April 2018. In  her  refusal  decision  she
                stated that it was  not  arguable  that  permission  for  JR
                should be granted, given that when he applied for LTR  as  a
                Tier 5 Charity worker, he had last  been  granted  leave  to
                remain as a Tier 4 student migrant at a  College  which  was
                not a recognised body as required.


           13.    Moreover, when the appellant's appeal was  allowed  on  6
                May 2016, the Respondent did make a decision, which  granted
                the appellant 60 days leave to vary his leave. He  chose  to
                do that and he made a  Tier  5  Charity  Worker  application
                which had no prospect of success. That was the matter  which
                was unsuccessful by the JR. I cannot revisit the JR matter.


           14.    The appellant's human rights claim is based solely on his
                length of residence in the United Kingdom. As matters stand,
                the appellant has remained in the UK unlawfully since 12 May
                2017. The appellant has no partner or children in the UK and
                has not advanced any reasons as to why he cannot  return  to
                India and gain employment there."

    8. The appellant relied on grounds of appeal asserting the Judge  failed
       to consider the material evidence relating to the purported break  in
       his continuous leave/failure to  give  reasons  asserting  the  Judge
       overlooked a legislative provision which could have  had  a  material
       effect on the  decision  namely  that  the  old  version  of  section
       82(2)(d) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applied.
       The grounds also assert the  decision  of  9  March  2017  failed  to
       contain notice of a right of appeal, was  therefore  not  valid,  and
       that the appellants section 3C leave  continued  until  he  lodges  a
       notice of appeal wavering said procedural irregularity.  The  Judge's
       findings that the appellant leave had been unlawful since 12 May 2017
       is therefore said to be perverse. The appellant asserts he  satisfies
       paragraph 276 on the basis of his continual lawful residence.  Ground
       2 asserts  the  Judge  placed  excessive  weight  upon  the  previous
       judicial review proceedings when the issue before the judge in  those
       proceedings was whether the appellant met switching requirements from
       Tier 4 to Tier 5. The availability or otherwise of a statutory  right
       of appeal was not  an  issue.  Ground  3  argues  the  Judge  applied
       excessive weight to the appellant's variation application from Tier 4
       (General) Migrant to  a  Tier  5  (Charity  worker)  and  reached  an
       irrational conclusion. The grounds assert the Judge erred in  law  in
       failing  to  engage  with  the  core  of  the  appellant's  arguments
       including submissions on the issue of whether a  statutory  right  of
       appeal was denied.  The appellant was denied the opportunity to widen
       his grounds of appeal as permitted the old regime. Ground  4  asserts
       the Judge erred in failing to  grapple  with  a  concession  made  on
       behalf of the Secretary of State during the course of the appeal  for
       reasons set out in the appellants grounds. Ground 5 asserts the Judge
       failed to consider the evidence from the appellant's solicitors which
       is said  to  highlighted  the  respondent's  errors  in  denying  the
       statutory right of appeal on the earlier occasion and referring to  a
       Senior Presenting Officer's appeal  review  which  is  said  to  have
       conceded that the dispute surrounding  the  section  3C  leave  is  a
       matter that will form part of the  article  8  assessment.  Ground  6
       asserts the Judge  failed  to  conduct  an  adequate  proportionality
       exercise in failing to give proper weight to the fact  the  appellant
       had been in the United Kingdom  in  excess  of  10  years  without  a
       criminal record and with lawful leave and failed to consider the full
       breadth of what is said to be relevant matters.  It is also  asserted
       the Judge failed have regard  to  the  explanation  provided  by  the
       appellant regarding his immigration history.

Error of law

    9. The appellants further submissions received following the  directions
       referred to above open with the following comment:

           "As a starting point we wish to highlight the  decision  of  UTJ
           Rebecca Owens  in  which  she  accepted  the  Appellant's  legal
           position on his historic 3C leave. The UTJ Owens went on to find
           that  this  was  a  factor  that  needed  to   be   taken   into
           consideration in an Art 8 proportionality assessment  which  FTJ
           Ross in the first instance failed to achieve was material to the
           outcome which could have been materially different but for  this
           failure. There was nothing to show that the judge had  canvassed
           this point in his determination. The FTJ  Ross  failed  to  deal
           with this issue all and consequently therefore  his  conclusions
           are untenable in law.

   10. Upper Tribunal Judge Owens  did  not  accept  the  appellant's  legal
       position in relation to any historic section 3C  leave  was  correct.
       Judge Owens granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
       basis that in her opinion it was arguable the Judge  failed  to  give
       adequate reasons in respect of the appellant's arguments in  relation
       to his historic 3C leave as set out above, no more.  This  is  not  a
       finding that there is any merit in the submissions  made  but  rather
       that there were worthy of further investigation.
   11. In the written submissions the appellant states that  the  Judge  was
       wrong to have  taken  a  point  about  the  breaking  of  his  lawful
       residence in 2017 claiming this to be contrary  to  the  respondent's
       own concession in an appeal review by a Senior Presenting Officer  at
       Leeds. The respondent's position on this point taken  in  a  Rule  24
       reply received on 24 June 2020 is that it is not  accepted  that  any
       concession was made in the review capable  of  revealing  exceptional
       circumstances that are needed in order for any Article  8  appeal  to
       succeed. A reading of the material relied upon at pages 102 - 108  of
       the appellant's appeal bundle which he claims was a concession  by  a
       Senior Presenting Officer does not read as such.  The last  email  of
       30 August 2019 states "The appellant is  unable  to  meet  the  Rules
       because section 3C leave cannot be reinstated respectively, therefore
       the Tribunal will need to consider the issue under  Article  8".  The
       appellant claimed to have met the requirements of  the  Rules  in  an
       email  dated  21  August  2019.  Arguments  put  by  the  appellant's
       representative were rejected by the  Senior  Presenting  Officer  who
       clearly did not  make  the  suggested  concession  or  anything  that
       created legitimate expectation or reasonable belief that this was the
       case.
   12. The appellant repeats the contention that an application made  on  29
       April 2014 was refused on 29 March 2017 against which an  appeal  was
       lodged on 16 June 2019. As a result the decision of 12 May 2017 which
       maintained the earlier refusal did not bring the appellants 3C  leave
       to an end.  The appellant claims that he is entitled  to  Section  3C
       leave to the point he became appeal rights exhausted which he  claims
       extended beyond 12 May 2017.
   13. The respondent in her Rule 24  reply  notes  that  the  position  has
       always been that it was for the appellant to show  he  had  10  years
       unbroken lawful leave to remain in the United Kingdom and that  since
       he arrived on 21 February 2009 he had leave to 2  February  2017  but
       since then he has made numerous applications,  including  a  judicial
       review application, all of which failed.
   14. The decision in Ahmed [2019] EWCA Civ 1070  is  relied  upon  by  the
       respondent.
   15. The appellant's immigration history reads:

           21/02/09    arrived in the UK with EC as student valid  15/12/08
                    to 31/01/11.


           14/01/11    applied in time for LTR is a Tier 4 student, refused
                    on 14/02/11 with right of appeal.


           01/03/11    appeal lodged. 09/03/11  appeal  allowed.  14/02/12.
                    LTR granted until 30/04/14.


           21/01/14    applied for LTR as a Tier 4 student. Rejected due to
                    no biometrics.


           29/04/14    applied for LTR as Tier 4 student. 02/03/15  refused
                    with right of appeal. 17/03/15 appeal  lodged.  06/05/16
                    appeal  allowed.  60  days  granted  leave  expired   on
                    02/02/17.


           29/04/14    applied  for  LTR  outside  the  immigration  rules.
                    Voided due to variation.


           25/01/17    applied for LTR as A Tier 5  migrant.  Refused  with
                    right of Administrative Review 20/04/17.


           12/05/17     decision  maintained  and   Administrative   Review
                    completed.


           01/05/18    applied less than 14 days out of time for LTR on the
                    basis of Article 8 private life. 11/01/19  refused  with
                    out of country right of appeal.


           25/01/19    applied less than 14 days out of time for LTR on the
                    basis  of  long  residence.  23/04/19  voided   due   to
                    variation.


           06/04/19    current out of time application for LTR on the basis
                    of long residence.

   16. The applicant claims that the 29 April 2014 application  was  refused
       but the refusal notice failed to advise the appellant he had a  right
       of appeal. The chronology suggests on 17 March  2015  an  appeal  was
       lodged against that decision, hence waiving the defect,  and  allowed
       on 6 May 2016 resulting in the grant of a short period of leave of 60
       days to enable the appellant to find a Tier  4  sponsor.  That  leave
       expired on 2 February 2017.  An  in-time  application  issued  on  25
       January 2017 for leave as a Tier 5 migrant was made  which  conferred
       upon the appellant a right of Administrative Review.
   17. Decisions eligible for Administrative Review are those made  on:  (a)
       in country Tier 4 applications made on or after 20  October  2014  by
       either a main applicant or dependant (b) in country Tiers 1, 2  or  5
       applications made on or after 2 March 2015 by either a main applicant
       or dependant, including indefinite leave to remain applications under
       those routes (c) in country applications where the decision was  made
       on or after 6 April, unless the applicant applied  as  a  visitor  or
       made a protection or human rights claim and for which the outcome  is
       that the application is either: refused, approved  and  a  review  is
       requested of the period or conditions of leave granted.
   18. The appellant's Tier 5 application having been  made  on  25  January
       2017 falls within this period. It  is  accepted  that  Administrative
       Review is not available for decisions made on: (a) applications under
       the points-based system made before the date on which  administrative
       review commenced for that route (20 October 2014 for  Tier  4  and  2
       March 2015 for Tiers 1, 2 and 5) (b) applications under  Appendix  EU
       (Family Permit) (c) applications as a visitor (d)  protection  claims
       (e) human rights claims (f) applications for leave to remain  outside
       the Immigration  Rules  (g)  transfer  of  conditions(TOC),  no  time
       limit(NTL)   or   replacement    biometric    immigration    document
       applications, but none  of  these  are  arguably  applicable  to  the
       appellant's case.  It is also not made out there was any challenge to
       any failure to grant a right of appeal in the proceedings  that  came
       before the Upper Tribunal by way of judicial review. It is  not  made
       out the  Judge  erred  in  failing  to  go  behind  and  reopen  such
       proceedings.
   19. Any leave extended by virtue of section 3C ended at the completion of
       the Administrative Review process on the 12  May  2017.  Applications
       made thereafter did not have the effect of  retrospectively  extended
       3C leave as found by the Court of Appeal in Ahmed. By  12  May  2017,
       the applicant had not attained 10 years continuous  lawful  residence
       in the United Kingdom.
   20. The reason the refusal of 2017 did not mention a right of  appeal  is
       because the respondent's case is that no right of appeal  existed  in
       relation to that decision which was  only  challengeable  by  way  of
       Administrative Review. That right was granted to the appellant  which
       he exercised.
   21. The appellant fails to establish legal error in  the  Judges  finding
       that there was a break in the appellant's lawful residence such as he
       did not have 10 years continuous lawful residence. Such  finding  has
       not been shown to be infected by arguable legal error.
   22. In relation to the article 8 proportionality exercise;  there  is  no
       arguable merit in the assertion the Judge failed to consider all  the
       evidence or undertake the required assessment. The Judge was  clearly
       aware of the period of time the appellant  had  been  in  the  United
       Kingdom carefully noting the appellant's immigration history. At [14]
       the Judge specifically notes that the appellant's human rights  claim
       is based solely on his length of residence in the United Kingdom.  It
       is not made out the appellant relied upon any other factor  that  the
       Judge failed to consider. The Judge also notes that the appellant has
       remained unlawfully since 12 May 2017 when the Administrative  Review
       was completed, and it is also relevant to the weight to be  given  to
       any private life that the appellant's status in  the  United  Kingdom
       has always been precarious. The Judge  notes  the  appellant  has  no
       partner or children in the UK and had not advanced any reason  as  to
       why he could not return to India and gain employment there.
   23. Whilst the appellant disagrees with the Judge's conclusions the Judge
       clearly considered the "historic injustice" submissions and  rejected
       the same. The grounds fail  to  establish  the  Judges  findings  are
       outside the range of those reasonably available to the Judge  on  the
       evidence.




Decision

   24. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   25. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 3 August 2020

