

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10582/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 June 2017                           |On 14 June 2017                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     CA
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:      Mr Adewusi, Crown & Law solicitors
For the respondent:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

   1. I have anonymised the appellant's name because this decision refers to
      the circumstances of his child and family proceedings relating to that
      child.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.   He  has  appealed  against  a
      decision dated 13 April 2016 refusing leave to remain on the basis  of
      his private and family life in the UK.   He  has  separated  from  the
      mother of his British citizen child,  J,  born  in  April  2013.   His
      application to remain focussed upon his relationship with J.

First-tier Tribunal decision

   3. In a decision dated 7 October 2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Blair
      dismissed the appellant's appeal on the papers  available,  without  a
      hearing, in line with the appellant's earlier request that his  appeal
      be considered without a hearing.


   4. Judge Blair referred to a letter from the appellant's solicitors dated
      30 June 2016 requesting an extension of time to submit evidence [9 and
      10].  This application enclosed an order from the  family  court  made
      after a hearing on 23 May 2016.  This order set out the timetable  for
      family proceedings  to  determine  whether  the  appellant  should  be
      permitted to spend time with J - a further hearing was set for 18 July
      2016.  With this in mind, the First-tier  Tribunal  had  accepted  the
      invitation to extend time  to  submit  evidence  and  to  adjourn  the
      hearing to 28 September 2016.


   5. Judge Blair observed at [11] that no further evidence was  served  and
      there was therefore very little documentary evidence  available.   The
      Judge  specifically  commented  "There  was  no  further  update  from
      solicitors about any of this".  This is erroneous.  In a letter  dated
      28 July 2016 the  appellant's  solicitors  appeared  to  apply  for  a
      further adjournment.   This application enclosed a further order  from
      the family court dated 18 July 2016.  This makes  it  clear  that  J's
      mother opposed the application for the appellant to  spend  time  with
      his daughter, on the basis that he posed a risk to her  safety.   This
      order refers to a further court hearing in  September  2016  at  which
      time consideration would be given to whether a finding of fact hearing
      is necessary.


   6. Judge Blair has not referred to the letter dated 28 July 2016  or  the
      family court order  enclosed  with  it.   The  relevant  material  was
      clearly  available  on  the  file  and  has  been  overlooked  -   the
      application for an adjournment was simply not addressed and  the  most
      up to date order from the family court was not considered.


   7. Both representatives agreed that in these circumstances the First-tier
      Tribunal decision contains an error  of  law  but  that  the  decision
      should be remade by the Upper  Tribunal.    The  factual  position  is
      uncomplicated  and  little  further  fact-finding  is  necessary.    I
      therefore concluded that I should remake the decision.

Remaking the decision
Hearing / adjournment request

       8. Mr Adewusi invited me  to  grant  an  adjournment  to  enable  the
          appellant to attend a  domestic  violence  prevention  course.   I
          declined to grant an adjournment for the reasons  provided  below.




       9. First, the family proceedings have  come  to  a  clear  end-point.
          There are  no  pending  proceedings  and  therefore  no  realistic
          prospect of the family court making a decision that  will  have  a
          material impact on the relationship between J and  her  father  in
          the immediate future - see  Mohammed  (Family  Court  proceedings-
          outcome) [2014] UKUT 419 (IAC).


      10. In an order dated 17 November 2016  DJ  Talbot  made  findings  of
          fact, having heard evidence from the  appellant,  J's  mother  and
          J's aunt.  These include the following:

                 "1. January  2013  -  whilst  the  mother  was  six  months
                 pregnant with J, the  father  punched  the  mother  in  her
                 stomach.  The mother fell to the ground.


                 2. Between February 2013 and early 2014  the  father  raped
                 the mother on  about  50  occasions.   The  first  occurred
                 during February 2013, when she was seven  months  pregnant.
                 The father repeatedly stated  it  was  his  right  to  have
                 sexual intercourse with  the  mother  as  a  Nigerian  man,
                 regardless as to whether she consented.


                 3.  In or about April 2013  the  father  took  J  from  the
                 mother's arms and held her in the air by her clothing.  The
                 father stated that I the mother did not let  him  leave  he
                 would drop J.  The father pushed the mother  to  the  floor
                 and put J on top of her.


                 4.  12 Jan 2014 - the father pushed the mother to the floor
                 and kicked her legs, whilst she was holding J.   H  and  P,
                 J's elder half-siblings were woken up by this incident  and
                 were crying and shouting 'leave mummy'.


                 5.  2014 - the father approached the mother from behind and
                 slapped and punched her to the head.  The father pushed the
                 mother's head into a wheelie bin and continued to punch her
                 head.  The mother's head was tender as  a  result  and  she
                 sustained marks to the right side of her head and face.


                 6.  5 May 2014 - the father dragged the mother to the  back
                 of a shop, whilst J was in her arms.  The mother  passed  J
                 to H.   The  father  took  the  mother's  phone  and  began
                 punching her to her face and numerous  items  in  the  shop
                 were knocked over.  All three children were present  during
                 this incident and were distressed.


                 7.  On a date between  9  and  23  April  2015  the  father
                 attended the mother's sister's home address and hit H  with
                 a large wooden spoon in her mouth as he stated that she was
                 not eating hot food fast enough.  H's  mouth  was  cut  and
                 bleeding."

      11. The matter was set down for a dispute resolution  appointment  and
          a final hearing took place on 17 March 2017.  At that hearing  the
          appellant was granted only indirect contact twice a year.   It  is
          also recorded that the appellant "expressed his intention to self-
          refer to an appropriate domestic violence prevention course as  he
          would wish to pursue an application  for  direct  contact  in  the
          future".   The   family   proceedings   have   therefore   clearly
          concluded.

      12. Second, any adjournment would be open-ended.   It  is  clear  that
          the appellant has no realistic  prospect  of  contact  with  J  at
          present or in the immediate future.  The  family  court  has  very
          recently made clear findings of fact that have now  been  accepted
          by the appellant.  These findings are such that he must  undertake
          a period of  self-reflection  and  complete  a  domestic  violence
          programme, before making any future application for  contact.   He
          has not even been assigned to such a programme,  albeit  I  accept
          it appears that he has referred himself for one.  The  time  frame
          is simply too lengthy and uncertain for an  adjournment  to  be  a
          viable option in the circumstances of this case.


      13. Third, there has already been  substantial  delay  in  determining
          this matter.  Now that the family proceedings  have  been  finally
          determined it is appropriate to determine the  appellant's  appeal
          on  the  basis  of  all  the  information  available  -   see   RS
          (immigration and  family  court  proceedings)  India  [2012]  UKUT
          (IAC) and Mohan v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1363.


      14. I therefore decided that in all  the  circumstances,  this  appeal
          can be fairly determined without an adjournment.


      15. After refusing the adjournment application, Mr Adewusi  made  very
          brief submissions.  He simply asserted that the  appellant  should
          be given the chance of future contact by being  granted  leave  in
          order to complete the domestic violence programme, and  that  this
          course is in the best interests of J.  Mr Adewusi did not take  me
          to any authority to support this approach and  did  not  refer  to
          the relevant statutory framework.


      16. After hearing from Mr Adewusi I told Mr McVeety  that  I  did  not
          need to hear from him as I had decided to dismiss the appeal,  for
          reasons I now give in writing.

Article 8 - best interests

      17. I begin  the  Article  8  assessment  by  evaluating  the  primary
          consideration of J's best interests.   J  is  a  British  citizen.
          There has been a very recent determination of J's  best  interests
          by the family court.  It has been determined that  it  is  in  her
          best interests to only have  twice-yearly  indirect  contact  with
          her father and to reside with her mother.


      18. I accept that it would be in J's best interests for her father  to
          begin the process of rehabilitation as soon as  possible,  with  a
          view to building on the possibility of a safe relationship in  the
          future.   There  is  no  clear  reason   why   that   process   of
          rehabilitation cannot take place in Nigeria.  The appellant  needs
          to evidence a reduction in his risk,  and  this  can  be  done  in
          several ways, and is not limited to the completion of  a  domestic
          violence programme in the UK.


      19. On balance, I conclude  that  the  best  interests  of  J,  viewed
          through the lens of Article 8 private life, would  not  be  served
          any better at the present time, by the appellant remaining in  the
          UK.   She can continue to have  indirect  contact  with  him  from
          Nigeria and he can  continue  the  process  of  rehabilitation  in
          Nigeria.

Section 117B(6)

      20. Section 117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
          2002 states as follows:


                 "In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
                 the public interest does not require the  person's  removal
                 where -


                 (a) the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child; and
                 (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                 the United Kingdom."

      21. The  correct  approach  to  section  117B(6)  is  set  out  in  MA
          (Pakistan) V SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705 (7  July  2016).     Section
          117B does not apply here.  Although J is  a  British  citizen  and
          therefore a  'qualifying  child',  her  father  does  not  have  a
          genuine and subsisting relationship with her.   The  family  court
          has clearly concluded that it is not in  J's  best  interests  for
          him to have any form of direct contact with  her.   The  appellant
          therefore does not meet the requirements  of  section  117B(6)(a),
          and it is unnecessary to consider section 117B(6)(b).  Mr  Adewusi
          placed no reliance on section 117B at all.

Private life

      22. The appellant has a private life  in  the  UK,  having  been  here
          since  2010.   Mr  Adewusi  did  not  place  reliance   upon   any
          community, employment,  family  or  religious  links  between  the
          appellant and the UK.  Mr Adewusi relied entirely  upon  the  need
          for the appellant to complete the domestic violence  programme  in
          the UK.  I accept that the appellant's removal from  the  UK  will
          breach whatever unparticularised private  life  he  has  developed
          here and will also mean  that  he  cannot  complete  the  domestic
          violence programme in the UK.  This may well delay or impact  upon
          his prospects of securing direct contact  with  J.   However,  for
          the reasons I  set  out  above  it  will  not  necessarily  put  a
          complete  end  to  the   possibility   of   future   contact,   as
          rehabilitation can be evidenced in alternative ways.

Balancing exercise

      23. Proportionality is  the  "public  interest  question"  within  the
          meaning of Part 5A of the 2002 Act. By section 117A(2)  thereof  I
          am obliged to have regard to the considerations listed in  section
          117B.  I consider that section 117B applies to this appeal in  the
          following way:


          (a)  The  public  interest  in  the   maintenance   of   effective
          immigration controls is clearly engaged.   The  appellant  arrived
          in the UK as a Tier 5 migrant in 2010.  This leave ran  out  on  1
          December 2012.  He was given leave on the  basis  of  his  claimed
          family  life  until  29  November  2015,  and  made   an   in-time
          application to remain on  that  same  basis.   The  appellant  has
          therefore been in the UK in a temporary capacity since  2010.   He
          does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.


          (b) There is no infringement  of  the  "English  speaking"  public
          interest, given the appellant is an English speaker.


          (c) The economic interest is engaged albeit  there  is  no  reason
          why the appellant would not be able to access employment if  given
          leave to remain.


          (d) The private life  established  by  the  appellant  during  the
          entirety of his time in the UK qualifies for  the  attribution  of
          little weight only.


      24. I regard it as a significant factor that the  appellant  has  been
          found to have used serious violence against J's mother,  in  front
          of J and her half siblings, over an extended period of  time.   Mr
          Adewusi did not take me  to  any  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
          appellant's attitude and behavior has changed.  Simply signing  up
          for  the  domestic  violence  programme  is  not   indicative   of
          rehabilitation.


      25.  Applying  the  guidance  in  RS   (supra)   together   with   the
          considerations set out above, I make the following findings.


              i) There are compelling, significant public  interest  reasons
                 to exclude the appellant from the UK  irrespective  of  the
                 pending  domestic  violence  programme   and   any   future
                 application for contact.  The most obvious  reason  relates
                 to the findings of fact of DJ  Talbot.   These  demonstrate
                 that the appellant has used serious  violence  against  J's
                 mother over an extended period of time.


             ii) J is only three years old and probably has no memory of her
                 own of the appellant.  Any memory that  she  does  have  is
                 likely to be a negative one, given DJ Talbot's findings  of
                 fact.  J's welfare and best interests at this point do  not
                 require the appellant's presence in the UK.


            iii) When all the circumstances are considered in the round, the
                 appellant's wish to remain in the UK to complete a domestic
                 violence programme to  support  a  future  application  for
                 contact, and the private and / or  family  life  vested  in
                 this, is overwhelmingly outweighed by the  public  interest
                 in removing him.

Decision

      26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law.


      27. I  remake  the  decision  by  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
          pursuant to Article 8 of the ECHR.





Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 13 June 2017
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
