
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10613/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at HMCTS Employment Tribunals           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Liverpool                                     |                              |
|On 12th September 2018                        |On 25th October 2018          |



                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                      MoHAMED kalidh mohammed siddique
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G McIndoe (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Tully, promulgated on 22nd  May  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester on 15th May 2018.  In the determination, the judge dismissed
    the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, and was born on 24th  July
    1987.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  17th
    August 2017, refusing his application for entry clearance to  join  his
    sponsoring wife, Fazila Salea.  The basis of the refusal was  that  the
    Appellant could not satisfy the "suitability" grounds  because  of  his
    previous criminal conviction in Canada.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that  the  Appellant,  who  had
    been unable to join his mother and siblings in the UK, when his  mother
    travelled as a British citizen to this country in 2005, because he  was
    over the age of 18 at the time of the application,  and  so  could  not
    accompany them, had gone on  to  emigrate  to  Canada  where  he  began
    studying engineering in  Winnipeg  in  August  2008.   Life  there  was
    difficult.   He  started  a  relationship  with  a  girl  there.    The
    relationship broke down temporarily.  This affected  his  studies.   He
    received counselling.  On 16th March 2012, his  girlfriend  was  flying
    from Winnipeg to Toronto.  The Appellant claimed to  be  under  extreme
    pressure.  He had just dropped out of all of his classes.   He  made  a
    hoax call to the police and told them  that  he  overheard  two  people
    talking about an Air Canada flight going down.

 4. He claimed his motivation in  making  the  hoax  call  was  to  portray
    himself in a good light with his girlfriend's parents by seeming to  be
    helpful and supportive to her.  The police found out that the call  was
    a hoax one.  He was taken to the police station.   He  was  questioned.
    He was offered a plea  bargain.   The  prosecution  dropped  the  hoax,
    terrorism and public mischief charges when he pleaded guilty.

 5. He was eventually deported to India from Canada in October  2015.   The
    Appellant accepts that  his  actions  were  stupid  and  reckless.   He
    claims, however, that he was at the  time  mentally  ill  and  has  not
    committed any offence ever since.

The Judge's Findings

 6. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant's sponsoring wife  and  his
    sister, Nasila Siddique, in English.  He noted that the mental  illness
    defence was not raised in the covering letter to his application (which
    appears at page 39 of the bundle) and there was nothing to suggest that
    he had submitted a medical report with his application.

 7. The judge went on to hold that the decision maker "had cause to make  a
    decision on a discretionary basis",  but  that  the  judge  could  only
    interfere with that decision

         "on the basis that, 'no reasonable decision maker  or  public  body
         could have arrived at such a decision'.  I do not accept that  this
         applies to this case.  the decision reached might not have been one
         that every  decision  maker  would  have  reached,  especially  had
         detailed medical evidence been produced, but it was  one  that  was
         properly open to the decision maker on  the  evidence  before  him"
         (paragraph 29).

 8. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that when carrying out  an  Article  8
    assessment the provisions of Section 85  of  the  NIAA  2002  were  not
    applicable because these were repealed in October 2015 and what applied
    presently was Section 85(4) which  states  that,  "[the  Tribunal]  may
    consider any matter which it thinks relevant to the  substance  of  the
    decision, including  ...  a  matter  arising  after  the  date  of  the
    decision", thus requiring a consideration  of  every  relevant  matter,
    rather than the decision maker simply being restricted to circumstances
    appertaining at the time of the decision, as was previously the case.

10.  Second,  it  was  asserted  that  the  judge,   in   considering   the
    "suitability" provisions applicable in the Immigration Rules  erred  by
    looking at the matter under the prism of "Wednesbury  unreasonableness"
    principles,  rather  than  proportionality  principles,  because   this
    restricted the assessment  of  Article  8  proportionality  provisions,
    contrary to what had been established in SA (human  rights  challenges:
    correct approach) [2015] UKUT 00536.

11. On 18th July 2018, permission to appeal was granted.

The Hearing

12. At the hearing before me on 12th September 2018, Mr McIndoe,  appearing
    as Counsel on behalf of the Appellant, made  two  submissions.   First,
    although it was the case that the Immigration Rule in S-EC.1.1  and  S-
    EC.1.5, were referred to by the judge (especially at paragraph 14),  as
    being applicable, the judge failed to have regard to the full extent of
    Home Office policy, which allowed for the measure of  discretion,  even
    in cases where there had been the commission  of  a  criminal  offence,
    because the Article 8 right to family  life  was  at  stake  between  a
    husband and a wife.

13. Thus, the Rule in S-EC.1.5, states that,

         "The exclusion of the applicant from the UK  is  conducive  to  the
         public good because for example the applicant's conduct  (including
         convictions  which  do  not  fall   within   paragraph   S-EC.1.4),
         character, associations or other reasons  make  it  undesirable  to
         grant  them   entry   clearance"   (see   paragraph   14   of   the
         determination),

    nevertheless, at page 168 of the Appellant's bundle,  the  Home  Office
    policy allows for a measure of discretion, which  the  judge  was  duty
    bound to consider, in the proportionality assessment.

14. This policy makes it clear that,

         "In doing so, the decision maker should also look  at  whether  the
         applicant's conduct (including any convictions which  do  not  fall
         within paragraph S-LTR.1.3 to S-LTR.1.4) means that their  presence
         in the UK is undesirable or not conducive to the public good  under
         conduct, character, association or other reasons.  It  is  possible
         for the applicant to meet the suitability requirements where  there
         is some criminality".

    The judge  failed  to  weigh  this  in  the  balance  when  making  the
    proportionality assessment.  Second, such  an  approach  failed  to  be
    applied by the judge because he had wrongly taken  the  view  that  the
    matter had to be assessed on the basis of "Wednesbury unreasonableness"
    principles (at paragraph 29), which was not the case.

15. For his part, Mr Tan submitted that, although the judge had taken  what
    was "probably not the most ideal approach" he does, in  concluding  his
    determination, end with the sentence that, "the decision to  refuse  in
    this  case  was  proportionate  in  light  of  all  the  circumstances"
    (paragraph  39).   This  showed  that  the  judge  did  embark  upon  a
    proportionality assessment.

Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

17. First, it is well-known that the distinction between an "appeal" and  a
    "review" is that an appeal goes to the "merits" and a "review" goes  to
    the "legality" of the decision in question.  The judge fell into  error
    in  construing  this  appeal  on  a  human  rights  matter  as  if  the
    application was one for judicial review, thus leading him  to  approach
    the matter  as  if  the  principles  of  "Wednesbury  unreasonableness"
    applied.  As a result, it was not enough to say (at paragraph 29)  that
    the judge "could only interfere with that decision on the basis that no
    reasonable decision maker or public body could have arrived at  such  a
    decision".

18. Second, the effect of this approach was that the  judge  was  prevented
    from considering whether, even in cases of "some criminality"  (and  it
    was the case that there was only one offence in this  case  which  took
    place some years ago), the "suitability requirements" can be met by the
    applicant.  This is an important exception to consider because were  it
    not for this, the Appellant would be shut out forever from  being  able
    to join his British citizen wife in this country.

19. Given that a proper evaluation needs to  be  made  of  this  particular
    aspect of the Appellant's past, the matter must be remitted back to the
    First-tier Tribunal, to be determined  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Tully, under Practice Statement 7.2(a) because the effect of the  error
    has been to deprive a party before the First-tier Tribunal  of  a  fair
    hearing or of an opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  and
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal.





Notice of Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is
    allowed to the extent that  it  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard by a judge other than Judge Tully.

21. No anonymity direction is made.

22. I allow the appeal.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd October 2018



