
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10545/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th December 2019                |On 18th December 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                JABRAN NAZIR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Youssefian, Counsel instructed by House of
                    Immigration Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Respondent is a national of Pakistan born in 1983.  On  the  11th
       July 2019 his human rights  appeal  was  allowed  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal (Judge Shamash). The Secretary of State now  has  permission
       to appeal against that decision.

    2. Although the appeal was concerned with Mr Nazir's  Article  8  rights
       the real matter in issue was  whether  the  Secretary  of  State  had
       proven her assertion that Mr Nazir had fraudulently obtained a  TOIEC
       certificate by using a proxy to take his English speaking  exam,  and
       thereafter used that certificate to obtain an immigration advantage.

    3. Having directed herself to the appropriate  burden  and  standard  of
       proof Judge Shamash did not find that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
       produced sufficient evidence to discharge the evidential  burden.  It
       followed that the legal burden could not be discharged and so on  the
       central matter in issue she found for Mr Nazir.    The effect of this
       finding was that the Secretary of State had been wrong, back in  2013
       to curtail Mr Nazir's leave to remain on the basis of the allegation;
       Judge  Shamash  found  that  in  the  circumstances   it   would   be
       proportionate for the Secretary of State to grant Mr  Nazir  a  short
       period of limited leave to return him to the position he had been  in
       prior to that curtailment, namely a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant
       with over a year left to run on his visa: see the decision in Khan  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1684.   It
       was on that basis  that  the  appeal  was  allowed  on  human  rights
       grounds.

    4. The Secretary of State has appealed on the grounds that the  decision
       is perverse and contrary to established caselaw on the 'ETS' scandal.
       In particular reliance is  placed  on  the  decision  of  Mr  Justice
       McCloskey in SM and Qadir (ETS -evidence-  burden  of  proof)  [2016]
       UKUT 00229 (IAC).  Although McCloskey J had found  the  Secretary  of
       State's evidence to be deficient in many respects, he had found it to
       be sufficient generally to discharge the evidential burden of  proof:
       the same type of evidence had been produced before Judge  Shamash  in
       the present case.

    5. In fact that is not so. True, the Secretary  of  State  had  supplied
       what has  become  known  as  the  'generic'  ETS  bundle,  and  brief
       printouts from the 'lookup tool' relating to the appellant before the
       First-tier Tribunal.   There was however a particular feature of  the
       latter which had caused Judge Shamash great concern. That  was  this.
       'Annex A' showed two test results for Mr Nazir.  The  first  speaking
       exam was taken on the 1st August 2013, which he had  failed.  He  re-
       took the test on the 22nd August, and passed. Both test  results  are
       recorded on the 'lookup' tool as 'invalid', a classification that the
       Secretary of State submits to indicate the presence of a  proxy  test
       taker.  This troubled Judge Shamash, who reasonably wondered  why  Mr
       Nazir would have employed a proxy who was unable to pass  a  speaking
       exam in basic English.  It was this  peculiarity,  coupled  with  the
       deficiencies in the 'generic evidence' identified by McCloskey  J  in
       SM & Qadir, that led her to find that the evidential burden  was  not
       discharged.   The evidence was not therefore on all  fours  with  the
       evidence presented in SM & Qadir. It contained a significant  anomaly
       which the Judge was entitled to place weight upon.  I  am  unable  to
       find that this was a perverse decision and the appeal is dismissed.




  Decisions

    6. The appeal is dismissed.

    7. There is no order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          13th December 2019


