
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/10679/2019(V)
                                                            HU/10681/2019(V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th January 2021                        |On 26th February 2021         |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Dajana Kurti
                                 Mario Kurti
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms A Nizami, instructed by Alexander Shaw Solicitors


This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are in
the bundles on the court file, the contents of which I have recorded. The
order made is described at the end of these reasons.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home
Department, I shall refer to the parties as in the First-tier Tribunal. The
Appellants, a brother and sister, are Albanian nationals born on 3 November
1996 and 30 March 2000 respectively. Their appeal against the refusal of
leave to remain in the UK was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Rose on
22 November 2019.

2.   The Secretary of State applied for permission on the following
grounds. The family pretended to be Kosovan in order to obtain asylum and
the judge failed to consider whether the Appellants could return to Albania
with their mother and father, who only had limited leave to remain in the
UK. The Appellants' father had remained illegally in the UK and arranged
for the Appellants and their mother to enter the UK illegally. Both
Appellants are working and given their unlawful immigration status it is
likely that they are working illegally. The judge had failed to assess
these adverse credibility points in considering the Appellants' claim. It
was not credible that the Appellants could not read or write in Albanian or
that the Appellants' mother could not afford to visit them in Albania
because she had returned to Albania three weeks prior to the hearing. The
claim that the first Appellant, Dajana, was abducted was not supported by
any of the evidence. The judge accepted the bare assertions made by the
Appellants which were not substantiated.

3.   At paragraph 9 the grounds state:

"The judge's overall assessment of credibility against the adverse factors
is inadequate. Respectfully to overlook such adverse factors against the
public interest is neither helpful nor prudent. The judge does even
entertain the very likely possibility that the family have planned a
dishonest strategy to bolster the Appellants' chances of remaining in the
UK by claiming not to read, write or speak Albanian or that Dajana was
abducted. Given the clear indications of the family's propensity to
dishonesty, this is a family who clearly know how to abuse and take
advantage of the UK's systems, including the unwise leniency afforded to
them by the judge."

4.   The grounds further submit that there are material conflicts of fact
and credibility which the judge clearly overlooked and the assessment of
Article 8 proportionality factors was flawed. The Appellants' relationship
with their parents did not meet the test in Kugathas [2000] EWCA Civ 31.
The judge had completely ignored the Appellants' illegal entry, overstaying
and illegal working in his proportionality assessment. In cases concerning
precarious family life the Appellants had failed to show a very strong
Article 8 claim to outweigh the public interest. The judge's findings
merely cite relevant jurisprudence but do not justify a conclusion that
there are harsh circumstances or very significant obstacles to re-
integration. The refusal of leave to remain was proportionate and the judge
erred in law in concluding otherwise.


5.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on 3 April
2020 for the following reasons:

"I am satisfied that there are arguable errors of law in this decision in
that the judge firstly gave no consideration as to why the Appellants'
parents could not accompany them to Albania given their limited status in
the United Kingdom.  Further, the judge did not conduct an assessment of
the credibility of the Appellants. Had he done so he may well have found
adverse factors. In any event he did not balance the need for immigration
control against any of the adverse matters in the history of the
Appellants. Further, he did not conduct a correct analysis of Section 117B,
addressing the relevant parts of that Section to the Appellants."

6.   In response to directions issued in the light of the present need to
take precautions against the spread of COVID-19 the Appellant made
submissions dated 20 and 29 July 2020. It was the Appellants' position as
of 20 July 2020 that Mukarkar v The Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1045 at [40] applied:

"Different Tribunals, without illegality or irrationality, may reach
different conclusions on the same case.  The mere fact that one Tribunal
has reached what may seem an unusually generous view of the facts of a
particular case does not mean that it has made an error of law so as to
justify an appeal under the old system or an order for reconsideration
under the new. Nor does it create any precedent so as to limit the
Secretary of State's right to argue for a more restrictive approach on a
similar case in the future.  However, on the facts of the particular case,
the decision of the specialist Tribunal should be respected."

7.   It is the Appellants' position that it was not part of the
Respondent's case that the Appellants' parents could accompany them to
Albania and the credibility points were never put to the Appellants or
their witnesses in cross-examination. The judge considered Section 117B at
[12] of the decision. It was submitted the decision was short but dealt
with all necessary matters. The Appellant relied on Budhathoki (reasons for
decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341, in which the Upper Tribunal stated:

"We are not for a moment suggesting that judgments have to set out the
entire interstices of the evidence presented or analyse every nuance
between the parties.  Far from it. Indeed, we should make it clear that it
is generally unnecessary, unhelpful and unhealthy for First-tier Tribunal
judgments to seek to rehearse every detail or issue raised in the case."

8.   In the written submissions dated 29 July 2020, the Appellants
submitted the matters referred to in the grounds were not part of the
Respondent's case before the First-tier Tribunal. There was no challenge to
the Appellants' credibility and any allegation that the witness was seeking
to mislead the Secretary of State or the Tribunal was not put in cross-
examination and could not be relied upon. It was not part of the
Respondent's case before the First-tier Tribunal that the family had
planned a dishonest strategy to bolster the Appellants' chances of
remaining in the UK.

9.   The failure to refer to Kugathas was not material, given the judge's
finding that there was an extremely close relationship with the Appellants
and their parents. Illegal entry and illegal working have no bearing in
this case. The judge allowed the appeal under the Rules on the basis of
very significant obstacles to re-integration. Therefore, there was no need
to consider exceptionality or compelling circumstances. In any event, the
judge dealt with all relevant matters and it was open to him to allow the
appeal on Article 8 grounds. It was not appropriate for the Respondent to
re-argue her case.

10.  The Respondent's written submissions state as follows. The First-tier
Tribunal failed to assess or factor in countervailing factors when
considering proportionality and failed to consider credibility in the
round. The judge failed to consider whether the Appellants' parents could
return to Albania, given that they only had limited leave to remain. The
judge failed to take into account the following matters:


             a.   the father had arranged for the Appellants and their
             mother to enter the UK illegally and remain in the UK
             unlawfully;
    b.   the Appellants' illegal working;
             c.   credibility issues in relation to whether the Appellants
             can read or write Albanian;
             d.   whether the Appellants' mother could afford to visit them
             in Albania;
             e.   the immigration history of the family in the assessment
             of proportionality;

     Further, the judge failed to give adequate reasons for accepting the
assertion that Dajana had been abducted. Had the judge considered these
matters, he would have come to a different conclusion.

11.  The Respondent submitted that the written submissions of the Appellant
were misconceived. The judge's findings were restricted to two paragraphs
and the judge failed to deal with relevant issues. The judge failed to
apply the definition of integration in Kamara. The judge's finding in the
alternative lacked reasons. It was incumbent on the judge to consider not
only whether there were insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing
in Albania, but also matters of adverse immigration history even though it
was accepted that the Appellants cannot be blamed for the wrongs of their
parents. The judge's failure in this respect disclosed a misunderstanding
of the principles and case law that must necessarily underpin a legally
sustainable Article 8 assessment. The findings under 276ADE were predicated
on an assumption that the parents would not follow the Appellants to
Albania.

12.  In oral submissions, Ms Nizami raised a preliminary issue in relation
to paragraph 1 of the grounds on the basis that the evidence submitted with
the grounds was not before the First-tier Tribunal, was not served on the
Appellant and there was no application under Rule 15(2A) for that evidence
to be admitted before the Upper Tribunal. Mr Tufan accepted that the
Respondent did not refuse leave on the basis of a wrongful claim to be
Kosovan. The issue was not raised in the refusal letter and was not argued
before the First-tier Tribunal.

13.  In relation to this preliminary issue, I find that the allegation at
paragraph 1 of the grounds of appeal was not relied on by the Respondent in
refusing leave to remain and was not argued before the First-tier Tribunal.
Given Mr Tufan's concession, it could not be relied on as a ground of
appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

14.  Mr Tufan relied on the written submissions of 9 September 2020 which I
have summarised above. He submitted the judge's findings were inadequate
and none of the reasons given by the judge satisfied the test of very
significant obstacles to re-integration. There were no reasons for why the
judge considered that the Appellants succeeded on an application of Razgar.
The Appellants were aged 24 and 20 and so had spent a considerable period
of their lives in Albania. Article 8 was not engaged on the facts and the
judge failed to properly apply Razgar.

15.  Ms Nizami relied on her written submissions of 20 and 29 July 2020 and
submitted the Respondent was seeking to re-argue the case both in the
grounds and in oral argument. The Respondent was represented before the
First-tier Tribunal and the judge properly considered all the evidence
before him. In making a decision in favour of the Appellants, following the
case of Mukarkar, there was no error of law. Credibility was not an issue
in this appeal. If the Appellants' unlawful working was part of the
Respondent's case it should have been put to the Appellants when they gave
evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and it was not.

16.  The judge's failure to consider the position of the Appellants'
parents' return to Albania was not raised in the reasons for refusal letter
or at the hearing. It was not appropriate for the Respondent to argue the
point, which was not dealt with before the First-tier Tribunal, and it was
not Robinson obvious. It should have been put to the Appellants' parents
that they could return to Albania as a family unit. The Respondent was
seeking to rely on adverse factors in the grounds of appeal which were not
put to the Appellants in evidence and were not part of the Respondent's
case before the First-tier Tribunal.

17.  Ms Nizami submitted that paragraph 6 of the grounds of appeal made an
impermissible allegation. Any allegation of deception should have been put
to the witnesses in cross-examination.  In any event, it was unclear how
the Respondent was evidencing the deception upon which she relied.

18.  Notwithstanding, the credibility points raised by the Respondent in
the grounds of appeal, the Appellants' parents were granted further leave
to remain. It was unfair for the Respondent to raise adverse credibility
points against the Appellants which were not put in cross-examination and
which were not held against their parents in relation to their grant of
leave to remain. It was open to the judge to accept the unchallenged
evidence that Dajana was kidnapped on return to Albania. The evidence
appeared in all four of the witness statements before the First-tier
Tribunal. The Respondent had not challenged any of this evidence in cross-
examination.

19.  Ms Nizami submitted the judge considered the evidence and submissions
and there was no error of law in the judge's failure to consider points
which were not made before him. The judge was entitled to reach the
conclusions he did. There were very  significant obstacles to re-
integration and objective evidence supporting the high unemployment rate.
It was not open to the Respondent to undermine the judge's finding on the
basis of an argument not made before the First-tier Tribunal. The
allegation at paragraph 9 of the grounds was particularly unfair.

20.  The judge had engaged with the argument the Respondent put forward on
appeal. The fact that the decision was a short one did not mean it
contained an error of law.  It was not necessary to rehearse every detail.
The judge was not asked to carry out a credibility assessment and the
Appellants' credibility was not challenged. The judge gave adequate reasons
for finding there were very significant obstacles to integration, namely
lack of employment, accommodation, social contact, language skills and the
time spent in each country. The judge took into account the statutory
considerations and engaged with all the points in the skeleton argument
which was before him.

21.  The Appellant relied on Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy)
[2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) to support the submission that the Appellants
although adults still had a family life with their parents. There was no
material error of law and the judge had dealt with all relevant points. Ms
Nizami invited me to dismiss the appeal. Both parties were of the view that
if I found the judge had made an error of law the matter should be remitted
to the First-tier Tribunal and none of the findings should stand.

Discussion and Conclusion

22.  I agree with Ms Nizami that the Respondent is seeking to rely on
issues which were not part of the Respondent's case before the First-tier
Tribunal. The judge heard evidence from both Appellants and their parents.
The Respondent's note from the presenting officer's unit, dated 8 November
2019, submitted with the grounds of appeal stated that there were no
credibility issues and recorded the limited extent of cross-examination.
The judge took into account the evidence adduced in cross-examination in
his findings.

23.  There were no credibility issues raised before the judge and the
credibility points made in paragraphs 1 to 9 of the grounds of appeal were
not put in cross-examination. The judge's failure to take those into
account could not give rise to an error of law. The judge was entitled to
rely on the unchallenged evidence in the Appellants' witness statements.

24.  I am satisfied the judge took into account all relevant matters and he
properly directed himself in law. His decision was short, but his reasons
were adequate. The grounds assert that the judge failed to take into
account matters which were not relied on in the refusal letter and were not
put to the witnesses in evidence. They were not part of the Respondent's
case.

25.  The grounds fail to identify matters which were in evidence and which
the judge failed to take into account in concluding that there were very
significant obstacles to re-integration. It was not the case that the
Appellants claimed they could not speak Albanian. Their evidence
demonstrated they could not read or write Albanian to a level which would
enable them to access employment. The judge was entitled to accept the
Appellants' evidence on this point.

26.  I accept that the judge failed to demonstrate that he had applied the
five steps in Razgar and merely stated that removal would offend the Razgar
principles. However, it was agreed by both the Appellant and the
Respondent, that unless an error was shown in respect of the judge's
finding on very significant obstacles to integration, any error in the
judge's assessment of Article 8 would not be material.

27.  The evidence before the judge demonstrated a close family
relationship. The judge was aware of the Appellants' illegal entry to the
UK as children and the grant of further leave to remain to their parents
notwithstanding their immigration history. The Appellants' father had been
residing in the UK in excess of 20 years at the date of hearing.

28.  I find there was no error of law in the judge's conclusion that there
were very significant obstacles to re-integration in Albania. Having made
such a finding, the judge's conclusion that the refusal of leave to remain
would amount to a disproportionate interference with their Article 8 rights
was open to him on the evidence before him and he gave adequate reasons for
coming to that conclusion. Accordingly, I dismiss the Respondent's appeal
to the Upper Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

An anonymity order was not made.



              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 11 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).
4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email


