
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10151/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Heard on 20 March 2019               |On 15 April 2019                     |
|Prepared on 3 April 2019             |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                              MR ANTHONY GRANT
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born  on  2  September  1970.  He
    appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated 21  April  2017  to
    make a deportation order against him and a  decision  dated  30  August
    2017 to refuse a human  rights  claim  and  maintain  the  decision  to
    deport. His appeal was allowed at first instance by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Atreya and the Respondent appeals with leave against  her
    decision. For the reasons which I set out in more detail below, I  have
    set that determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  aside  and  I  have
    proceeded to remake the decision in this  determination.  Although  the
    matter came before me initially as an appeal by  the  Respondent  as  I
    have redetermined the appeal I will continue to refer to the parties as
    they were known at first instance.

 2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on  10  September  2000  as  a
    visitor and was then granted leave to remain  as  a  student  until  31
    January 2002. He had no further leave thereafter (save as  referred  to
    below) although he applied unsuccessfully for  leave  as  a  spouse  in
    2008. The Appellant had a number of criminal convictions dating back to
    2002 including a conviction for drug dealing for which he was sentenced
    to 42 months by Snaresbrook Crown Court (having been found guilty after
    a not guilty plea) on 15 April 2002. He was notified of  his  liability
    for deportation in 2009 and a decision to deport  him  was  made  on  2
    February 2011. The Appellant successfully  appealed  against  the  2011
    deportation decision  and  was  granted  3  years  discretionary  leave
    following this appeal.

 3. However, the Appellant's offending did not stop after succeeding in his
    first deportation appeal.  He  received  a  conditional  discharge  for
    possessing cannabis in 2013 and a fine in March 2015 for an offence  of
    attempting to pervert the course of justice and possession of  cannabis
    and a further fine in May 2015 for another  offence  of  possession  of
    cannabis. The Appellant accepted that he was addicted to  cannabis.  On
    21 April 2017 the Respondent made a second  deportation  order  against
    the Appellant and subsequently refused  the  Appellant's  human  rights
    claim based on his private and  family  life.  The  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Respondent's decisions has given rise to these proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

 4. The Appellant contested the second deportation on Article 8 grounds. He
    has three adult children and five children under the age of 18. He  was
    found by the Judge at  first  instance  to  be  actively  involved  and
    present in the lives of all his children although he did not live  with
    any of them. He had separated from his wife Juliet  who  suffered  from
    depression. His youngest child T was born after  the  2nd  Home  Office
    decision to deport the Appellant. At the time of his first  deportation
    appeal in 2011 Judge Monro in  allowing  the  appeal  stated  that  the
    Appellant  had  made  a  fresh  start  in  life  and  made  a  positive
    contribution to the lives of his children and other people.

 5. In the second appeal the Appellant told Judge Atreya that he  had  been
    working since he came out of prison and financially supporting his wife
    and  children  producing  bank  statements  on  his  mobile  phone   as
    confirmation. He accompanied his wife to  hospital  appointments  which
    concerned the children and he was the first point  of  contact  at  the
    secondary school. The Appellant's  present  partner  [ML]  stated  that
    while she did not live with the Appellant he was  at  her  house  every
    day. The Appellant supported her 14-year-old son which she had  had  by
    another relationship. The Judge also heard evidence from friends of the
    Appellant and his daughter [SB] who had made a statement for the appeal
    dated 9 June 2018 in which she described the Appellant as "the rock  of
    my stability".

The Decision at First Instance

 6. Judge Atreya found the Appellant to be a truthful  witness  who  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his three adult  children  and
    five under 18's. He was in a committed and  serious  relationship  with
    [ML]. There was  a  significant  public  interest  in  the  Appellant's
    deportation, but the Judge found the Appellant had addressed  his  drug
    addiction and had not been to prison  since  the  previous  deportation
    appeal. At [73] of the determination the Judge found on the balance  of
    probabilities that it would be unduly harsh for the under  18  children
    to remain in the United Kingdom without the  Appellant.  He  was  in  a
    position to give continued love and support and  guidance  which  could
    not be given meaningfully on a reduced  basis  for  example  by  Skype.
    Visits were unlikely to happen because of the cost.

 7. At [74] the Judge stated that the Appellant fell within  the  exception
    to Paragraph 399(a) because he had been involved with his children  all
    their lives and continued to play a significant role in their  everyday
    lives. Even if he did not come within the exception,  there  were  very
    compelling  circumstances  which  outweighed  the  public  interest  in
    deportation. These were that the Appellant was a constant and  involved
    parent and  addressing  his  cannabis  addiction  and  contributing  to
    society through work. The children were vulnerable because of their age
    and depended on the Appellant emotionally and  financially  and  risked
    losing a parent permanently.

The Onward Appeal

 8. The Respondent appealed against this decision arguing  that  the  Judge
    had  failed  to  correctly  apply  the  test  of  unduly  harshness  as
    identified in MM Uganda [2016] EWCA Civ 450. The Judge failed  to  give
    the requisite weight to the strong public interest,  as  identified  by
    Parliament, in the Appellant's deportation given the serious nature  of
    the offence involving drugs and the  Appellant's  continual  offending.
    The  Judge  failed  to  give  clear  reasons  what  the  unduly   harsh
    consequences of separation would be if the Appellant was  deported  and
    the partner and children remained in the United Kingdom.  In  order  to
    satisfy the rigorous test  of  undue  harshness  it  was  necessary  to
    identify factors that went beyond being a supportive  parent  providing
    moral and emotional support or normal father-child interactions.  There
    was no finding that the Appellant partner [I assume this reference also
    includes the Appellant's  ex-wife]  would  be  unable  to  support  the
    children or provide for them.  The  Judge  had  failed  to  give  clear
    reasons how the public interest in deportation was  outweighed  by  the
    Appellant's family life relied upon.

 9. The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Lambert  on  12  December  2018.  In
    granting permission to appeal she  referred  to  the  relatively  brief
    content of [73] of the determination (see paragraph 6 above) which  had
    displayed an arguable lack of adequate reasoning consistent  with  case
    law. There was no Rule 24 response from the Appellant to the  grant  of
    permission.

The Error of Law Stage

10. In consequence of the grant of permission to  appeal  the  matter  came
    before me to determine in the first place whether there was a  material
    error of law in the determination such that it fell to be set aside. If
    there was not, then the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  would
    stand. If there was then I would give directions for the  rehearing  of
    the appeal.

11. For the Respondent the Presenting  Officer  argued  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in  the  determination  and  she  relied  on  the
    grounds provided. The Appellant had to show that  there  was  something
    beyond the ordinary in the connection between him and his  family,  but
    he could not do this. He did not live with his family  he  only  picked
    the children up from school. The Respondent relied on the Supreme Court
    decision of KO [2018] UKSC 53  which  confirmed  that  undue  harshness
    implied an element of comparison. The  facts  of  KO  involved  British
    citizen children. The Appellant had  spent  more  time  in  the  United
    Kingdom without leave then with it as the Judge  acknowledged  at  [50]
    when she referred to the Appellant having four years lawful  leave  out
    of a total time spent in the United Kingdom of ten years.

12. The Judge had not properly considered that  whilst  the  Appellant  had
    contact with his children he had nevertheless committed offences.  [73]
    of the determination did  not  properly  address  the  issue  of  undue
    harshness. The Appellant was not  the  primary  carer  and  so  it  was
    difficult  to  see  what  was  out  of  the  ordinary  in  the  current
    arrangements which the Appellant had. Even if the Appellant did see the
    children every day their mother was the primary carer.  There  had  not
    been a full consideration of all the facts.

13. In reply counsel indicated he would focus on the grounds as drafted. KO
    had not been promulgated when the hearing in the First-tier took  place
    (20 September 2018). The main criticism of the  determination  made  by
    the Respondent was that the  Judge  had  not  identified  circumstances
    which made the effect on the family to be unduly  harsh.  However,  the
    determination was comprehensive. The Judge had  dealt  in  some  detail
    with why it was unduly harsh for the family to be  separated  from  the
    Appellant. She had identified factors which took this case out  of  the
    ordinary. She had accepted the Appellant was a family man and committed
    to all eight of his children even though he did not live  with  any  of
    them.

14.  Her  summary  at  [59]  of  the  evidence  of  Michael  Griffiths  was
    particularly relevant. He was a friend of the Appellant's and  a  youth
    support worker with 30 years' experience in his  field.  His  evidence,
    which the Judge accepted, was that the Appellant was actively  involved
    in his children's lives and had a meaningful and positive  presence  in
    their lives. I queried  with  counsel  by  way  of  clarification  what
    guidance the Appellant would be giving to young people in the light  of
    his 2015 offending. Counsel responded that the  Appellant  accepted  he
    was addicted to cannabis. It was recorded at [70]  that  the  Appellant
    was addressing his drug addiction by attending a course  which  he  was
    close to finishing. The starting point of the Article  8  analysis  was
    the acceptance by the Respondent, noted by the Judge at [69] that Judge
    Monro had accepted the strength of the  Appellant's  relationship  with
    his children in the first deportation appeal in 2011.

15. One had to look at all of the  Judge's  findings  together.  There  was
    evidence of financial support being paid to the Appellant's wife at the
    date of the hearing even though he was unable to  live  with  her.  The
    Appellant had been a significant carer for  the  children  since  their
    births. As he was an involved parent it would be unduly harsh  for  him
    to  be  deported.  The  Respondent's  grounds  were  no  more  than   a
    disagreement with the determination.

16. At the conclusion of submissions, I gave short oral reasons why I found
    there to be a material error of law in the determination such  that  it
    fell to be set aside. I indicated that I would  give  full  reasons  in
    writing in my determination which I now do.

17. The deportation of the Appellant is conducive to the public good and in
    the public interest because he has been convicted  of  an  offence  and
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least
    12 months, that is to say the conviction in  2002  for  possession  and
    supply of a controlled drug for which he received a prison sentence  of
    42 months. One of my concerns about the determination in this  case  is
    the Judge's statement at [70]  that  while  there  have  been  criminal
    offences since 2002 there have been no custodial sentences  since  then
    and no criminal offending since 2015. It is not at all clear to me that
    the Judge has looked at this matter cumulatively in that the  Appellant
    had a lengthy prison sentence followed by further offending, Rather the
    impression is gained that the Judge has in some way started  the  clock
    again concentrating on the fact that  the  2013  and  2015  convictions
    (which included a conviction for attempting to pervert  the  course  of
    justice) resulted in non-custodial sentences. That  approach  would  be
    wrong in law since  the  effect  of  the  Appellant's  offending  is  a
    cumulative one. For an  example  of  this,  see  the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in Harverye [2018] EWCA Civ  2848  where  the  Respondent  was
    successful in a second deportation appeal, the Appellant having won his
    first appeal, because there had been a  change  of  circumstances.  The
    facts behind the convictions were still relevant  once  the  Article  3
    risk to the Appellant had passed.

18. The Immigration Rules contain  (for  the  purposes  of  this  case)  an
    exception to the deportation of persons in  the  Appellant's  position.
    That is if they can show  that  they  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who  is  a
    British citizen and it would be unduly harsh for that child  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom without the Appellant. There  is  no  dispute  in
    this case that the Appellant has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with his children, the error of law issue turns on whether
    the Judge properly considered undue  harshness  in  the  light  of  the
    Appellant's offending history.

19. The Respondent in his grounds of onward appeal relies on the  Court  of
    Appeal decision MM [2016] EWCA Civ 617 from  which  the  Supreme  Court
    respectfully differed in KO. The Judge cited MM at [66] noting that the
    expression "unduly harsh" in both the  2002  Act  and  the  Immigration
    Rules required regard to be had to all the circumstances including  the
    criminal's  immigration   and   criminal   history.   The   only   real
    consideration substantively of that case occurs at [70] which I find is
    inadequate for the reasons I have given. Whilst the Supreme Court in KO
    emphasised that the effect on a child of separation from a  parent  was
    not to be weighed in the balance against the parent's offending, I find
    there is very little recognition in the determination of  Judge  Atreya
    of the seriousness of the  Appellant's  offending.  In  particular  the
    consideration  that  having  won  his  first  deportation  appeal   the
    Appellant  continued  to  offend  thereafter.  He   clearly   was   not
    rehabilitated despite serving half of his 42-month prison sentence.  It
    is not apparent from the determination that  the  Judge  has  paid  due
    attention to the public interest in the deportation  of  criminals  who
    have  a  significant  history  of  offending  as  this  Appellant  has,
    notwithstanding the Judge's comment at [68]. For those reasons  I  find
    there is a material error of law in the  determination  and  I  set  it
    aside.

20. After I announced my decision I indicated that  this  was  not  a  case
    where there appeared to be a need for further evidence although as  the
    Appellant was present that option was available if  he  so  chose.  The
    Judge  had  engaged  in  a  fact-finding   exercise   on   the   family
    circumstances of  the  Appellant.  The  issue  turned  on  whether  the
    consequences of deportation as found by the Judge  were  indeed  unduly
    harsh. I therefore proposed  that  I  would  proceed  with  the  appeal
    rehearing against the backdrop of the Judge's factual findings. Neither
    party objected to this course of action after I had outlined it.

The Re-hearing

21. For the Respondent it was  argued  that  undue  harshness  was  a  high
    threshold for the Appellant to cross and nothing had been  put  forward
    to demonstrate undue harshness on the children. The Appellant's actions
    in picking the children up from school was an everyday  activity.  This
    was the 2nd deportation appeal and the Appellant had shown  himself  to
    be someone willing to continue to commit crimes. He had accepted he was
    addicted to cannabis and at the First-tier hearing had said he had last
    taken it one month before. His habit had resulted in crime.

22. For the Appellant it was argued that given that  the  evidence  at  the
    First-tier hearing had largely not been challenged by  the  Respondent,
    many of the witnesses were not cross-examined, attention was  drawn  to
    the First-tier Tribunal's summary of their evidence.  There  were  very
    compelling circumstances in this case and the Appellant was  addressing
    his cannabis addiction. There had been no offending  since  2015.  That
    was four years ago, a significant period of time. The  evidence  of  Mr
    Griffiths was particularly relevant. (see above at paragraph  14).  The
    Judge had stated at [72] that his daughters had  been  given  emotional
    guidance and moral support in their journey from childhood to adulthood
    by the Appellant. Taking all factors together  that  met  the  test  of
    undue harshness and the appeal should be allowed.

Findings

23. Much of this case has turned on the definition of "unduly  harsh".  The
    Supreme Court in the case of KO approved the  definition  that  it  was
    more than "severe" or "bleak", there must be something inordinately  so
    about it. That must mean more than merely unreasonable, since otherwise
    that would duplicate section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act. At  paragraph  23
    the Supreme Court  said:  "...  the  expression  "unduly  harsh"  seems
    clearly  intended  to  introduce  a  higher   hurdle   than   that   of
    "reasonableness" under section 117B(6), taking account  of  the  public
    interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.  Further  the  word
    "unduly" implies an element of comparison. It assumes that there  is  a
    "due" level of "harshness", that is a level which may be acceptable  or
    justifiable in the relevant context. "Unduly" implies  something  going
    beyond that level. The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1),
    that is the public interest in the deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
    One is looking for a  degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  what  would
    necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation  of  a
    parent."

24. It is difficult on the facts as found by the Judge to see that  element
    of undue harshness required by section  117C  of  the  2002  Act.  That
    section contains a general statement that the more serious the  offence
    committed by a foreign criminal the greater is the public  interest  in
    deportation of the criminal. In this case not only  has  the  Appellant
    been sentenced to 42 months and succeeded on a  deportation  order  but
    far from rehabilitating himself after that prison sentence  was  served
    he continued to offend.

25. In allowing his appeal against the first deportation order Judge Munro,
    quoted by Judge Atreya at [24], found that the  Appellant  had  made  a
    fresh start in life and had made a positive contribution to  the  lives
    of all his children and other people. His daughter Shasheika had a very
    close relationship  with  the  Appellant  and  if  the  Appellant  were
    deported his children would be deprived of any meaningful  relationship
    with him. The problem in this case is that  effectively  the  Appellant
    ran the same argument with the same facts before Judge Atreya as he had
    run before Judge Munro.

26. Once again, he  sought  to  avoid  the  consequences  of  his  criminal
    offending by relying on his relationship with his children.  I  do  not
    detect  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   in   either
    determination, that of Judge Munro or  Judge  Atreya,  any  recognition
    that the Appellant's claimed ability to be a positive influence in  his
    children's lives is affected by his offending. Judge Atreya  noted  the
    evidence given by Mr Griffiths that the Appellant was actively involved
    in his children's lives and had a meaningful and positive  presence  in
    their lives. It was a material error of law for the Judge (in  addition
    to the ones I state  above)  not  to  adequately  demonstrate  how  she
    arrived  at  that  conclusion  when  weighed  against  the  Appellant's
    offending between 2002 and 2015.

27. The issue of the Appellant's involvement with the children goes towards
    the question  of  undue  harshness.  It  is  not  in  my  view  a  mere
    disagreement by the Respondent with the result, for the  Respondent  to
    say that there would not be undue harshness on the Appellant's children
    if the Appellant were deported and the children were  to  remain  here.
    The Judge found that the Appellant was  not  living  with  any  of  the
    children but had daily contact with them. It is difficult  to  see  how
    that is out of the ordinary in such a way that it crosses the threshold
    of undue harshness. To deprive a child of contact with their father may
    be harsh but that is not the test. The test is whether the harshness is
    unduly so.  The  comparison  which  this  definition  implies  is  that
    separating a child from his or her parent may be harsh, but it  has  to
    be more than that, it has to be severe or bleak.  It  is  difficult  to
    see on the facts of this case how that test is met.

28. The Appellant's offending was very serious  because  not  only  did  he
    receive a prison sentence of 42 months,  but  he  continued  to  offend
    after succeeding in a deportation appeal  by  arguing  his  connections
    with his children. His interactions with his children are not such that
    there would be undue harshness if he were removed because they  do  not
    live with him and because the beneficial guidance which it  is  claimed
    the Appellant gives has in my view been overstated. How for example was
    the Appellant able to be a role model for his children  during  the  21
    months he was in  prison.  How  can  he  demonstrate  guidance  to  his
    children when he has a serious drug  addiction  which  leads  him  into
    criminality as the Respondent correctly submitted to me?

29. It is difficult to see how on the facts as found by the  Judge  it  can
    properly be  argued  that  the  Appellant  is  no  longer  at  risk  of
    committing further offences  because  he  is  addressing  his  cannabis
    addiction. The evidence received by the Judge was  that  the  Appellant
    had not smoked cannabis for a month prior to the hearing, see [39].  It
    is hard to see how continued  use  of  cannabis  knowing  that  he  the
    Appellant had a deportation appeal coming up very shortly can  be  said
    to be evidence of the Appellant addressing his drug addiction. Although
    the Appellant succeeded in his first deportation appeal on the basis of
    his connections with his  children,  there  is  a  very  strong  public
    interest  in  his  deportation  given  his  continued  offending  after
    succeeding in that appeal.  The  public  interest  in  the  Appellant's
    deportation is not in my view outweighed by the effect on his  children
    if he the Appellant were to be deported.  They  would  continue  to  be
    cared for by their mother.

30. Whilst communication between the United Kingdom and  Jamaica  might  at
    times be difficult, it is  hard  to  see  how  that  constitutes  undue
    harshness. The Appellant states he has worked in  the  United  Kingdom,
    the Judge does not deal to any great extent whether the Appellant could
    work in Jamaica, a country he lived in for the first 30  years  of  his
    life. However the Judge's conclusion  at  [73]  that  visits  would  be
    unlikely to happen because of the cost is  speculative.  The  Appellant
    could if he chose facilitate family visits to Jamaica  using  resources
    obtained from lawful work in that country.

31. The effect of the Appellant's  offending  and  deportation  is  that  a
    family is split up as the Court of Appeal noted in AD Lee  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  248:  "The  tragic
    consequence is that this family, short-lived as it has been,  would  be
    broken up for ever, because of the Appellant's bad behaviour.  That  is
    what deportation does." As Judge Southern went on  to  observe,  having
    cited this passage in KO when it was in the Upper Tribunal, the  family
    relationship in KO was not short lived "but the  point  is  the  same".
    That was not disputed in the Supreme Court judgment.

32. It is difficult to see what very compelling circumstances there are  in
    this case (outside the Immigration Rules) which would outweigh the very
    considerable   public   interest   in   the   Appellant's   deportation
    particularly as I find that  the  Appellant  cannot  demonstrate  undue
    harshness. I bear in mind the direction in Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department v Millar [2018] EWCA Civ 28, that it is helpful if  the
    Upper Tribunal set  out  matters  in  a  balance  sheet  form.  On  the
    Appellant's side of the balance sheet is the Judge's reference  to  the
    Appellant contributing  to  society  through  work  and  parenting  his
    children. On the Respondent's side this  overlooks  the  very  negative
    contribution the Appellant has made to society by continuing to  offend
    even after succeeding in a deportation appeal. On the Appellant's side,
    the Appellant has contact with his children, but this is not  a  family
    in which the Appellant is living in the same household as  the  British
    citizen children. Arrangements for their care would  continue  even  if
    the Appellant was no longer in the United Kingdom.

33. Overall the matters weighing in the Respondent's  side  of  the  scales
    exceed by a considerable  margin  those  factors  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant. I find that the Appellant is not able  to  demonstrate  that
    the exception of undue harshness in Paragraph 399 applies in this case.
    The Judge did not allow  the  appeal  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    private life and that issue has not been appealed and is not  therefore
    before me. I dismiss the Appellant's appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it aside.

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 8 April 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 8 April 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
