
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10500/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 December 2018                           |On 30 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            mr Abdulqudoos Boota
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss S Iengar, Counsel, instructed by Aston Bond Law
Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision posted on 8 October 2018 Judge Morgan of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) allowed on  human  rights  grounds  the  appeal  of  the
    respondent (hereafter the claimant), a citizen of Pakistan, against the
    decision made by the appellant (hereafter the  Secretary  of  State  or
    SSHD) on 4 September  2017  to  make  a  deportation  order  and  on  5
    September to  refuse  his  protection  and  human  rights  claim.   The
    claimant is a foreign criminal as a result of his 30  months'  sentence
    in 2017 for two convictions for conspiring to supply both class  A  and
    class B drugs.  The claimant had been granted ILR in 2010.

2.   At paragraphs 17 and 18 the judge stated:

         "17. Applying the approach  outlined  above  I  find  that  if  the
             appellant  is  removed  to  Pakistan  he   would   face   very
             significant obstacles to his integration.  He  would  struggle
             to operate in Pakistan, without family to whom he can turn  to
             for support and with nowhere to live he would  face  risks  of
             exploitation and would be without the capacity to operate  and
             build up the variety of human relationships necessary to  give
             substance to his private life.  I find that these risks enable
             and justify a finding that  he  would  face  very  significant
             obstacles  to  his  integration.   This  is  a  factor  in  my
             judgement  that  weighs  in  the  appellant's  favour  in  the
             balancing exercise albeit that given  his  residence  has  not
             been lawful it does not carry the weight it  otherwise  would.
             If the appellant had had  an  additional  2  years  of  lawful
             residence his ability to  satisfy  this  exemption,  contained
             within  the  immigration  rules,  would  arguably  have   been
             conclusive in respect of the proportionality assessment.


         18.  In this respect I also note that the appellant would have been
             able to satisfy the previous formulation of both paragraphs of
             399A however as already indicated the current  rules  set  out
             both a stricter test and require lawful residence."

3.   The SSHD's grounds take  issue  with  three  features  of  the  judge's
    decision.  The first relates to the judge's treatment  of  "exemptions"
    contained within the Immigration Rules and the  Immigration  Act.   The
    second relates to the judge's reliance on the  appellant's  ability  to
    satisfy  paragraph  276ADE(1)(v)  because  he  would  face  significant
    obstacles to his integration if returned to Pakistan.  It is  submitted
    that the judge effectively treats the fact that the claimant would face
    very significant obstacles as tantamount  to  him  meeting  the  higher
    threshold of very compelling circumstances.  The third feature concerns
    the judge's  approach  to  the  claimant's  residency  particularly  as
    reflected in paragraphs 18 to 23 where he appears to attach significant
    weight to the fact that the claimant would have been  able  to  satisfy
    the requirements of paragraph 399A if he had had a further two years of
    lawful residency.

4.   I express my gratitude to the representatives for their submissions.

5.   The judge's decision is vulnerable  to  a  number  of  criticisms.   Mr
    Tarlow is right to say that the judge's treatment of the exemptions  in
    the Rules is flawed.  The language of "exemptions" is misleading  since
    what the judge meant top identify were  specific  instances  where  the
    Rules impose more or less stringent requirements by reference to length
    of residence.  But I agree with Ms Iengar that the judge was meaning to
    use  the  term  analogically  and  drawing  attention  to   policy   he
    considering to underlie  the  Rules.   However,  it  remains  that  the
    judge's  findings  about  such  "exemptions"  are   inconsistent.    At
    paragraph 26 he states that he allows the appeal "because the appellant
    satisfies the exemptions contained within the Immigration Rules and the
    Immigration Act (see above) ..."  Yet at paragraph 22 the judge  states
    that "[the claimant] is not able to satisfy  the  exemptions  contained
    within the Immigration Rules and [Section] 117 [of the NIAA 2002]".  In
    discussion with Counsel, I raised the issue of whether I should  regard
    paragraph 26 simply as an typo or oversight, the  judge  having  simply
    forgotten that he had earlier found to the contrary.  Such a view would
    certainly chime with the fact  that  everywhere  else  in  the  judge's
    decision it is accepted and acknowledged that  the  claimant  does  not
    come within any of the "exemptions".

6.   However, even if I disregard the inconsistency in this way, it  remains
    the case that paragraph 26 makes abundantly clear that  for  the  judge
    the claimant's  position  in  respect  of  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    extremely important.  That in my judgment significantly  undermines  Ms
    Iengar's efforts to defend the judge's decision.  For the judge it  was
    of particular importance that, despite failing to meet the requirements
    of the Rules, the claimant either met some  of  their  requirements  or
    would have in the future.  Thus at paragraph 13 the  judge  noted  that
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) provided that a young adult aged between 18  and
    25 who has spent half of his life living continuously in the UK is able
    to satisfy the private life requirements without the  need  to  satisfy
    the reasonableness test set out in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv).  The  judge
    went on to say that it was only the  claimant's  status  as  a  foreign
    criminal that  prevented  him  from  being  able  to  benefit  from  it
    (paragraph 13).  Also at paragraph 17 the judge found that:

         "[i]f the [claimant] had  had  an  additional  2  years  of  lawful
         residence his ability to satisfy  this  exemption  [he  is  clearly
         referring to paragraph  399A],  contained  within  the  Immigration
         Rules, would arguably  have  been  conclusive  in  respect  of  the
         proportionality assessment."

7.   It is clear that in the above paragraphs the judge lost  sight  of  the
    fact that one way or another the claimant did not meet the requirements
    of the Immigration Rules and that that failure was  a  public  interest
    factor counting against the claimant.  For  the  judge  the  claimant's
    ability to meet some of the Rules was seen to override and  negate  the
    fact that overall he failed to meet them.  What  the  judge  stated  at
    paragraph 17 (as immediately quoted above) further reinforces  my  view
    that the judge failed to properly weigh in the balance the significance
    of the claimant's inability to meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules,
    since even if he had been able to show lawful residence for  over  half
    of his life and so satisfy paragraph 399A, his was a case that fell  to
    be considered under paragraph 398.  As a result it was simply wrong  to
    suggest that if the claimant had been able to qualify under  399A  that
    "would arguably have been conclusive in respect of the  proportionality
    assessment".  What the judge set out at paragraph 18  is  afflicted  by
    the same error.

8.   What I have just said about the SSHD's first concerns also  doubles  as
    my reason for considering  that  the  SSHD's  third  concern  is  well-
    founded.

9.   As regards the SSHD's second main area of concern, the judge's  seeming
    elision of the very significant obstacles  test  and  the  higher  very
    compelling circumstances test, Miss Iengar is right to  highlight  that
    the judge properly identifies that the test he had  to  apply  was  the
    latter.  At paragraph 24 the judge wrote:

         "24. In summary although the appellant's offences are very serious,
             on the  particular  facts  of  this  case  the  strong  public
             interest weighing in favour of deportation  is  outweighed  by
             the rights of the appellant and his settled  mother.   I  find
             that  there  are  very  strong  and  compelling  circumstances
             present in the appellant's case which renders his  deportation
             disproportionate.  I find particular  circumstances  in  which
             deportation would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
             for  the  appellant  and  his  settled  mother  such  that   a
             deportation would not be proportionate."

10.  It remains, however, that in assessing whether the  claimant  had  been
    able to show very compelling circumstances, the judge plainly  attached
    undue weight to the claimant's ability to meet - or nearly meet -  some
    provisions of the Rules: see the point made earlier about  the  judge's
    summary at paragraph 28.

11.  For the above reasons I conclude that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    law and I set aside his decision.  Both parties submitted that if I set
    aside the decision I was in a position to re-make  it  without  further
    ado, which I now proceed to do.

My Decision

12.  In re-making the decision in the appeal I see no reason to revisit  the
    primary facts as found by Judge Morgan.

13.  It is not in dispute that  in  order  to  succeed  in  his  appeal  the
    claimant has to show very compelling circumstances over and above those
    set out in paragraphs 399 and 399A.  However, in assessing whether such
    circumstances exist, it is relevant to consider the claimant's position
    under the Immigration Rules.  It is not in dispute that he cannot  meet
    their  requirements.   It  is  true  that  he  was  able  to  meet  the
    requirement of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) by virtue of being a young  adult
    aged between 18 and 25 who had spent at least half of his  life  living
    continuously in the UK.  However, he could not benefit from  that  Rule
    by virtue of being a foreign criminal.  It is also  true  that  if  the
    claimant had been able to show he  had  a  further  two  years'  lawful
    residence he would have been able to satisfy paragraph  399A,  but  the
    fact is that he had not lived lawfully in the UK for half of  his  life
    and so  could  not  benefit  from  this  Rule.   I  consider  that  the
    claimant's inability to meet the Immigration Rules is a  factor  to  be
    weighed against him in the proportionality assessment.   In  particular
    his inability to satisfy  the  suitability  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE, which reflect the fact that great weight  should  generally  be
    given to the public interest in the deportation of a  foreign  offender
    who has served a sentence of more than twelve months.

14.  The question then is whether  the  public  interest  in  deporting  the
    claimant, a foreign criminal,  should  be  regarded  as  outweighed  by
    countervailing factors amounting to very compelling circumstances.

15.  The factors that the claimant seeks to  rely  on  in  this  regard  are
    that: neither he nor his mother has had contact with family members  in
    Pakistan since their arrival in the UK in 2003; he  only  speaks  basic
    Urdu; he has almost no social, cultural or family ties in Pakistan;  if
    removed to Pakistan he would face very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration; he has undergone all his schooling in the UK since the age
    of 5;  he has spent fifteen years - over half his  life  -  in  the  UK
    including his most formative years as a child and young adult;  he  has
    integrated into UK society and UK culture, values and pastimes;   prior
    to his two offences he had not been in trouble with  the  law  and  had
    simply fallen in with the wrong crowd;  he has had no  further  contact
    with his co-defendants; he was an exemplary prisoner and has abided  by
    his licence  conditions  and  has  been  engaging  with  the  probation
    services;  he was assessed by probation as posing a low risk of serious
    harm; he has been motivated to engage in positive activity;  his mother
    is unwell, she is a  single  mother  and  sees  a  diabetic  nurse  for
    diabetes management and a rheumatologist specialist for her  arthritis;
    her GP has expressed concern that her physical and mental  health  will
    deteriorate without the claimant's help; and  there is an unusual level
    of dependency between the claimant and his  mother  given  her  various
    medical conditions.

16.  It is plain that if the countervailing factors just enumerated  are  to
    qualify as very compelling circumstances it must be  on  the  basis  of
    their cumulative impact.

17.  But for one factor I would have had no hesitation in  concluding  that,
    even though taken cumulatively these factors carry substantial  weight,
    the  claimant's  circumstances  fall  short  of  the  very   compelling
    circumstances threshold.  In favour of the claimant it can be  said  in
    particular that he speaks  English;  that  by  virtue  of  having  been
    granted ILR in 2010 his immigration status is not precarious; and  that
    the SSHD has not  sought  to  dispute  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    claimant would face very significant obstacles if returned to Pakistan.
     However, "very significant obstacles" is a  lower  threshold  than  is
    required  by  paragraph  398  and  by   the   general   proportionality
    assessment.  Furthermore, what has to be shown are that the  claimant's
    circumstances are sufficiently compelling to outweigh the  very  strong
    public interest in deportation of foreign criminals.  Further, the fact
    that the claimant has shown significant rehabilitation is not a  factor
    to which I can attach significant weight.

18.  There is however one other factor  in  play  in  the  claimant's  case,
    which concerns the physical and mental health of the claimant's mother.
    The SSHD has not sought to dispute the judge's  finding  of  fact  that
    there was an "unusual level of dependency between  the  [claimant]  and
    his mother" or the GP's assessment that his  removal  would  compromise
    his mother's physical and mental health.  By virtue of the terms of s.6
    of the Human  Rights  Act  1998,  I  have  to  consider  not  just  the
    claimant's human rights but those of his mother.   I  consider  I  must
    attach significant weight to this  finding  and  the  medical  evidence
    underlying it.

19.  In  my  assessment  and  particularly  given  that  the  SSHD  has  not
    challenged the primary findings of fact on which I base my  assessment,
    I am just persuaded that the claimant has established  very  compelling
    circumstances sufficient to outweigh the strong public interest in  his
    deportation.

20.  For the above reasons I:

    -    set aside the decision of the FtT Judge for material error of law;




    -    re-make the decision  by  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  under
    paragraph 398 of the Rules and Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:  [pic]    Date: 15 January 2019

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




