
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10838/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 May 2019                       |On 12 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

            MR JUSTICE MURRAY, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bazini, Counsel, instructed by Cardinal
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  (hereafter  SSHD)
         appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         O'Callaghan (the judge) who, in a decision promulgated on 19  March
         2019, allowed the appeal of Mr AA (hereafter claimant) against  the
         SSHD's decision of 6 May 2018 to refuse his human rights claim.



Background

      2. We summarise the salient features of this appeal. The claimant is a
         national of Ghana who was born in Germany in 1986. He  entered  the
         UK in December 1987 aged 18 months as a dependent of his mother. He
         was left with a maternal aunt when his mother returned  to  Germany
         and was placed in foster care in January 1988,  where  he  remained
         until 1991. The claimant returned to his mother's care when she re-
         entered the UK in 1991. The claimant's father concluded his medical
         studies in August 1991 and visited his wife and the claimant in the
         UK before commencing employment in South Africa. He died  in  1994.
         The claimant's mother applied for Indefinite Leave to Remain  (ILR)
         outside of the immigration rules in 2002 and  this  was  ultimately
         granted on 10 December 2003, the claimant being granted  leave  in-
         line with his mother as her dependent child. He was 17 years old at
         the time.


      3. The claimant has ten criminal convictions. These are  a  matter  of
         record and are set out in the judge's decision at [15] to [20]. All
         of these convictions, bar the  index  offences  for  which  he  was
         sentenced on 13 June 2011, attracted non-custodial  sentences.  The
         index offence  concerned  charges  laid  against  the  claimant  in
         January 2010 relating to the  selling  of  prohibited  weapons  and
         ammunition. The claimant pleaded guilty to one count of selling  or
         transferring a prohibited weapon (smooth-bore revolver), for  which
         he received a custodial sentence of 5 years imprisonment, and a 2nd
         count of conspiracy to sell  ammunition  without  being  registered
         under the Firearms Act 1968, for which he  received  a  consecutive
         one-year sentence.

      4. The claimant was released from custody on 26  April  2013  and  his
         licence period expired on 28 April 2016. The claimant  commenced  a
         B.Sc. (Hons) degree in business management  in  February  2014  and
         secured a 2:2 in 2018. He intended to commence a master's degree in
         business entrepreneurship in May 2019.

      5. In 2014 the claimant met SH, a British citizen born in  1993.  They
         married on 20 February 2019 and, at  the  date  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal hearing, both resided with her father.

      6. The claimant was arrested on 13 October 2017 and  charge  the  next
         day with one count of wounding with intent, contrary to section  18
         of the Offences Against the Person Act 1861, but he was informed by
         the CPS on 31 October 2017  that  a  decision  had  been  taken  to
         discontinue the charge because there was insufficient  evidence  to
         establish a realistic prospect of conviction.

      7. On 2 November 2017 the SSHD  notified  the  claimant  that  he  was
         liable for deportation. On 6  May  2018  the  SSHD  served  on  the
         claimant a decision making him the subject of a  deportation  order
         and refusing his human rights claim.  The  claimant  had  therefore
         lived in the community for approximately 4 years and 7 months  when
         the  SSHD  informed  him  of  his  liability  to  deportation,  and
         approaching 5 years at the date of the SSHD's decision, and  almost
         6 years at  the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.  The
         claimant appealed the SSHD's decision  refusing  his  human  rights
         claim  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to  s.82   of   the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      8. It is accepted by both parties that the judge's  decision  is  well
         structured and detailed. The judge set out  the  various  documents
         served by the  parties  including  a  principal  and  supplementary
         bundle provided by the claimant. The judge noted at the  outset  of
         the hearing that  the  SSHD  had  been  unable  to  comply  with  a
         direction of the First-tier Tribunal issued on 14 November 2018  to
         file and serve the  relevant  sentencing  remarks.  The  Presenting
         Officer explained that, due to the age of the index  conviction  in
         2011, there was no likelihood of  the  Sentencing  Judge's  remarks
         being obtained.


      9. The judge set out the basis of the claimant's  appeal  (that  there
         existed "very compelling circumstances" by reference  to  paragraph
         398 of the immigration rules outweighing the public interest in his
         deportation) and accurately recorded the  burden  and  standard  of
         proof. The judge  summarised  the  documentary  and  oral  evidence
         provided by the claimant, SH, the claimant's mother (FG),  and  his
         mother-in-law (GG).

     10. The judge's factual conclusions and supporting reasons are found at
         [67] to [106]. His decision as a  whole,  and  his  conclusions  in
         particular,   are   interspersed   with   references   to   various
         authorities, legal principles relating to  deportation  of  serious
         offenders (including three important facets relating to the general
         public interest - see [75]), and  relevant  legislative  provisions
         (including s.117C of the 2002 Act).

     11. We summarise the judge's findings pertinent to this appeal. At [84]
         the judge noted the SSHD's  inability  to  provide  the  sentencing
         remarks. At [86] the  judge  accepted  the  claimant's  account  of
         presenting a letter to the Sentencing Judge in which  he  expressed
         his deep remorse and confirmed his realisation as to  the  severity
         of his actions. The judge found that the mandatory minimum sentence
         was  imposed  on  the  claimant  and,  on  balance,  accepted   the
         claimant's evidence that the Sentencing  Judge  identified  a  real
         hope in respect to his rehabilitation.

     12. At [90] the judge noted that the claimant had only lawfully resided
         in the UK from the age of 17 years and 5 months,  and  at  [92]  he
         noted  that  the  claimant  could  not  therefore  meet  the  three
         conjunctive requirements of paragraph 399A of the immigration rules
         and s.117C(4) of the 2002 Act.

     13. At [93] the judge purported to determine "the true  nature  of  the
         [claimant's] private life" in the UK. The judge stated,

             "... That he has previously committed crimes  does  not  mean,
             per se, that he is not now integrated into  this  country  and
             his local community. I find to the appropriate  standard  that
             the  [claimant]  is  fully  integrated  into  United   Kingdom
             society. He has never visited Ghana and lived in Germany  only
             for the first eighteen months of his life. He knows of life in
             no other country but this one. Both he and his  wife  enjoy  a
             circle of friends in this country and  they  live  as  a  law-
             abiding family unit. The securing of a degree establishes that
             he has been a diligent student in recent times.  I  accept  to
             the required standard that  the  [claimant]  has  demonstrated
             remorse for his offending, both at his sentencing hearing  and
             before the Tribunal, and he has sought to develop  a  life  in
             this country that is both law-abiding and rewarding."

     14. The judge gave detailed consideration in the remainder of [93]  and
         in [94] to the incident surrounding the claimant's arrest  in  2017
         and concluded that this incident did not undermine the  nature  and
         quality of the claimant's integration.


     15. At [96] the judge accorded "some weight" to the claimant's  ability
         to integrate into Ghanaian society. "Though it is not determinative
         in  nature,  it  is  a  relevant  factor   when   undertaking   the
         proportionality assessment exercise and  enjoys  some  weight."  At
         [97] the judge noted that the claimant had never visited Ghana  and
         that his formative and adult years had been spent in  the  UK.  The
         claimant had built up no connections with Ghana  through  familial,
         friendship  or  school  links  that  could  aid  him  in   securing
         accommodation or employment.  The  judge  found,  and  it  was  not
         challenged, that the claimant could  not  speak  a  local  Ghanaian
         language. The claimant had "virtually no  command  of  Twi  or  any
         other Ghanaian language beyond a few words and phrases." The  judge
         accepted that English was  spoken  in  Ghana  but  found  that  the
         general population was aided in everyday life by  speaking  one  or
         more of the local languages. At [98] the judge found  FG  to  be  a
         credible witness and accepted her evidence that neither she nor the
         claimant had any contact with his father's family and that,  having
         left Ghana in 1979, she enjoyed virtually no contact with  her  own
         extended family and that all her siblings had relocated to  Europe.
         The judge consequently found there were very significant  obstacles
         to the claimant's integration upon deportation to Ghana.


     16. At [99] the judge found that the claimant's  relationship  with  SH
         commenced when he enjoyed settled status in the UK.  Following  his
         release  from  custody  the  claimant  had  lived  in  the  UK  for
         approaching a year when he met SH. The judge noted  that  the  SSHD
         had taken no steps to indicate an intention to deport him  at  this
         time, and indeed that  the  claimant  had  travelled  to  and  from
         Amsterdam in 2016 and experienced no problems when passing  through
         immigration  control  on  return.  The   judge   found   that   the
         relationship between the claimant and SH was established  when  she
         reasonably believed that he was someone who would be  permitted  to
         remain in the UK indefinitely and that  he  had  paid  his  due  to
         society.

     17. At [101] the judge found SH to be "a very impressive  witness"  and
         accepted that she and  the  claimant  were  in  "a  strong,  loving
         relationship". The judge considered  SH's  claim  to  be  suffering
         ongoing anxiety "with great care" given the absence of any  medical
         evidence. The judge accepted that SH continued to  suffer  symptoms
         of anxiety due to the claimant's deportation proceedings and recent
         news relating to fertility treatment. The judge accepted that  SH's
         present inability to have a child was having a  significant  impact
         on her emotional  and  mental  health,  and  that  emotionally  and
         mentally she  was  clinging  to  the  possibility  of  successfully
         pursuing IVF treatment and that  she  held  significant  subjective
         concerns, following her own research, as to whether  IVF  could  be
         successfully pursued in Ghana.

             "I find that it [sic] this subjective belief impacts upon  her
             anxiety and would continue to do so if she relocated to Ghana.
             In all of the  circumstances  and  being  mindful  as  to  her
             debilitating  history  of  anxiety,  I  find  that  compelling
             circumstances exist in relation to her not being  required  to
             accompany her husband to Ghana and to be  required  to  do  so
             would breach her own protected article 8 rights. It  would  be
             unduly harsh for her to leave the protection of her own family
             and  also  her  husband's  mother  to  whom  she   is   close,
             particularly at a time when she is seeking fertility treatment
             through the NHS. I observed that she continues to reside  with
             her father and has never lived independently of at  least  one
             of her parents. I find that the [claimant's] deportation would
             be an emotional body blow to [SH], both  in  relation  to  her
             anxiety and her desire to start  a  family,  in  circumstances
             where she has suffered various vicissitudes in  life  and  has
             placed her emotional attachment to the [claimant]  as  a  core
             element in her life. In such circumstances, the effect of  the
             [claimant's] deportation upon [SH] would be unduly harsh."

     18. From [102] onwards the judge considered whether  there  were  "very
         compelling circumstances" within the terms of s.117C(6). Throughout
         his assessment the judge reminded himself  of  the  "great  weight"
         that must attach  to  the  public  interest  in  deporting  foreign
         national offenders. In applying the very  compelling  circumstances
         test the judge considered, at [104], his findings of fact  made  in
         relation to the "exceptions" under the immigration rules. The judge
         noted that the claimant had spent all but 18 months of his life  in
         this country, that  he  had  never  been  to  Ghana,  that  he  had
         undertaken his education in the UK, that he was "deeply integrated"
         and  that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
         integration in Ghanaian society. Against this the judge weighed the
         seriousness of the claimant's index offence, but also placed in the
         balance the evidence that the claimant's  rehabilitation  was  very
         strong.


     19.  At  [105]  the  judge  accepted  the  claimant's  account  of  the
         circumstances of his index offence  and  found  that  he  had  been
         targeted by a criminal gang member because of his vulnerability  at
         the time. The judge additionally  noted  that  most  of  the  prior
         offending had been relatively low-level. The judge noted  that  the
         claimant had removed himself from his previous "chaotic  lifestyle"
         and that he had turned his life around. The judge noted that, since
         his release, the claimant had pursued his education  with  aims  of
         running his own business. The judge accepted that the claimant  had
         "... undergone a significant rehabilitative transformation and that
         he has done so over several years when the [SSHD] was  not  seeking
         to deport him. His efforts to rehabilitate are therefore not linked
         to seeking to avoid deportation, having commenced long  before  the
         [SSHD] gave notice of his intention."

     20. Then at [106] the judge stated,

             "I have clearly  in  mind  both  the  need  to  deter  foreign
             criminals from committing serious crimes such as  the  selling
             of firearms and ammunition, that deportation is an  expression
             of society's revulsion at serious crimes and the need to build
             public confidence in the treatment of  foreign  criminals  who
             have committed such crimes. However, upon considering  all  of
             the  evidence,  which  I  have  detailed  with  care  in  this
             decision, and having focused on  the  relevant  public  policy
             factors in  favour  of  deportation,  I  find  that  the  high
             threshold has been met in this  matter.  That  the  [claimant]
             will be exiled from the only country that he knows,  his  lack
             of personal connection to Ghana, his present insight as to his
             previous  offending  behaviour,  his   strong   rehabilitation
             transformation, his age at the time of the index  offence  and
             subsequent maturity, his recent  educational  attainment,  his
             family life with his wife, his wife's health and  his  genuine
             remorse are cumulatively factors that establish  his  case  as
             being one of those rare cases as identified by  Lord  Reid  in
             Hesham Ali where very compelling circumstances arise resulting
             in it not being in the public interest that he be deported  to
             Ghana."

     21. The judge allowed the human rights appeal.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     22.  The  original  grounds  are,  to  some  extent,  discursive.  They
         essentially contend however that the  judge  improperly  took  into
         account mitigating factors relating to the index offence,  that  he
         was not entitled to conclude that  the  effect  of  the  claimant's
         deportation on his wife would be unduly harsh, that the judge erred
         in  finding  that  the  claimant  was   socially   and   culturally
         integrated, that it  was  not  open  to  the  judge  to  find  very
         significant obstacles  to  his  integration  in  Ghana  given  that
         English  was  widely  spoken  and  in  light  of  his   educational
         achievements and the absence of any medical issues, that the  judge
         failed to fully appreciate the public interest factors in play, and
         that the judge consequently erred in finding that there  were  very
         compelling circumstances.


     23. In granting permission to appeal judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Pickup stated,

             "It is arguable that the judge erred in the assessment of  the
             unduly harsh threshold test and in consequence the requirement
             to demonstrate to the  higher  threshold  of  very  compelling
             circumstances. It is also  arguable  that  the  strong  public
             interest in removing the [claimant] has  not  been  adequately
             taken into account.


             All grounds may be argued."

     24. The SSHD's challenge to the judge's decision has been refined in  a
         skeleton argument prepared by  Mr  Kotas  dated  2  May  2019,  and
         further amplified by him at the "error of law" hearing. Paragraph 3
         of his skeleton argument reads,

             'The SSHD submits that notwithstanding what was  an  otherwise
             carefully  reasoned  and  detailed  determination,  the   FTTJ
             nevertheless erred in law in several  distinct  respects,  and
             that such errors cumulatively render the  ultimate  conclusion
             unsafe, and accordingly that the decision should be set  aside
             by the Upper Tribunal.'

     25. At the outset of the hearing Mr Bazini invited us  to  find,  as  a
         preliminary matter, that Mr Kotas' skeleton argument  advanced  new
         grounds that were not contained in the initial  grounds  of  appeal
         and in respect of which Mr  Kotas  had  not  sought  permission  to
         amend. We invited Mr Bazini to identify the grounds he claimed were
         new, and we heard from Mr Kotas in reply.  With  the  exception  of
         paragraph 6 of Mr Kotas' skeleton  argument  (which  dealt  with  a
         factual matter not raised in the grounds), we considered  that  the
         four grounds now advanced by the SSHD were readily identifiable  in
         the initial grounds.


     26. We summarise the grounds advanced by Mr  Kotas.  The  first  ground
         contends that the judge erred in law in relation to his findings at
         [86] regarding the index offence. In  the  absence  of  the  actual
         sentencing remarks the judge was not rationally entitled to  accept
         the claimant's assertion that he expressed remorse for his criminal
         offending to the Sentencing Judge, or  that  the  Sentencing  Judge
         accepted that the claimant would make a positive change in his life
         upon release, or that the Sentencing Judge expressed real  hope  as
         to his rehabilitation. Nor was the judge entitled to rely on  Court
         of Appeal decisions where heavier sentences were imposed  on  other
         individuals with no previous convictions and who had  also  entered
         guilty pleas as there may have been other reasons for the sentences
         passed in those cases. The judge's findings on these issues,  which
         spoke to mitigation, were said  to  be  speculative  and  therefore
         unsafe.

     27. The 2nd ground contends that the judge erred in law in finding that
         the claimant had fully integrated into United Kingdom society,  and
         that  he  erred  in  law  in  finding  that  there  would  be  very
         significant obstacles  to  his  integration  in  Ghana.  The  judge
         ignored not  only  the  claimant's  index  offence  and  consequent
         incarceration for 3 years, but also the totality  of  his  previous
         criminal offending which spanned nearly  10  years,  from  2002  to
         2011. Such criminality militated  heavily  against  any  suggestion
         that the claimant was integrated into society. Notwithstanding  the
         claimant's conduct upon release from detention, it was incumbent on
         the judge to assess this issue globally. There was said  to  be  an
         absence of evidence of the claimant's integration  other  than  his
         undertaking a degree and his relationship with his wife. The  judge
         failed to attach any weight to so-called  "generic  features"  that
         may assist the claimant upon his return to Ghana such as  his  good
         health, his educational achievements, and his capacity to work. Nor
         had the judge considered that it may take "a reasonable  time"  for
         such integration to take place. The judge failed to appreciate  the
         stringent nature of this test, and failed  to  undertake  a  broad,
         evaluative assessment.


     28. The 3rd ground contends that the judge placed undue weight  on  the
         claimant's  rehabilitation.  Court  of  Appeal  authority  (Binbuga
         (Turkey) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2019]  EWCA
         Civ 551) indicated that  rehabilitation  or  lack  of  re-offending
         should carry little or no material  weight  in  establishing  'very
         compelling circumstances'. There was said  to  be  nothing  on  the
         facts  of  the  instant  appeal  to  show   that   the   claimant's
         rehabilitation required  weight.  To  the  extent  that  the  judge
         accorded strong weight to the claimant's rehabilitation,  he  erred
         in law.

     29. The 4th ground of challenge contends that the judge erred in law in
         relation to his findings relating to the claimant's  private  life.
         The judge failed to properly acknowledge that,  for  a  substantial
         period, the claimant was present in the UK  without  leave.  Little
         weight should have been given  to  his  private  life  pursuant  to
         s.117B(5). In reliance on AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)
         it was further submitted that the claimant's  offending  imperilled
         his settled status rendering it precarious. The judge  additionally
         attached undue weight  to  the  IVF  treatment  undertaken  by  the
         claimant and his wife which was commenced at a  time  when  he  was
         facing the real prospect of deportation. The fact of IVF  treatment
         had been held in other cases to not  amount  to  "very  significant
         obstacles" and, given that the "very compelling circumstances" test
         was an even higher threshold, the judge erred in law  by  attaching
         undue weight to this feature.

     30. We  were  invited  to  find  that  the  cumulative  effect  of  the
         identified  errors  of  law  rendered  the   determination   unsafe
         sufficient for it to be set aside.

Discussion

     31. We consider each of the  grounds,  individually  and  cumulatively.
         Following the Case Management Review Hearing on  13  November  2018
         judge of the First-tier Tribunal Peart issued directions  requiring
         the SSHD to file and serve the sentencing remarks. At the start  of
         the First-tier Tribunal hearing the  Presenting  Officer  indicated
         that, because of the age of the conviction, there was no likelihood
         of the sentencing  remarks  being  obtained.  There  was  therefore
         limited independent evidence  before  the  judge  relating  to  the
         circumstances of the  claimant's  index  offence.  The  nature  and
         circumstances of  the  index  offence  were  nevertheless  relevant
         considerations when determining the existence  of  very  compelling
         circumstances (KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC  53).  Moreover,  in  Barry
         [2018] EWCA Civ  790  (at  [57])  Lord  Justice  Singh  rejected  a
         submission by the Secretary of State that it  was  not  permissible
         for a First-tier Tribunal  judge  to  give  weight  to  matters  of
         mitigation in the context of  an  appeal  involving  a  deportation
         order.

     32. At [86]  the  judge  recorded  the  claimant's  assertion  that  he
         presented a letter to the Sentencing Judge expressing his  remorse.
         According to the claimant the Sentencing  Judge  found  him  to  be
         remorseful and accepted that he would make a positive change to his
         life upon release. In assessing this evidence, the  judge  observed
         that the claimant was articulate and, noting that the provision  of
         a letter of remorse was a common  occurrence  in  the  Crown  Court
         where a custodial sentence was likely, accepted that  the  claimant
         would have taken steps to present a letter to the Sentencing Judge.
         This is a conclusion the judge was unarguably entitled to reach for
         the reasons given. Observing that the  claimant's  behaviour  since
         his index offence strongly suggested he possessed real insight into
         the inappropriateness of his  earlier  behaviour,  the  judge  also
         accepted  that  the  claimant  conveyed  such  sentiments  to   the
         Sentencing Judge. We can detect no irrationality or  other  element
         of unlawfulness in the way the judge reached this conclusion.

     33. The claimant's assertion that the  Sentencing  Judge  identified  a
         real hope as to his rehabilitation was not inherently  implausible.
         The judge observed the claimant giving evidence and was in the best
         position to assess the reliability  of  that  evidence.  The  judge
         accurately noted that the claimant received the  mandatory  minimum
         sentence under the relevant  legislative  provisions.  We  did  not
         understand Mr Kotas to suggest otherwise.  As  only  the  mandatory
         minimum sentence was imposed, the judge accepted, "on balance", the
         claimant's evidence that the Sentencing  Judge  identified  a  real
         hope as to rehabilitation. The  judge  reinforced  his  finding  by
         noting that the  Court  of  Appeal  had  regularly  upheld  heavier
         sentences in matters concerning the sale of guns and ammunition. In
         our judgement the judge made findings of fact that were open to him
         based on the evidence before him and  for  the  reasons  given.  We
         accept that it is not usually helpful to compare the facts  of  one
         case with another, and that few details were given by the judge  in
         respect of the Court  of  Appeal  case  he  identified  by  way  of
         example. We are nevertheless satisfied that this did not  undermine
         the judge's assessment of the circumstances of the offence and  the
         sentence.

     34. We consider the second ground. In reaching his conclusion that  the
         claimant was socially and culturally integrated into the UK we  are
         not persuaded that the judge failed to consider  his  incarceration
         for 3 years or the totality  of  his  previous  criminal  offending
         spanning nearly 10 years. From [14] to [21]  the  judge  accurately
         set out the history of the claimant's  criminal  convictions.  This
         suggests that the judge was mindful  of  the  full  extent  of  the
         claimant's criminality. This  observation  gains  support  at  [93]
         where the judge stated that the previously committed crimes did not
         mean, per se, that the claimant was not now integrated into the  UK
         and his local community. The judge was therefore aware of, and took
         into account,  the  totality  of  the  claimant's  criminality.  We
         observe that the claimant had not received custodial  sentences  in
         respect of his other criminal convictions. We accept that the issue
         of  the  claimant's  cultural  and  social  integration   must   be
         considered "in the round", including his past conduct. The issue is
         however to be determined, having regard  to  the  entirety  of  the
         claimant's conduct, as at the date of the  hearing.  A  qualitative
         test must be applied  when  assessing  the  degree  of  social  and
         cultural integration (AM (Somalia) v The Secretary of State for the
         Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 774).


     35. At the date of the hearing the claimant  had  been  living  in  the
         community following his release on licence for almost 6  years  and
         had, as observed by the judge, led a law-abiding  life.  The  judge
         observed that both the claimant and his wife enjoyed  a  circle  of
         friends in the UK and they lived as a law-abiding family unit.  The
         judge noted that the securing of  a  degree  established  that  the
         claimant had been a diligent student. We observe that the  claimant
         had invested heavily in his education. The  judge  found  that  the
         claimant demonstrated remorse for his offending and that he  sought
         to develop a life in this country that  was  both  law-abiding  and
         rewarding. The judge noted that the claimant had lived  in  the  UK
         since he was 18 months old and that he knew of  life  in  no  other
         country but this one. The judge was  demonstrably  aware  that  the
         claimant only secured lawful status when aged 17 (at [92]). In  our
         view the judge took  account  of  all  relevant  circumstances  and
         approached the question of integration from a  global  perspective.
         The judge was entitled to place greater weight on  the  nature  and
         quality of the integrative links established by the claimant  since
         release, and it was open to him to  find  that  any  break  in  the
         claimant's integration caused by his criminality had been  regained
         following his release in 2013. In reaching our decision we note the
         absence of any challenge to the judge's assessment of the  incident
         in 2017 that led to the claimant's arrest.

     36. Both SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 and AS v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA
         Civ 1284 considered the concept of "integration" in s.117C(4)(c) of
         the 2002 Act and paragraph 399A of the immigration rules. In Kamara
         Sales LJ, with whom Moore-Bick LJ agreed, stated, at [14],

             "In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's "integration"
             into the country to which it is proposed that he be  deported,
             as set out in section 117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph  399A,  is  a
             broad one. It is not confined to the mere ability  to  find  a
             job or to sustain life while living in the other  country.  It
             is not appropriate to treat the statutory language as  subject
             to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a court or
             tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms that  Parliament
             has chosen to use. The idea of "integration" calls for a broad
             evaluative judgment to be made as to  whether  the  individual
             will be enough of an insider in  terms  of  understanding  how
             life in the society in that other country is carried on and  a
             capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
             opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate  on  a
             day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
             reasonable time a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give
             substance to the individual's private or family life."

     37. In AS Lord Justice Moylan  rejected  a  submission  that  so-called
         "generic" factors, such as intelligence, health, employability  and
         general robustness of character, were irrelevant when  assessing  a
         person's ability to integrate, and held that such  factors  can  be
         relevant  to  whether  there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to
         integration as they form part of the  "broad  evaluative  judgment"
         (at [58] and [59]). The Court of Appeal rejected a submission  that
         whether someone is "enough of an insider" is to  be  determined  by
         reference to their ties to the country of proposed removal.

     38. In light of the above principles, and for the following reasons, we
         are not persuaded that the judge failed to undertake the  requisite
         broad assessment, with particular reference to  "generic"  factors,
         when he  found  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the  claimant's
         integration in Ghana. At [96]  the  judge  indicated  that  he  had
         accorded some weight to the  claimant's  ability  to  integrate  in
         Ghana.  Whilst it would have  been  preferable  if  the  judge  had
         expressly  identified  the  factors  underlying  this  ability   to
         integrate, we are nevertheless satisfied that the judge had  firmly
         in mind the generic factors referred to in AS.  A  submission  that
         another judge erred in law by failing to refer  explicitly  in  his
         reasons to the facts that an appellant was  a  young  man  in  good
         health and capable of working was rejected in Kamara. At [20] Sales
         LJ stated,

             "... these were all matters of which the Tribunal was  plainly
             aware. It knew Mr Kamara's age and had seen him give evidence;
             and in any event no-one had suggested  that  he  was  anything
             other than what he appeared to be on the papers, i.e. a  young
             man in good health and capable of working. Since there was  no
             issue about any of this and there could be no real doubt about
             the Tribunal's awareness of the position, the Tribunal did not
             have to state these things in terms in  its  reasons  to  show
             that it had taken them into account. In the context  in  which
             it gave its decision, it is clear that it has done so."

     39. We are likewise satisfied that the judge was acutely aware of these
         factors and that they were, albeit by  implication,  recognised  at
         [96] of his decision. By his reference  to  Kamara  the  judge  was
         mindful of the approach he was required to adopt when assessing the
         existence of very significant obstacles. At  [97]  the  judge  then
         identified various factors supporting his conclusion that,  despite
         attaching some weight to the claimant's ability to  integrate  into
         Ghanaian  society,  there  nevertheless  existed  very  significant
         obstacles to his integration. These  included  the  fact  that  the
         claimant had never visited Ghana, that he had no connections within
         the country through familial, friendship or school links that could
         aid him in securing accommodation or employment, that  he  did  not
         speak a local Ghanaian language, and that while English was  spoken
         in Ghana, the general population was  aided  in  everyday  life  by
         speaking one or more the local languages. At [98] the  judge  found
         that the claimant's mother had no contact with her husband's family
         or Ghana and that she enjoyed virtually no  contact  with  her  own
         extended family in Ghana. In the absence of any clear  misdirection
         we do not find that the judge's  conclusion  was  one  he  was  not
         rationally entitled to reach.


     40. In considering Mr Kotas' 3rd ground we first note that, whilst  the
         judge found the evidence relating to the claimant's  rehabilitation
         to be strong, he did not expressly accord "strong" weight  to  that
         rehabilitation. It is nevertheless  apparent  that  the  judge  has
         accorded  some  weight  to  the  fact  of  rehabilitation  in   his
         assessment under s.117C(6).

     41. In RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence:  seriousness)  Iraq  [2019]
         UKUT  00123  (IAC)  the  President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (IAC)
         considered arguments on the issue of rehabilitation.  At  [32]  and
         [33] he had this to say.

             "As the Court of Appeal pointed out in Danso  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2015]  EWCA  Civ  596,  courses
             aimed at rehabilitation,  undertaken  whilst  in  prison,  are
             often unlikely to bear material weight, for the simple  reason
             that they are a  commonplace;  particularly  in  the  case  of
             sexual offenders.


             As a more general point, the fact that an individual  has  not
             committed further offences,  since  release  from  prison,  is
             highly  unlikely  to  have  a  material  bearing,  given  that
             everyone is expected not to commit crime. Rehabilitation  will
             therefore normally do no more than show  that  the  individual
             has returned to the  place  where  society  expects  him  (and
             everyone else) to be. There is, in other  words,  no  material
             weight which ordinarily falls to be given to rehabilitation in
             the proportionality balance (see SE (Zimbabwe) v Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 256,  paragraphs
             48 to 56). Nevertheless, as so often in  the  field  of  human
             rights, one cannot categorically say that rehabilitation  will
             never be  capable  of  playing  a  significant  role  (see  LG
             (Colombia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]
             EWCA Civ 1225). Any judicial departure from  the  norm  would,
             however, need to be fully reasoned."

     42. RA (Iraq) received approval in  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Binbuga
         (Turkey). As the extract makes plain, neither  the  Upper  Tribunal
         nor the Court of Appeal suggested that rehabilitation can never  be
         capable of playing a significant role,  but  the  circumstances  in
         which it is likely to be able to make  a  significant  contribution
         are rare (see also Taylor v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 845). The  judge's
         overall assessment of the  claimant's  rehabilitation  was  however
         conducted in the context of the  SSHD's  delay  in  initiating  any
         deportation proceedings (see [99] and [105], where the judge refers
         to the claimant's  rehabilitative  transformation  having  occurred
         over several years when the SSHD was not seeking to deport him.) Mr
         Kotas accepted that there was no explanation for the SSHD's failure
         to initiate deportation  proceedings  for  4  years  and  7  months
         following the claimant's release into the community, and that  some
         7 years and 1 month had passed between  the  claimant's  conviction
         and the respondent's decision to deport him.

     43. It is clear from EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41, a decision  considered
         by the judge at [99], that a delay  may  enable  an  individual  to
         demonstrate that they have genuinely rehabilitated, as well  as  to
         develop closer personal and social ties and establish deeper  roots
         in the community, and that if  months  or  years  pass  without  an
         attempt made to remove an individual an expectation will grow  that
         the authorities do not intend to remove  the  person,  and  that  a
         significant and unexplained delay  may  reduce  the  weight  to  be
         attached to the public interest. In RJG v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1042
         (at [54] the  Court  of  Appeal  accepted  that,  in  principle,  a
         substantial delay on the part of the Secretary of State in pursuing
         the deportation of a person convicted of serious crime could be  an
         important  factor  in  determining  the  proportionality   of   the
         deportation, both because it might reflect  on  the  weight  to  be
         given to the public interest in  deportation  and  because  of  its
         effect on the individuals concerned.  In  MN-T  (Colombia)  v  SSHD
         [2016] EWCA Civ 893, a case involving an individual who entered the
         UK as 9 years old in  1977  and  received  an  8-year  sentence  of
         imprisonment, there was a delay of 5 years between her release  and
         the start of deport action. At [35] the Court held,

             "I agree  that  rehabilitation  alone  would  not  suffice  to
             justify the Upper Tribunal's decision in this case. If it  had
             not been for the long delay  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in
             taking action to deport, in my view there would be no question
             of saying that "very compelling circumstances over  and  above
             those described in Exceptions 1 and  2"  outweighed  the  high
             public interest in deportation. But that lengthy delay makes a
             critical difference. That  lengthy  delay  is  an  exceptional
             circumstance.  It  has  led  to  the  claimant   substantially
             strengthening her family and private life here. Also,  it  has
             led to her rehabilitation and to her demonstrating the fact of
             her rehabilitation by her industrious life over  the  last  13
             years. This is one of those cases which is on the  borderline.
             The Upper Tribunal might have decided either way. The Court of
             Appeal would not have reversed the Upper  Tribunal's  decision
             if the Upper Tribunal had decided that  because  of  the  high
             public importance the claimant must be deported. In the  event
             the Upper Tribunal  decided  this  matter  in  favour  of  the
             claimant. This was, in my view, an evaluative decision  within
             the range which the Upper Tribunal was  entitled  to  make.  I
             therefore conclude that the Upper  Tribunal  was  entitled  to
             hold  that  there  were   in   this   case   very   compelling
             circumstances over and above those described in  Exceptions  1
             and  2,  which  outweighed  the  high   public   interest   in
             deportation."

     44. At  [40]  to  [42]  of  MN-T  the  Court  of  Appeal  rejected  the
         respondent's submission that the issue of delay, in the context  of
         a deportation  decision,  was  incapable  of  reducing  the  public
         interest. The Court explained that, if during a lengthy period  the
         criminal becomes rehabilitated and shows himself or herself to have
         become a law-abiding citizen, he poses less of a risk or threat  to
         the public, that the deterrent effect of the policy is weakened  if
         the Secretary of State does not act promptly, and  that  it  hardly
         expresses society's revulsion at the criminality of the  offender's
         conduct if the Secretary of State  delays  for  many  years  before
         proceeding to deport.


     45. Having regard to the aforementioned authorities, and  in  light  of
         the relevance accorded by the judge to the  SSHD's  delay  and  the
         particular  circumstances  in  which  the  claimant  was  able   to
         demonstrate his rehabilitation, we find, on the specific  facts  of
         this appeal, that the  claimant's  rehabilitation  was  capable  of
         having weight attached to it  when  considering  the  existence  of
         'very compelling circumstances' over and above  the  exceptions  in
         the relevant immigration rules and s.117C(4), and  that  the  judge
         did not commit an error of law in  according  some  weight  to  the
         applicant's rehabilitation.

     46. We consider Mr Kotas' 4th ground. Mr Kotas contends  that  the  FtJ
         failed to properly acknowledge that the claimant  was  resident  in
         the UK for a substantial  period  without  leave  and  that  little
         weight should have been accorded to his private  life  pursuant  to
         s.117B(5). The judge was however demonstrably aware of  the  length
         of  the  claimant's  unlawful  residence.   At   [90]   the   judge
         specifically acknowledges  that  the  claimant  has  only  lawfully
         resided in the UK since he was 17 years and 5 months old.  Then  at
         [92] the judge acknowledges that the claimant could not succeed  on
         the first requirement of paragraph 339A of the immigration rules or
         s.117C(4)(a) of the 2002 Act as he had spent  less  than  half  his
         life lawfully present in the UK. This element of  the  grounds  has
         not been made out.

     47. Mr Kotas relies on AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015]  UKUT  0260  (IAC)  in
         support of the proposition that, although the applicant was settled
         when he committed his criminal offences,  his  course  of  criminal
         conduct was sufficient to render his status precarious.

     48. Headnote (5) of AM (Malawi) reads,

             "(5) In some circumstances it may also be that even  a  person
             with indefinite leave to remain, or a person who has  obtained
             citizenship, enjoys  a  status  that  is  "precarious"  either
             because that status is revocable by the Secretary of State  as
             a result of their deception,  or  because  of  their  criminal
             conduct. In such circumstances the person will be  well  aware
             that he has imperilled his  status  and  cannot  viably  claim
             thereafter that his status is other than precarious."

     49. The comments that a person with ILR, or indeed  a  person  who  has
         obtain  citizenship,  could  still  be   regarded   as   having   a
         'precarious' immigration status, was obiter dicta as the  appellant
         in that case did not have ILR. AM (Malawi) was  considered  by  the
         Supreme Court in Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58. At [44] the Court stated,

             "The answer to the  primary  question  posed  by  the  present
             appeal is therefore that everyone who, not being a UK citizen,
             is present in the UK and who has leave to  reside  here  other
             than to do so indefinitely has a precarious immigration status
             for the purposes of section 117B(5)."

     50. Then at [47] the Court stated,

             "The facts of the present case do not  enable  this  court  to
             appraise the further suggestion in the AM  case  that  even  a
             grant of indefinite leave to remain might yield  a  precarious
             immigration status in the  circumstances  identified  at  para
             39(e)[1] above. The reader will however have  noted  that  the
             suggestion derives partial support from the  decision  of  the
             ECtHR in the Butt case, summarised at para 33 above."

     51. We accept Mr Kotas' submission that the comments in AM (Malawi) are
         of persuasive force, even though they were purely obiter. There was
         however no detailed  exploration  in  AM  (Malawi)  itself  of  the
         circumstances in which a person with ILR may nevertheless,  because
         of  their  criminal  conduct,   have   their   immigration   status
         imperilled. Each case must be decided on  its  own  facts.  In  the
         present  appeal,  although  the   claimant's   core   offence   was
         undoubtedly serious, the question whether  the  judge  should  have
         approached  his  immigration  status  on  the  basis  that  it  was
         precarious must, in our  judgment,  be  informed  by  all  material
         circumstances, including  the  respondent's  significant  delay  in
         informing the applicant  that  he  may  be  deported  (specifically
         considered by the judge at [99]).  We  do  not  consider  that  the
         applicant's immigration status could be considered to be precarious
         if, after a period of 4 years and 7 months  following  his  release
         into the community, the respondent has entirely failed to  initiate
         any deportation proceedings. We consequently find the judge did not
         err in law by failing to regard the claimant's  immigration  status
         as precarious.


     52. Mr Kotas also submits that the judge erred in law by placing "undue
         weight" on the fact that the claimant and his wife were  undergoing
         IVF, described as a "purely elective medical procedure", given that
         such a factor has been held to not amount to  a  "very  significant
         obstacle" in the context of EX.1.

     53. The attribution of weight to particular elements of a case will not
         usually amount to an error  of  law  unless  such  attribution  was
         irrational,  or  unless,  in  attaching  that  weight,  the   judge
         misdirected himself in respect of a legal requirement  or  a  legal
         test.  We  are  not  persuaded  that  the  judge  made   any   such
         misdirection, or that his attribution of some  weight  to  the  IVF
         treatment was irrational.  That  a  desire  to  continue  fertility
         treatment in  the  UK  does  not  amount  to  a  "very  significant
         obstacle" under EX.1 of the immigration rules, does not  mean  that
         it is an irrelevant consideration when determining either the issue
         of undue  hardship,  or  in  determining  whether  there  are  very
         compelling circumstances over and above Exceptions 1 and 2 such  as
         to render a decision disproportionate under Article 8. At [101] the
         issue of IVF treatment constituted just one of a number of  factors
         holistically considered by the judge. The judge carefully evaluated
         SH's evidence, who he found to  be  "a  very  impressive  witness",
         noting that her present inability to have  a  child  was  having  a
         significant impact on her emotional and mental health, and that she
         held "significant subjective concerns" as to whether IVF  treatment
         could be  properly  pursued  in  Ghana.  We  do  not  regard  these
         observations as irrelevant considerations, and we  find  the  judge
         was rationally entitled, when undertaking a rounded  assessment  of
         the impact on SH and the existence of very compelling circumstances
         in s.117C(6), to attach some weight to the issue of IVF treatment.


     54. Mr Kotas's skeleton argument did not directly address  the  judge's
         "unduly harsh" assessment, and he made no specific oral submissions
         on this  point.  We  have  nevertheless  carefully  considered  the
         judge's reasoning at [101]. Although there was no medical evidence,
         the  judge  considered  the  symptoms  described  by  SH  and   her
         description of her own anxieties. The judge  was  entitled,  having
         found SH to be an impressive witness,  and  having  considered  her
         evidence and her description of the symptoms  she  experienced,  to
         his conclusion that  she  suffered  from  anxiety.  The  judge  was
         additionally entitled to find that SH's subjective belief that  she
         would be unable to successfully pursue IVF treatment in Ghana would
         continue to impact upon her anxiety if she relocated  to  Ghana,  a
         country she had never visited, and that  this  would  significantly
         impact on her emotional and mental  health.  The  judge  considered
         SH's personal circumstances, that she had never lived independently
         of at least one of her parents, her relationship with  her  parents
         and the  claimant's  mother,  and  that,  having  suffered  various
         vicissitudes in life, she had "placed her emotional  attachment  to
         the [claimant] as a core element in  her  life".  In  circumstances
         where it has not been suggested that the judge misdirected  himself
         in respect of the legal test for undue harshness, we are  satisfied
         that, whilst another judge may have reached a different conclusion,
         the judge was rationally entitled to conclude that the  deportation
         decision would have an unduly harsh impact on the claimant's wife.


     55. Mr Kotas submitted that the judge's cumulative errors rendered  his
         decision unsafe. We find that the judge did not make any errors  of
         law. We find, in any event, that the  judge's  overall  conclusion,
         that there  were  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above
         Exceptions  1  and  2  in  s.117C(5)  that  outweighed  the  public
         interest, was one he was entitled to reach on the  evidence  before
         him and for the reasons given. The judge  demonstrably  focused  on
         the need for very compelling circumstances over and above those  in
         Exception 1 and 2 throughout his decision (e.g. [68],  [77],  [91],
         [93], [102], [104], [105], [106]). He accurately  directed  himself
         in  respect  of  the  legal  approach  to   the   very   compelling
         circumstances test ([102])  and  made  specific  reference  to  the
         authority of NA (Pakistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662.   The  judge  was  aware  that  the
         threshold under s.117C(6) was a very high one  ([78],  [79],  [80],
         [83]). The judge accurately directed  himself  in  respect  of  the
         public interest considerations ([75], [82], [103], [106]), and  was
         acutely aware of the seriousness of the claimant's offending ([83],
         [85], [104], [106]).


     56. The judge took account of a wide range of  factors,  including  his
         findings under the Exceptions themselves ([104]). He noted that the
         claimant had never been to Ghana and lacked any personal connection
         with the country, that he spent all but 18 months of  his  life  in
         the UK, that he was deeply integrated and that there would be  very
         significant obstacles to his integration. The judge took account of
         the circumstances of the applicant's offending, the evidence of his
         rehabilitation given that it was occasioned by  a  significant  and
         unexplained delay by the respondent, his current circumstances, his
         relationship with SH and the impact on her of his  deportation  and
         her health. The judge weighed all these factors against the  strong
         public interest factors ([104] to [106]).

     57. Whilst it might be said that the judge's conclusion was a  generous
         one, we are tasked with determining whether he made an error  on  a
         point of law. We cannot  set  aside  the  judge's  decision  simply
         because another judge may have reached a different  conclusion.  We
         do not find that the decision  was  perverse,  or  that  the  judge
         failed to attach weight to relevant matters, or that he  took  into
         account irrelevant factors. We can detect no  legal  error  in  the
         judge's assessment, and consequently we dismiss the SSHD's appeal.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision does not contain any error of law.
The SSHD's appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 10 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
-----------------------
[1]  Paragraph 39(e) of the Court's judgment summarised headnote 5 of AM
(Malawi), that even a grant of indefinite leave to remain might render the
person's status precarious if the grant had been obtained by deception or
if he or she had embarked on a course of criminal conduct which would
justify its withdrawal

