
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
HU/10796/2016

                                                       HU/10799/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 12 March 2018                           |On 13 March 2018                  |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 ARZU KANALP
                                ILKE KUTLUAY
                        [NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimants:     Mrs L Barton, instructed by Ashton Ross Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Jones promulgated 4.7.17, allowing on human  rights
    grounds the claimants' linked  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State, dated 6.8.16, to refuse their applications for  ILR
    on the basis of their relationship with the  sponsoring  husband/father
    with ILR status in the UK.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Woodcraft granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    22.12.17. Thus, the matter came before me on 12.3.18 as  an  appeal  in
    the Upper Tribunal.



Error of Law

 3. For the reasons summarised below, I found such errors  of  law  in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to require  it  to
    be set aside and remade.

 4.  In  essence,  the  grounds  submit  that  the  judge's  reasoning  was
    inadequate. It is suggested that the appeal was allowed for one  reason
    only, namely the view of the Judge that it would  be  unreasonable  for
    the appellants to return to Turkey and seek entry clearance from there.
    It is argued that the decision fails to engage with s117B of  the  2002
    Act and failed to adopt the balance sheet approach  established  in  AM
    (Pakistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 180, thus  failing  to  properly  take  into
    account the public interest in the proportionality assessment.

 5. The grounds also alleged errors in  reliance  on  Chikwamba  principles
    without consideration of Chen and the need to  demonstrate  that  there
    would be a breach of article 8 if required to make an  entry  clearance
    application from outside the UK, which may amount only to  a  temporary
    separation. It was also submitted that the nature of the family life in
    the UK was limited in that the husband works away in  London  and  only
    sees his wife and child on some weekends  and  vacations.  It  is  also
    submitted that the judge failed to take  into  account  the  precarious
    immigration status of the family. Finally, it  is  submitted  that  the
    'best interests' assessment of the child should have  been  weighed  in
    the balance with the competing factors in favour of removal. The  judge
    has  in  effect  elevated  the  child's  best  interests  to  the  sole
    consideration.

 6. In  granting  permission  to  appeal,  Judge  Woodcraft  observed  that
    arguably, the reasoning comprises but one sentence and did  not  engage
    with the 2002 Act. "Further, the judge arguably erred in rejecting  the
    point that the appellant should return to Turkey  to  apply  for  entry
    clearance from there. Having found that the appellant  could  not  meet
    the Rules it was arguably an  error  to  conclude  that  the  case  law
    precluded a return to Turkey to apply for entry clearance."

 7. Having considered the submissions of both Mr Bates  and  Ms  Barton,  I
    found the decision in error of law in a number of respects. In short, I
    agree with Judge Woodcraft that the reasoning for allowing  the  appeal
    was entirely inadequate, contained within a single sentence at the very
    end of the decision: "What I do find I have heard is credible  evidence
    from the appellant, it is said that otherwise suitability  requirements
    are met, and for these reasons, I find the submission  essentially  she
    and her child should be seen  to  return  to  make  an  application  is
    disproportionate and not in the child's best interests."

 8. The phrasing of the sentence makes the sense difficult to  follow,  but
    the judge appears to have allowed the appeal on the basis that  as  the
    suitability requirements of Appendix FM were met, and the  sponsor  has
    ILR, it would be disproportionate to expect the wife and child to  make
    entry  clearance  from  the  UK.  The  ILR  status  of  the  sponsoring
    husband/father is not determinative of the issue. Such reasoning  would
    make the Rules redundant. Whilst the appellants could not benefit  from
    EX1, as none  of  the  family  has  settled  status,  the  question  of
    insurmountable obstacles set out in the Rules, which are the  Secretary
    of State's response to private and family life claims under  article  8
    ECHR, was a relevant consideration and should have been made  or  taken
    into account in one form or another. The tribunal found  at  [14]  that
    the appellants could not meet the requirements of the  Rules.  However,
    in the subsequent article 8 assessment, the judge omitted to take  this
    weighty consideration into account in the proportionality assessment.

 9. Further, it appears that in the last sentence of  [20]  the  judge  has
    conflated a best interests assessment with the article  proportionality
    exercise. Just because it may be in the best interests of a  child  who
    has been in the UK with his mother and father since 2014, despite  four
    years in Turkey whilst his father was in the  UK,  does  not  make  the
    expectation of making an entry clearance application from  outside  the
    UK disproportionate.

10. The 'best interests' assessment should be  made  independently  of  the
    proportionality assessment but is to be brought into account  alongside
    the countervailing public interest factors, pursuant to  MA  (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705. Evidently, this was not the approach of the First-
    tier Tribunal. The decision appears to accord no weight to  the  public
    interest in maintaining immigration control and there is  no  reference
    to s117B of the 2002 having been taken into account, including that  in
    the article 8 assessment immigration control is in the public interest,
    (perhaps as well as that the sponsor does not speak English well-enough
    not to need  an  interpreter).  Further  and  more  significantly,  the
    immigration status of the appellants was  always  precarious.  S117B(6)
    does not apply because the child has not been in the UK for 7 years and
    the reasonableness assessment would in any  event  have  to  take  into
    account the wider public interest  considerations.   Neither  appellant
    nor the sponsor are British citizens, so that there is no right for the
    family to settle in the UK. The judge appears to have treated this case
    as akin to a case of a British citizen with  family  life  with  third-
    country family members.

11. In Chen,  considering  the  Chikwamba  principles,  it  was  held  that
    Appendix FM does not include consideration of the question  whether  it
    would be disproportionate to expect an individual to return to his home
    country to make  an  entry  clearance  application  to  re-join  family
    members  in  the  UK.  There  may  be  cases  in  which  there  are  no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed  outside  the  UK
    but where temporary separation to  enable  an  individual  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance may be  disproportionate.  However,  in
    all cases it will be for the individual to place before  the  Secretary
    of  State  evidence  that  such  temporary  separation  will  interfere
    disproportionately with protected rights. It will not be enough to rely
    solely upon the case-law concerning Chikwamba. Further, on the facts of
    the present case there was no guarantee that an application  for  entry
    clearance would be granted, as the appellants have yet  to  demonstrate
    that they can  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules,  including  the
    specified  documentary  evidence   under   Appendix   FM-SE.   In   the
    circumstances, reliance on Chikwamba was misplaced.

12. Taking the  decision  as  a  whole,  I  find  that  the  reasoning  was
    insufficient if not flawed, and the proportionality assessment entirely
    inadequate. These errors  of  law  are  sufficiently  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal, so that the decision cannot stand  and  must  be
    set aside and remade.

Remittal

13. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal vitiate findings of fact and the conclusions from those  facts
    so that there has not been a valid determination of the issues  in  the
    appeal.

14. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2. The  nature  or
    extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary for the decision
    in the appeal to  be  re-made  is  such  that,  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective in rule 2 to deal with cases  fairly  and  justly,
    including with the avoidance of delay, I find that it is appropriate to
    remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to  determine  the  appeal
    afresh, with no findings of fact preserved.

Conclusion & Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier Tribunal.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup





