
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/10958/2018
                                                HU/10960/2018, HU/10963/2018
                                                HU/10965/2018, HU/10969/2018
                                                HU/10971/2018, HU/10978/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|Given extempore on 7th August 2019            |On 21st August 2019          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                    fmoA
                                    jkhh
                                    ckhhH
                                    skhh
                                    lkhh
                                    hkhh
                                    hkhh
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - AMMAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Holmes of Counsel instructed by Ashwood
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Petersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The sponsors in this appeal are  SKH,  NKHA  and  SKH.   They  are  all
    related in some form to the appellants.  The appellants are the mother,
    stepmother, siblings or half siblings of the sponsors.  They  currently
    reside in a refugee camp on the border of Iraq and the KRI.

2.   The Sponsors, together with H, have been granted refugee status in  the
    United Kingdom.  They send money to the appellants in Iraq and continue
    to maintain contact with them.

3.   The  appellants  applied  for  family  reunion  in  the  UK  under  the
    Immigration Rules on 20th  November  2017,  but  that  application  was
    refused on 7th February 2018.  The respondent was  not  satisfied  that
    the appellants were the spouse of minor children or their sponsors  and
    concluded that they could not meet the requirements of  paragraph  252D
    of the Immigration Rules qualifying for family reunion.  The respondent
    found that the procedure would not violate the rights of the appellants
    or their sponsors under Article 8 European Convention on  Human  Rights
    and Fundamental Freedoms.

4.   Before me today Mr Holmes clarified several issues for me.  It  appears
    from statements made by  the  sponsors  that  the  appellants  and  the
    sponsors together with H a minor who has already  been  granted  asylum
    with the sponsor, all lived together as one family unit from 2013, when
    the first and second named appellant's husband and the third or  fifth,
    sixth and seventh appellants' father left the family home.  He has  not
    been seen or heard of since.  In fact, Mr Holmes  confirmed,  they  had
    all been living as one family unit throughout their lives.

5.   Ms Petersen, with her customary fairness, interrupted and told me  that
    she accepted, that given  the  strength  of  the  family  life  enjoyed
    between the parties, That Article 8 was engaged.  She  agreed  with  me
    that even the adult siblings had never left the  family  home  and  had
    lived with their mother and step mother all their lives.  The minor  in
    the United Kingdom had known his step mother and step sibling  all  his
    life and had always lived with then.

6.   Ms Petersen pointed out that these facts  were  not  previously  clear.
    She accepted that any errors of law in the determination could  not  be
    said to be material and invited me to allow the appeal outright.  I  am
    very happy to do so.  I uphold the decision of the First Tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  This appeal is allowed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
16 August 2019



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable (adjusted where full  award
not justified) for the following reason.  There is family life  between  the
parties.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
16 August 2019
