
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10399/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On: 6th September 2017                 |On: 8th September 2017              |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                            O'Neil O'Brian Smith
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:           Mr C. Timson, Counsel instructed by HSK
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G. Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a national of Jamaica date of birth [ ].    He  seeks
      leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  human  rights  grounds;  in
      particular he places reliance on Article 8 ECHR. He submits  that  his
      removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  would   be   a   disproportionate
      interference with his family life with his British partner and son.




      Case History


   2. In May 2001 the Appellant was given leave to enter the United  Kingdom
      as a visitor.  He was seventeen years old.  That leave expired on  the
      29th November 2001; it is not disputed that he has remained in the  UK
      without leave since that date.   In October 2015 the  Appellant  wrote
      to the Home Office requesting that he be granted leave  to  remain  on
      Article 8 grounds.   He included evidence that he is the father  of  a
      British child, K, who was born in  2011.  Supporting  statements  were
      included from various family members  including  the  child's  mother,
      [NR].


   3. The Respondent refused to  grant  leave.  In  her  letter  dated  29th
      October 2015 she pointed out  that  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of
      Actual Bodily Harm on the 8th May 2014 and  that  he  had  received  a
      suspended sentence of 12 months' imprisonment as  a  result,  with  an
      unpaid work and supervision order.   This  meant  that  the  Appellant
      could not qualify for leave to remain in accordance with  Appendix  FM
      of the Immigration Rules, because he fell foul  of  the  'suitability'
      requirements in S-LTR.1.4:

         "The presence of  the  applicant  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  not
         conducive to the public good because they have been convicted of an
         offence for which they have been sentenced to imprisonment for less
         than 4 years but at least 12 months".


      A further issue was raised  as  to  whether  the  Appellant's  claimed
      relationship with [NR] was genuine and subsisting. The Respondent went
      on  to  consider  whether  leave  should  be  granted,  exceptionally,
      'outside of the rules' (i.e. in accordance with the  United  Kingdom's
      obligations under the ECHR).   She noted that  the  Appellant's  child
      would  be  able  to  access  basic  services  such  as  education  and
      healthcare if he were to move to Jamaica with his father, and for that
      reason found no violation of Article 8.


   4. The Appellant exercised his right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal
      under s82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. He, his
      partner, his partner's mother and a friend all appeared to  give  oral
      evidence.  All of their evidence was  concerned  with  the  depth  and
      quality of the Appellant's Article 8 private and family  life  in  the
      UK.  The Respondent failed to attend the hearing and so that  evidence
      went unchallenged.


   5. In a determination dated the 2nd October 2016 the First-tier  Tribunal
      (Judge Fox) accepted that the Appellant and  [NR]  are  in  a  genuine
      relationship, and that a family life exists,  albeit  that  it  was  a
      family life established when the Appellant was living here unlawfully.
      As to the relationship with K the Tribunal  notes  that  there  is  no
      requirement that the child leave the country. The letter  from  school
      describes the Appellant as one of the child's primary carers and  this
      fact could not therefore assist the Appellant's case. The child can be
      cared for by his mother and other family members. There is no evidence
      to demonstrate that the child will be adversely  affected  beyond  the
      obvious inconvenience which would result if his father would return to
      Jamaica and tried to make an entry clearance application from  abroad.
      The Tribunal found there to be no exceptional  circumstances  and  the
      appeal was dismissed.


      The Challenge: Error of Law

   6. The Appellant appealed the decision of Judge Fox on  several  grounds.
      These were helpfully distilled, at a hearing before  me  on  the  14th
      June  2017,  by  his  Counsel  Mr  Timson,  who  made  the   following
      submissions.  The Tribunal's task, in its assessment  of  s117B(6)  of
      the 2002 Act, was to assess  (a)  whether  there  was  a  genuine  and
      subsisting parental relationship  and  (b)  whether,  in  all  of  the
      circumstances, it was reasonable to expect K to leave the UK.  In  its
      assessment of reasonableness, the Tribunal would be required to decide
      what would be in the child's best interests, and consider that  matter
      alongside the public interest  in  the  removal  of  persons  who  are
      unlawfully in the UK.   Mr Timson submitted that the Tribunal had here
      failed to do any of that. There was no  discernible  'best  interests'
      assessment, and no consideration  of  the  Respondent's  policy  which
      contains a strong presumption that it will not be reasonable to expect
      a British child to leave the country. Nor did there appear to  be  any
      weighing of the evidence of the  witnesses,  which  had  been  to  the
      effect that K was close to his dad and would be adversely affected  if
      he were to be removed.

   7. I need not deal with those grounds in any detail save to say that they
      were all made out, and that the Respondent accepts that to be so.   At
      the  initial  hearing  the  Respondent  was  represented   by   Senior
      Presenting Officer Mr McVeety who conceded that it was  not  clear  if
      the Tribunal had  conducted  a  Razgar  enquiry,  or  whether  it  had
      properly applied the considerations set out  in  s117B(1)-(6)  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.    Mr  McVeety  did  not
      accept that this was a case where the only outcome  could  be  in  the
      Appellant's favour, but he did accept that the decision of the  First-
      tier Tribunal was flawed for material error as set out in the grounds.
      I was therefore invited by both parties to remake the decision in  the
      appeal.

      The Re-Made Decision

   8. Before me the parties agreed that the legal framework to be applied in
      this case is as follows:


          i) My  starting  point  is  the  relevant  Immigration  Rule,  ie
             Appendix  FM.    This  is  because  the  rule  reflects  where
             parliament considers the balance  to  be  struck  between  the
             rights of the individual and the public interest;


         ii) The Appellant cannot meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM
             because he fails to meet the 'suitability'  criteria.  He  has
             been sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment and  notwithstanding
             that his sentence was suspended, this engages S-LTR.1.4 (cited
             above). The Appellant cannot therefore meet  the  requirements
             for entry into the 'five year route to settlement';


        iii) It is for the Appellant to demonstrate that he  has  a  family
             life in the UK  and  that  his  removal  would  amount  to  an
             interference with that family life;


         iv) It is for the Respondent to demonstrate that any  interference
             caused by the  Appellant's  removal  would  be  proportionate,
             having regard to the public interest in removing  persons  who
             have been sentenced to 12 months or more in prison,  who  have
             remained unlawfully in the UK and who have no current claim to
             remain under the  Immigration  Rules.   In  my  assessment  of
             proportionality I must have regard to the public  interest  as
             it is expressed in s117B of the 2002 Act.


   9. Mr Harrison conceded that the Appellant had discharged the  burden  of
      proof in respect  of  whether  he  has  a  family  life.  That  was  a
      concession properly made.  Judge Fox had  already  accepted  that  the
      Appellant's relationship with [NR] is genuine and subsisting, and that
      the Appellant is indeed the biological father of K,  as  reflected  on
      the child's birth certificate.  It was further accepted  that  both  K
      and his mother are  settled  in  the  UK  and  are  British  nationals
      entitled to enjoy the benefits of their nationality. To  that  extent,
      it was accepted that the separation from the  Appellant  (which  would
      inevitably follow from the refusal to grant him leave) would amount to
      an interference with this Article 8 family life.


  10. The question was whether the interference would be  proportionate.   I
      must have regard to all of  the  factors  set  out  in  s117B  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

  11. The Appellant has not had  leave  to  remain  in  this  country  since
      November 2001. Although I bear in mind that he was  a  minor  when  he
      entered the country (he was seventeen and his journey was arranged  by
      adult family members) he has been an adult for the  entire  period  of
      overstaying and as such can be expected to take responsibility for it.
      He has shown an obvious disregard for immigration control and the laws
      of this country.  The proper maintenance of immigration control is  in
      the public interest.

  12. The Appellant speaks fluent English. This is a neutral  factor  in  my
      assessment.

  13. The Appellant is not able to work, since he lacks the permission to do
      so. He would like to work as a chef - he feels that he has an aptitude
      for it and has been encouraged by family members who work in the  food
      industry, who have provided him with  informal  training.    He  would
      like one day to run his own take-away business selling Caribbean food.
      He and [NR] are currently living on the benefits that she is  entitled
      to. He does not claim benefits himself, and  never  has.    I  accept,
      having heard the Appellant's evidence, that he has every intention  of
      working and supporting his family, but at the date of this  appeal  it
      is the incontrovertible fact that he is not  financially  independent.
      This weighs against him in the balancing exercise: it is in the public
      interest that persons who are financially independent are better  able
      to integrate.

  14. The Appellant met [NR] at a  time  when  his  immigration  status  was
      unlawful. That was plainly a matter of which they were both aware.  As
      such little weight can be attached to their relationship.

  15. The Appellant has told me that he has many friends in this country and
      regards it as his home. I do not doubt that to be the case.  This  was
      however a private life developed in the knowledge  that  he  was  here
      unlawfully and as such little weight can  be  attached  to  it  in  my
      overall assessment.

  16. The final consideration in the Act is at s117B(6):

         In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


         (a)      the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
         relationship with a qualifying child, and


         (b)      it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
         the United Kingdom.

  17. As to the first limb, at (a), Mr Harrison concedes that the  Appellant
      enjoys a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his son. He
      has lived with him since he was born and plays an active role  in  his
      upbringing.


  18. As to the second limb, the question of reasonableness, I remind myself
      of the guidance on how this  phrase  should  be  interpreted.   In  MA
      (Pakistan) & Ors [2016] EWCA Civ 705 the  Court  of  Appeal  confirmed
      that this sub-section was a free-standing provision, which unlike  the
      preceding sub-sections, was  capable  of  being  determinative  in  an
      appeal. If both limbs could be satisfied,  it  would  not  be  in  the
      public interest for the parent to  be  removed,  ergo  the  Respondent
      would be unable to establish a refusal of leave to  be  proportionate.
      To that extent the Court agreed with the President,  McCloskey  J,  in
      Treebhowan [2015] UKUT 00674. The Court disagreed, however,  with  his
      assessment of what matters went to 'reasonableness'.     The President
      had suggested that that  question  was  to  be  answered  solely  with
      reference to the child. Drawing an analogy with the approach taken  in
      deportation appeals to the test of "undue harshness",  Elias  LJ   was
      satisfied - albeit reluctantly -  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
      correct in her contention that the test in fact  required  the  public
      interest to be weighed in to the balance.  This would include all  the
      pertinent matters set out  at  s117B(1)-(5),  as  well  as  any  other
      'suitability' issues such as those raised in this appeal. Against that
      would  be  weighed  any  number  of  factors  relating  to  the  'best
      interests' of the child, for instance: education, healthcare, ties  to
      the country where he would live  if  he  had  to  leave  the  UK,  the
      location and strength of ties with other family members.


  19. Another important factor would be the child's nationality: ZH Tanzania
      v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC  4.   In  her
      published policy on the application of Article 8 'outside  the  rules'
      the Secretary of State acknowledges that nationality has an  important
      role to play, albeit applying a different legal ratio. Recognising the
      consequences that flow from the decision in the CJEU case of  Zambrano
      [2011] (C-34/0) the Immigration Directorate's Instructions[1] read  as
      follows:

         Save in cases involving criminality, the decision  maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice judgment in
         Zambrano.
         The decision maker must consult the following guidance when
         assessing cases involving criminality:


            . Criminality Guidance in ECHR Cases (internal)
            . Criminality Guidance in ECHR Cases (external)


         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.


         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.


         (emphasis added)

      Applying the highlighted guidance  to  the  test  in  s117B(6)(b),   a
      parent of a British child with no countervailing factors (other than a
      lack of valid leave) would  always succeed.

  20. "Almost always" was the phrase used by Mr McVeety in  his  submissions
      on the question of 'error of law' in this case. He accepted  that  the
      policy is published guidance and that as  such  Article  8  applicants
      would be entitled to read it as an  expression  of  the  Secretary  of
      State's view.  He pointed out however that the policy draws a distinct
      line around cases involving criminality. It reads on:


         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer  in
         the UK or in the EU.


         The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:


            . criminality falling below the thresholds set out in paragraph
              398 of the Immigration Rules;
            . a very poor immigration history, such as where the person has
              repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.


         In considering whether refusal  may  be  appropriate  the  decision
         maker must consider the impact on the child of any  separation.  If
         the decision maker is minded  to  refuse,  in  circumstances  where
         separation would be the result, this decision  should  normally  be
         discussed with a senior caseworker and, where  appropriate,  advice
         may be sought from the Office of the  Children's  Champion  on  the
         implications for the welfare of the child, in order to  inform  the
         decision.


         ....


  21. In this case the Appellant has both  a  criminal  record  and  a  poor
      immigration history and it was for this reason that Mr McVeety was not
      prepared to concede the appeal at the hearing in June. I agree with Mr
      McVeety, and the terms of the Secretary of State's policy, that  these
      are matters which must be considered as part of a  rounded  assessment
      of whether, in all the circumstances, it would be reasonable to expect
      the K to leave the UK.


  22. At the hearing I had the opportunity to hear live  evidence  from  the
      Appellant and his partner [NR].  Both were impressive witnesses and  I
      was satisfied that they were telling  the  truth  about  their  family
      circumstances. For the record, I  note  that  Mr  Harrison  did  cross
      examine the witnesses but indicated in closing submissions that he did
      not challenge the credibility of either.

  23. The couple have struggled financially. The Appellant is not officially
      allowed to work, and [NR]  had  to  give  up  her  employment  (as  an
      assistant in Debenhams department store) because of  ill-health.  They
      have survived on her benefits and the occasional help  of  family  and
      friends. The Appellant candidly admitted to having done 'cash in hand'
      work over the years, and to having been paid in kind for jobs such  as
      gardening, cooking and painting.   Things have however been  hard  for
      them and they have for instance had to  move  house  on  a  number  of
      occasions having fallen behind on rent.

  24. [NR] has a number of health complaints. She has scoliosis of the spine
      which periodically causes her back to spasm and cramp  such  that  she
      has high levels of pain and is unable to move. She  experiences  these
      episodes very frequently: she told me that, for instance, she has  had
      several  incidents  since  last  Christmas.   She   takes   medication
      (including prescription-only painkillers) and rests to  wait  for  the
      spasm to pass.   She cannot do any housework, work, lift K or  do  any
      activity with him during these attacks. Perhaps more significantly she
      suffers from monthly periods of extreme abdominal pain which mean that
      she is unable to stand, or move about normally. She told me that  when
      this pain hits she can only "lie in a ball" with a hot water bottle on
      her tummy, and again, takes prescription-only painkillers. She  has  a
      lot of various tablets prescribed at the hospital. These bouts of pain
      can last up to 5-6 days  at  a  time.  She  produced  several  medical
      appointment letters relating to this condition.  She currently  has  a
      diagnosis of poly-cystic ovaries and before K was born had to have one
      of her ovaries removed because there was a large tumour growing on it.
      She has also been admitted to hospital  with  what  she  described  as
      'septic blood'. She has  been  told  that  all  of  these  issues  are
      related, and she has been referred to a specialist for  investigation.
      Her  doctors  now  suspect  that  she  is  actually   suffering   from
      endometriosis.    She has the first appointment  with  the  consultant
      coming up in October.


  25. Despite these substantial difficulties  the  couple  have  managed  to
      provide a stable and loving home for K. Both play a  very  significant
      role in his upbringing, although  the  Appellant  takes  the  lead  in
      physical activities because of [NR]'s conditions.   For  instance,  he
      regularly plays football with his son, takes him swimming,  takes  him
      to the park and plays along with the 'rough and tumble' that  is  part
      of the daily life of a six-year old boy.   Both parents can  take  and
      collect K from school. When [NR] is unwell the Appellant does it: this
      is confirmed in a letter from K's primary school in which he  is  said
      to "regularly" be the  parent  doing  drop-off  and  collection.   The
      school confirms that he also attends parents' evenings,  engages  with
      the school and generally shows an interest in his son's education.  In
      her evidence [NR]  spoke  movingly  of  the  struggles  that  she  has
      personally faced in coping with monthly pain - for as long as she  can
      remember - and how reliant she is on the Appellant to do things around
      the house and things with K that she simply cannot.

  26. Both witnesses stated that they are the main carers  for  K.  Although
      [NR] has parents and a sister who all live in Manchester  and  all  of
      whom have a good relationship with him, none  are  able  to  play  any
      significant role in looking after him. Her father  works  long  hours,
      her  mother  has  significant  illnesses  and   disabilities   herself
      (including lung disease COPD and  being  partially-sighted),  and  her
      sister has two young children of her own to look after.

  27. [NR] said that she could not imagine moving her son  to  Jamaica.  She
      knows nothing about the place and the Appellant  has  not  been  there
      himself for  nearly  twenty  years.  She  would  be  scared  of  going
      somewhere where she did not know about the medical provision available
      to her. She has doctors here who have been looking  after  her  for  a
      long time and know her history. She would not want her  son  to  leave
      behind everything he knows - his grandparents, his aunt  and  cousins,
      his home and school.  She confirmed the Appellant's evidence that K is
      currently receiving one-on-one tuition at school because he is  having
      difficulties with his speech.  Nor can [NR] envisage what she would do
      if the Appellant were to leave and go back to  Jamaica  without  them.
      In her opinion it would "destroy" K if he were to  be  separated  from
      his father.   She cannot rely on her parents or sister to help her  so
      she would not know what to do, because for  lots  of  days  she  can't
      physically look after K herself.

  28. I must consider all of these factors in the round. The  Appellant  has
      been an overstayer since November 2001, some sixteen years. Although I
      accept that he was brought to this country as a teenager and that this
      was not necessarily his decision,  he has had a long  time  to  either
      make a voluntary departure - or regularise his position - as an adult.
      He chose to start a relationship knowing he had no  leave  to  remain,
      and for that reason his relationship with [NR] -  undoubtedly  genuine
      as it is  - cannot attract any significant  weight  in  the  balancing
      exercise.  Similarly little weight can be attached to the private life
      that has been established during this period of  unlawful  stay.    He
      committed a serious assault, a fact reflected  in  the  sentencing.  I
      accept that the fact that his sentence of imprisonment  was  suspended
      would tend to indicate that there were extenuating circumstances  (the
      Appellant claims as much but I make no finding to  that  effect  since
      the sentencing remarks of the judge were not made  available  to  me),
      but the conviction stands.  I make my assessment on the basis  of  the
      bare facts of the conviction and  the  sentence.  The  fact  that  the
      Appellant has  received  this  sentence  weighs  against  him  in  the
      balance.  So too does the fact that he is not financially independent.
      He is in effect reliant on the benefits that are provided by the state
      to [NR] and K, and that too is a matter that must weigh  against  him.




  29. I am satisfied that it would be strongly in the best  interests  of  K
      for him to remain in the UK with both of his parents.

  30. I accept that he has a stable and loving home in  this  country  which
      his parents might find difficult to replicate in the more  challenging
      environment of  Jamaica.  I  accept  that  [NR]  would  find  it  very
      distressing to move away from her parents, friends, sister,  home  and
      the support network that K has at  his  present  primary  school.    I
      accept that she would be extremely  anxious  about  moving  to  a  new
      country where she did not have the support of  her  doctors,  and  the
      free prescriptions that she is currently  entitled  to  as  a  British
      national.    I  find  that  her  anxiety  would  very  likely  have  a
      detrimental impact on K.  If the family travelled together to  Jamaica
      K would be separated from British family members who he knows well and
      whom he has  grown  up  with,  including  his  maternal  grandparents.
      Although he could of course attend school in Jamaica he  would  suffer
      significant disruption  if  moved  away  from  the  school,  teachers,
      support staff and friends that he currently knows.  As  Baroness  Hale
      puts it in ZH, nor should the intrinsic importance of his  citizenship
      - and the right of abode in this country that it confers -  be  played
      down.


  31. I find that a separation of K's parents would  be  hugely  detrimental
      for him.  Were the Appellant to travel to Jamaica without  his  family
      it would in all likelihood be a very  long  time  before  he  saw  his
      father in person again. [NR] is not well  and  is  on  a  low  income.
      Whilst I do not doubt that she would make every effort  to  facilitate
      contact with the Appellant, the reality is that it would be  extremely
      difficult for her to visit Jamaica.   It is sometimes  suggested  that
      the removed parent can simply apply for entry clearance to come  back.
      Where children are involved that is in my view a difficult proposition
      but in this case  that  is  especially  so,  since  the  'suitability'
      refusal makes it all but inevitable that  any  application  for  entry
      clearance would be refused.  K would be  deprived  of  any  meaningful
      relationship with his father. As the Appellant puts it: you can't  hug
      over Skype.  [NR] would be left to cope on her own.  I accept that she
      appears to be suffering from a complex condition that has resulted  in
      her suffering years of pain. I have no  hesitation  in  accepting  her
      evidence that "when pain  hits"  she  is  entirely  reliant  upon  the
      Appellant to manage the household and K.  All of  these  factors  mean
      that it would be very much contrary to  K's  best  interests  for  his
      family to be split up.

  32. Weighing all of the above in the round I cannot be satisfied  that  it
      would be "reasonable" to expect K to leave the UK. Although his father
      has committed a crime and has overstayed these were  not  matters  for
      which he can be held accountable. He is a British child who has  known
      nothing but life in  this  country.  His  ability  to  adapt  to  live
      overseas would be made far more difficult by the fact that his  family
      have few live connections to Jamaica (his father has  not  been  there
      since 2001 and has no contact with family members who  may  be  there)
      and by the fact that his mother would find it  extremely  difficult  -
      both physically and psychologically - to make that move.  I  have  not
      given specific consideration to the notion that K  would  be  able  to
      move  with  his  father  alone  since  that  option  was  specifically
      disavowed before me by the Respondent.  Although I have given  careful
      consideration to the public interest I am  not  satisfied  that  there
      exists in this case countervailing considerations of such weight as to
      justify separation.


      Decisions


  33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law  such
      that the decision must be set aside.


  34. The decision is remade as follows:


         "the appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".

  35. There is no direction for anonymity.









                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          7th September 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life (as a partner or
parent) Ten Year Routes, published August 2015

