
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10038/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15 April 2019                       |On 26 April 2019                    |


                                   Before:


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |VB                                                |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |


                                  Anonymity


I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  her  or  members  of  her
family. This direction applies to both the appellant and to  the  respondent
and all other persons. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.
I make this order because it refers to evidence that one of the  appellant's
minor children suffers a speech impediment.

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr A Slatter, of Counsel, instructed by Malik &
Malik Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the resumed hearing in order to re-make  the  decision  on  the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 24 August  2017
    to refuse her human rights claim of 5 October 2016 for indefinite leave
    to remain to be granted to her on the basis of her marriage to Mr FB, a
    British citizen born on 18 December 1973.

 2. The appellant (date of birth: 20 January  1982)  is  from  Kosovo.  Her
    husband is also from Kosovo. He has been living in the  United  Kingdom
    since 2000. They were married in Kosovo on 27 May 2011.  The  appellant
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 6 October 2013  as  FB's  spouse  with
    leave valid from 22 August 2013 until  22  November  2015.  A  daughter
    ("X") was born to them on 11 November 2014. Their second daughter ("Y")
    was born on 19 February 2016. The children are both British citizens.

 3. By a decision (with directions) sent to the parties on  12  March  2019
    (hereafter the "Error of law  decision")  following  a  hearing  on  12
    February 2019 before Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul  and  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Gill (hereafter the "panel"), the Upper Tribunal  set  aside  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mace,  who  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal following  a  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT") on 22 June 2018. The reasons for doing so are set  out  in  the
    Error of law decision. (The Error of law decision  is  not  annexed  to
    this decision because it  was  not  considered  necessary  to  make  an
    anonymity direction at the time. I have decided to  make  an  anonymity
    direction in view  of  the  evidence  I  heard  that  X  has  a  speech
    impediment.)

 4. In essence, the panel concluded that, through no fault of her own,  the
    judge had materially erred in law by taking into account the  behaviour
    of the appellant (i.e. the fact that she had submitted a false "Life in
    the UK" test certificate in support of her application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain) in reaching her finding that it  would  be  reasonable
    for her children to leave the United Kingdom, contrary to the  judgment
    of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) & Others v  SSHD  [2018]  UKSC  53
    which was delivered after the judge's decision had been promulgated.

 5. The panel set out at para 30 of its decision the findings that were  to
    stand and stated, at para 31, that the judge's record of  the  evidence
    that she heard also stood.

 6. However, in relation to the judge's findings, it should be  noted  that
    she incorrectly referred to Albania. The appellant and her husband  are
    both from Kosovo, not Albania. They speak the Albanian language,  which
    may be the reason for the judge mistakenly  referring  to  the  country
    Albania.

 7. Although the panel stated, at para 25 of the  Error  of  law  decision,
    that the re-making of the decision would be limited  to  the  issue  in
    s.117B(6)(b of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (the
    "2002 Act"), the issues  were  enlarged  at  the  resumed  hearing,  as
    explained at paras 8-10 below.

The issues

 8. The first issue  in  this  resumed  hearing  is  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for the appellant's children to leave the United Kingdom for
    the purposes of s.117B(6)(b) of the 2002 Act. In this  regard,  I  have
    the benefit of the judgment of the Supreme Court in KO  (Nigeria),  the
    Upper Tribunal (the President and Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill)  in  JG
    (s.117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019]  UKUT  00072  (IAC)
    (Rev 1) and the Court  of  Appeal  in  SSHD  v  AB   (Jamaica)  and  AO
    (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 661.

 9. In relation to the first issue, Mr Slatter and Mr Tufan agreed that:


    (i)    If I found that it would not be reasonable for  the  appellant's
        children to leave the United Kingdom, I would allow the  appeal  on
        human rights grounds  because  s.117B(6)(b)  of  the  2002  Act  is
        satisfied.


    (ii)   If I found that it  would  be  reasonable  for  the  appellant's
        children to leave the United Kingdom, the second issue arises, i.e.
        whether, having conducted the balancing  exercise  in  relation  to
        proportionality, the decision  would  breach  Article  8.  In  this
        regard, Mr Slatter and Mr Tufan agreed that I would need  to  weigh
        all relevant factors including the public interest which arises  on
        account of the fact that the appellant had submitted a false  "Life
        in the UK" test certificate  in  support  of  her  application  for
        indefinite leave to remain.

10. The following issues arose during submissions:


    (i)    In relation to the first issue, whether it  is  permissible  for
        the Tribunal to consider whether it would  be  reasonable  for  the
        appellant's children to leave the United Kingdom temporarily whilst
        the appellant makes an entry clearance application.  This  requires
        me to consider, inter alia, paras 89-91 of JG.


    (ii)   In relation to the  first  and  second  issues,  whether  it  is
        permissible  for  the   Tribunal   to   take   into   account   the
        reasonableness of the  appellant's  husband  relocating  to  Kosovo
        permanently with her and her children or the reasonableness of  the
        appellant's husband  following  her  and  her  children  to  Kosovo
        temporarily whilst she makes an entry clearance application.

Oral evidence on 15 April 2019

11. Before summarising the evidence, I  should  say  that  there  was  some
    discussion at the hearing before me about the  possible  problems  that
    may arise as a result of the fact that the interpreter at  the  hearing
    before me was interpreting  in  the  Albanian  language  as  spoken  in
    Albania, whereas the appellant was speaking the  Albanian  language  as
    spoken in Kosovo.

12. The appellant and the interpreter said that the two languages  are  the
    same except that there are some words that are  different.  I  rose  at
    that point to make some enquires.  When  I  returned,  I  informed  the
    parties that the Tribunal's system for  booking  interpreters  did  not
    distinguish between interpreters who interpret the Albanian language as
    spoken in Albania and interpreters who interpret the Albanian  language
    as spoken in Kosovo. It was also clear from the correspondence on  file
    that the appellant's representatives had requested  an  interpreter  in
    the   Albanian   language,   without   any   further   explanation   or
    qualification.

13. I decided to continue with the hearing with  the  interpreter  who  was
    present. There was no request from Mr Slatter for  an  adjournment  for
    another interpreter to attend. I took into account  the  fact  that  my
    enquiries with the administrative staff of the Upper Tribunal  revealed
    that the Tribunal's system for booking interpreters did not distinguish
    between interpreters who interpret Albanian as spoken  in  Albania  and
    interpreters who interpret Albanian as spoken in Kosovo, from which  it
    followed that, even if the hearing were to  be  adjourned  for  another
    interpreter  to  be  provided,  the  same  situation  could  arise.  In
    addition, the lack of any  differentiation  in  the  Tribunal's  system
    appears to suggest that there  was  no  known  problem  with  using  an
    interpreter who interprets  in  the  Albanian  language  as  spoken  in
    Albania for a witness who originates from Kosovo. The Tribunal's system
    would have accommodated any such known problems. I  took  into  account
    that it was possible for me to give clear instructions in order to pre-
    empt any difficulties so that the Tribunal was alerted to any  problems
    in interpretation if and when they arose, and give further instructions
    as needed.

14. I instructed the appellant and the interpreter to inform me immediately
    if there was any occasion when they did not understand anything  and  I
    would then give further instructions to enable the  word  or  words  in
    question to be properly and accurately conveyed.  At  the  end  of  the
    hearing, they each confirmed that there was   no  occasion  during  the
    evidence of the appellant and the  interpretation  by  the  interpreter
    that they did not understand any word or words and that they  had  each
    understood everything.

15. The appellant's husband began giving evidence in the English  language.
    However, I was not satisfied  that  he  was  able  to  communicate  his
    answers accurately in a  way  that  I  could  understand.  I  therefore
    informed him that he should give his evidence through the  interpreter,
    whereupon I gave him and the  interpreter  the  same  instructions,  as
    summarised above. At the end of the hearing,  he  and  the  interpreter
    confirmed that there was  no  occasion  during  his  evidence  and  the
    interpretation by the interpreter that they did not understand any word
    or words and that they had each understood everything.

The appellant's oral evidence

16. The appellant adopted the contents of her  witness  statement  14  June
    2018 (pages 1-5 of bundle A) and her witness statement dated  27  March
    2018 (pages 1-3 of bundle C) which she confirmed were true and accurate
    to the best of her knowledge and belief and  which  she  confirmed  had
    been translated to her in a language she understood.

17. The appellant's elder daughter, X,  has  a  speech  impediment  and  is
    receiving speech therapy. The appellant was referred  to  the  document
    dated 21 February 2019 from NELFT  NHS  Foundation  Trust,  Speech  and
    Language Therapy Service (hereafter the "NELFT Letter") (pages 38-39 of
    bundle C), which states that X had attended a block  of  five  sessions
    entitled: "Developing Play Sessions"  from  10  January  2019  until  7
    February 2019. The appellant said that X is due to attend another block
    of six sessions, beginning at the end of April 218. Her progress on the
    second block of sessions will determine whether it is necessary for her
    to attend any further  sessions.  She  will  start  nursery  school  in
    September 2019.

18. Asked how it came about that  it  was  decided  that  X  needed  speech
    therapy, the appellant said that, when she took X to  her  play  group,
    there was a psychologist present as was usually the case.  It  will  be
    two years this summer since X has been attending the  play  group.  She
    told the psychologist that X was having speech  difficulties  and  that
    she  does  not  even  say  "Mum".  The  psychologist  helped  her.  The
    psychologist visited her  home.  She  explained  the  problems  to  the
    psychologist who advised her  to  speak  to  X  in  Albanian  at  home.
    However, the psychologist said that the reason why X needed  to  attend
    speech and language therapy sessions  was  because  she  had  a  speech
    impediment  and  not  because  she  had  difficulty  with  the  English
    language. The psychologist wrote a report.

19. Having attended the block of five sessions, X has improved and can  now
    speak a little. She now speaks  both  Albanian  and  English  at  home,
    although she only says a few words that she knows. Before attending the
    speech and language therapy sessions, X's speech was "not good at all".
    She is due to attend another block of six sessions.

20. Asked why the report from the psychologist was not  in  the  bundle  of
    documents, the appellant said that she had submitted the report and all
    of the letters she received to her solicitors.

21. It was the psychologist who told her that X needed  to  attend  another
    block of six sessions. The appellant had a letter informing her that  X
    had to attend another block of six sessions beginning  at  the  end  of
    April. She forgot to bring the letter to court. She left this letter at
    home.

22. Asked whether she was told why X would need to attend another block  of
    sessions in view of the fact that the NELFT letter states  that  X  had
    achieved the aims of the sessions, the appellant said that she was  not
    given any reasons. She was just sent another letter informing her  that
    X had to attend another block of sessions.

23. The appellant said that X would not be able to receive  any  help  with
    speech therapy in Kosovo. She had not  made  any  enquiries  about  the
    availability of such services in Kosovo because she wants X  to  access
    services in the United Kingdom.

24. The appellant said that she and her family speak Albanian at home.

25. The appellant said  that,  although  her  husband  is  a  self-employed
    builder, it is not possible for him to choose when to work  because  he
    has to pay the rent and the bills. It is not possible for him  to  work
    in Kosovo because he has lived in the United Kingdom for a long time; a
    lot of people in Kosovo are emigrating to other countries; there  would
    be no employment for him in Kosovo; her children go to  school  in  the
    United Kingdom; and their education  would  be  better  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

Oral evidence of the appellant's husband

26. FB adopted the contents of his three witness statements -  a  statement
    dated 14 June 2018 (pages 7-11 of bundle A), a statement d 19 June 2018
    (pages 1-2 of bundle B) and a statement dated 27 March 2019 (pages  4-5
    of bundle C). They  had  been  read  back  to  him  in  a  language  he
    understood. Their contents were true and accurate to the  best  of  his
    knowledge and belief.

27. Asked what triggered X's attendance at the speech and language  therapy
    sessions in January 2019, he said that she did not  speak  some  words.
    For example, she would say "daddy" but not "mummy". When he took her to
    the nursery, he explained the  problem.  Asked  who  decided  that  she
    should attend the first block of sessions, he said  that  he  explained
    the problem to the staff at her school and a person  who  was  "like  a
    teacher at the school" said that X needed to go to the place where  she
    subsequently attended the speech and language therapy sessions. He said
    that X had had a hearing test which was  positive.  After  the  hearing
    test, a psychologist saw X. The psychologist identified the problem.

28. Asked whether there was a psychologist's report, FB said that a  report
    will be prepared when X completes the second block of sessions.

29. Pressed to say whether there  was  a  psychologist's  report  before  X
    commenced the  first block  of  sessions  stating  that  she  had  been
    examined and explaining that she had a speech impediment, FB said  that
    the staff at the play group helped them  when  they  saw  the  problem.
    Asked again, he said  that  he  and  his  wife  had  seen  that  X  had
    difficulties at home.

30. Asked again, FB said that there was no report from the psychologist but
    the teachers at the school had identified the problem. Asked to confirm
    that it was his evidence that there was no report from the psychologist
    before X commenced the first block of sessions, he said that there  was
    no psychologist's report but "they" explained the problem to the school
    and the school identified that she could not speak properly.

31. FB said that, having attended one block of sessions, X can now say  the
    alphabet,  she can count up to  20  and  say  words  like  "mummy"  and
    "aunty". He and his wife have received  a  letter  saying  that  it  is
    necessary for X to attend one more block of sessions. He does not  know
    how many sessions are in the second block.

32. FB said that he had not enquired  about  whether  speech  and  language
    therapy is available in Kosovo but he  does  not  believe  that  it  is
    available.

33. FB said that he could not follow the appellant to  Kosovo  because  his
    children are in school in the United Kingdom and everything  they  need
    is in the United Kingdom. Asked to explain  why  he  had  said  at  the
    hearing before the FtT that, if he had to do so in order  to  keep  his
    family together, he would return to Kosovo, he said that  his  children
    are now in school. At the time of the hearing before  the  FtT,  X  was
    attending a play group and Y  was  not  attending  any  play  group  or
    school.

34. Asked whether he was a citizen of both the United Kingdom  and  Kosovo,
    he said he was a citizen of the United Kingdom.

Submissions

The first issue

35. Mr Tufan submitted  that  paras  89-91  of  JG  presented  him  with  a
    difficulty on the question whether the Tribunal should consider whether
    it would be reasonable for the appellant's children to leave the United
    Kingdom in order to accompany the appellant to Kosovo whilst  she  made
    an entry clearance application. Nonetheless, he submitted  that  I  was
    not precluded from considering the possibility of the children  leaving
    the United Kingdom temporarily  whilst  the  appellant  made  an  entry
    clearance application and conclude, on that  basis,  that  s.117B(6)(b)
    was not satisfied. He submitted that para 91 of JG was obiter and it is
    clear that the Upper Tribunal did not hear submissions on the point.

36. Mr Tufan submitted that JG could be distinguished from the instant case
    on the facts and asked me to find that it would be reasonable  for  the
    appellant's children to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  and  relocate  to
    Kosovo. In JG, the  children  were  considerably  older  and  therefore
    advanced  in  their  education.  There  were  issues   concerning   the
    availability of Catholic schools in Turkey. In the  instant  case,  the
    appellant's children are right at the  beginning  of  their  education.
    They are only 4 years and 3 years old. It is said that it would not  be
    reasonable for X to leave  the  United  Kingdom  because  she  requires
    speech and  language  therapy  sessions.  However,  the  only  evidence
    submitted was the NELFT letter which is brief and which states that the
    aims of the first block of sessions have been  achieved.  There  is  no
    letter to confirm that X needs to attend another block of sessions. The
    appellant and her husband had been inconsistent about whether there was
    a psychologist's report. There was no medical evidence at all.

37. There was no evidence that the children would not be entitled to  enter
    or live in Kosovo. Both parents are of Kosovan origin. There are family
    members in Kosovo and a number of places to which the appellant and her
    family could go whilst they establish themselves.

38. In relation to the fact that  the  appellant's  children  were  British
    citizens, Mr Tufan referred me to para 44 of KO (Nigeria) from which it
    is clear, in his submission, that the respondent's concession in Sanade
    (British children - Zambrano - Dereci)  [2012]  UKUT  48  was  made  in
    error. The fact that a person or a child is a British citizen is not  a
    bar to relocation.

39. Mr Tufan asked me to find that s.117B(6)(b) of the  2002  Act  was  not
    satisfied.

40. Mr Slatter referred me to para 23 of the  Error  of  law  decision  and
    submitted that the respondent's position was that he  does  not  expect
    the appellant's children  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.  Mr  Slatter
    submitted that, given that the respondent does not expect the  children
    to leave the United Kingdom,  it was not reasonable to expect  them  to
    leave the  United  Kingdom.  On  that  basis  alone,  s.117B(6)(b)  was
    satisfied, in his submission.

41. Mr Slatter referred me to page 76 of the respondent's policy  dated  22
    February 2018 where the respondent states that:

             "Where  the  child  is  a  British  citizen,  it  will  not  be
             reasonable to expect them to leave the UK  with  the  applicant
             parent or primary carer facing removal...."

42. Page 68  of  the  policy  dated  19  December  2018  entitled:  "Family
    Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b" version 2.0, states:

            "If the effect of refusal of the application  would  be,  or  is
             likely to be, that the chid would have to  leave  the  UK,  the
             decision-maker must consider whether it would be reasonable  to
             expect the child to leave the UK."

43. Mr Slatter submitted that the respondent's position is  therefore  that
    it is not reasonable to expect a British citizen  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

44. Furthermore, in reliance upon paras 18-19 of KO (Nigeria),  Mr  Slatter
    submitted that, given that one parent  is  a  British  citizen  in  the
    instant case, it follows that it would be unreasonable  to  expect  the
    children to leave with the other parent. He submitted that, pursuant to
    paras 18-19 of KO (Nigeria), the Tribunal is precluded from considering
    whether it is reasonable to expect a British citizen parent to relocate
    with the third-country national parent. He submitted that, pursuant  to
    paras 18-19 of KO (Nigeria), it was only possible for the  Tribunal  to
    consider the position of the parent who has no right to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom in assessing whether s.117B(6)(b) is satisfied.

45. Mr Slatter submitted that it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant's children to leave the  United  Kingdom.  They  are  British
    citizens.  Their  nationality  is  important,  as  is  clear  from   ZH
    (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4.  They  would  lose  their  educational
    opportunities,  support  and  protection  of  the  country   of   their
    nationality, amongst other matters.

46. The appellant's elder child has a speech impediment  and  is  receiving
    therapy. Although she has improved, she continued to need therapy.  She
    is about to start school in September 2018. It is important  to  ensure
    that she does not have difficulty with  words.  There  was  no  obvious
    place for  the  appellant  and  her  family  in  Kosovo.  FB  may  have
    transferable skills but he has lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  18
    years. He would experience  difficulties  in  starting  a  business  in
    Kosovo from scratch.

47. Mr Slatter distinguished JG on the ground that  JG's  family  had  been
    separated at some point whereas the appellant, her husband and her  two
    children have never been separated.

48. If the appellant leaves the United Kingdom, the children would have  to
    follow her because she is their  primary  carer.  It  is  in  the  best
    interests of the children for them to remain  with  both  parents.  The
    appellant and FB have shown remorse for the  fact  that  the  appellant
    submitted a false test certificate. It  was  a  one-off  incident.  She
    arrived lawfully and passed her English language test to  obtain  entry
    clearance.  It  was  disproportionate  to  force  the  family  into  an
    uncertain situation in Kosovo.

49. Mr  Slatter  submitted  that  s.117B(6)(b)  requires  the  Tribunal  to
    consider the reasonableness of the  appellant's  children  leaving  the
    United Kingdom permanently. He submitted that the  Tribunal  could  not
    consider whether it would be reasonable for the children to  leave  the
    United  Kingdom  temporarily  whilst  the  appellant  makes  an   entry
    clearance application.

50. If the family were to relocate to Kosovo, the appellant  would  not  be
    able to satisfy the entry clearance requirements because  it  would  be
    difficult in that case for her to show that the maintenance requirement
    was satisfied. In any event, Mr Slatter submitted that it has not  been
    the respondent's position in the instant case that the appellant should
    make an  entry clearance application. This is  because  the  respondent
    has never asserted that it was open to the appellant to make  an  entry
    clearance application. In any event, he submitted that it would be rare
    for it to be proportionate to expect a mother who is the primary  carer
    of young children to make an entry clearance application.

The second issue

51. Mr Tufan submitted  that,  in  conducting  the  balancing  exercise  in
    relation to proportionality, I should take into account  Chikwamba.  He
    relied upon the Upper Tribunal's decision in R (Chen) v SSHD  (Appendix
    FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation  -  proportionality)  IJR  [2015]
    UKUT 189 (IAC) and para  51  of  the  Supreme  Court's  judgment  in  R
    (Agyarko) and others v SSHD  [2017 UKSC 11. He submitted  that,  if  it
    could be shown that any entry clearance application would be  bound  to
    succeed, then it may be that there would be no point  in  requiring  an
    appellant to seek entry clearance. At para 39  of  Chen,  the  Tribunal
    said that it may be easier to  show  that  it  is  disproportionate  to
    require an appellant to make an entry clearance  application  if  there
    are children involved. However, he submitted that the onus was upon the
    appellant to  place  relevant  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  or  the
    Secretary of State.

52. The appellant had submitted a false test certificate. There was a  lack
    of evidence concerning X's speech impediment. The  appellant's  husband
    was self-employed. In Mr  Tufan's  submission,  he  had  flexible  work
    arrangements such as would enable him to look  after  his  children  or
    arrange for them to be cared for, whilst the appellant  made  an  entry
    clearance application. Alternatively, he could accompany the  appellant
    to Kosovo  with  the  children  whilst  she  made  an  entry  clearance
    application. Mr Tufan submitted that I would have to take into  account
    the wider public interest, including the public interest  arising  from
    the fact that the appellant had submitted a false test certificate.  He
    submitted that, taking into account  the  public  interest  arising  on
    account of the  appellant's  use  of  a  false  test  certificate,  the
    decision was not disproportionate.

53. Mr Slatter submitted that I would have to consider  proportionality  on
    the  basis that the appellant's husband remained in the United  Kingdom
    because he is a British citizen. He submitted that  this  follows  from
    paras 18-19 of KO (Nigeria) for the reasons he gave earlier and which I
    have summarised at my para 43 above.

54. Mr Slatter submitted that, in any event, the decision would  give  rise
    to unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  appellant's  husband,  who
    has lived in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  long  time.  He  would  have
    difficulties  starting  his  business  again  in  Kosovo.   The   least
    restrictive interference to family life would be for the respondent  to
    return the appellant's  passport to her  and  permit  her  to  sit  for
    English language and "Life in the UK" tests.

55. Mr Slatter submitted that, as the Home Office  have  not  returned  the
    appellant's passport to her, she has not studied English.  However,  Mr
    Tufan said that it was open to the  appellant  to  have  requested  the
    respondent to provide her with a certified copy of her  passport  which
    would have enabled her to embark upon English language courses.

56. I reserved my decision.

Assessment

57. Mr Slatter and Mr Tufan agreed  that  I  should  first  decide  whether
    s.117B(6)(b)  of  the  2002  Act  is  satisfied,  i.e.  whether  it  is
    reasonable for the appellant's children to leave the United Kingdom. If
    it is satisfied, I would  simply  allow  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds on the basis that s.117B(6)(b)  is  satisfied.  If  it  is  not
    satisfied, then I would need  to  conduct  the  balancing  exercise  in
    relation  to  proportionality  and  decide  whether  the  decision   is
    disproportionate. In other words, the first stage is  to  consider  the
    applicability or otherwise  of  s.117B(6)(b)  and,  if  necessary,  the
    second stage is to consider proportionality.

58. Before embarking upon an assessment of  the  evidence  in  relation  to
    s.117B(6)(b), I shall first consider and decide the general  issues  of
    principle described at para 10 above.

59.  The  first  general  issue  of  principle  concerns  whether,  in  its
    consideration of whether s.117B(6)(b) is satisfied, it  is  permissible
    for the Tribunal to consider whether it is reasonable for  a  child  to
    accompany one of his or her parents temporarily to that  parent's  home
    country whilst the parent makes an entry  clearance  application.  This
    question is unlikely to arise  in  a  case  where  both  parents  of  a
    qualifying child face removal. It may  arise  where  one  parent  of  a
    qualifying child is entitled to remain in the United  Kingdom  (whether
    as a British citizen or settled  person  or  person  with  leave  as  a
    refugee or humanitarian protection) who is therefore  able  to  act  as
    sponsor to the parent facing removal in an entry clearance application.



60. I have carefully considered the comments of the Tribunal in JG at paras
    89-91 which read:


          "89.     Section   117B(6)   concerns   an   assessment   of   the
              reasonableness of a child's leaving the  United  Kingdom.  It
              does not expressly demand an assessment of reasonableness  by
              reference to the length of time the child is expected  to  be
              outside the United Kingdom. In the light of paragraphs 18 and
              19 of KO (Nigeria), the child's destination and future are to
              be assumed to be with the person who is being removed.  In  a
              case where the respondent's position is that the  person  who
              is being removed can be expected to make an  entry  clearance
              application, does this require the Tribunal's  assessment  to
              take this into account, in determining whether  it  would  be
              reasonable for the child to leave? There may, obviously, be a
              good deal of difference between a child  living  outside  the
              United  Kingdom  for  a  matter  of  months  and  facing   an
              indefinite period abroad.


          90.     We did not hear submissions  on  this  specific  question.
              Certainly, Mr Malik did not advance it as a  reason  why,  if
              his construction of section  117B(6)  were  not  adopted,  it
              would nevertheless be reasonable for the children to leave.


          91.     In the circumstances, we do not consider it  necessary  to
              resolve the question; at  least,   in  its  stark  form.  The
              Chikwamba principle is predicated  on  the  assumption  that,
              where there are children, it is not envisaged that they would
              be expected to go and stay with the parent concerned,  whilst
              the latter makes  an  application  for  entry  clearance.  To
              envisage otherwise would be almost to stand the principle  on
              its head."

61. Mr Tufan is correct to say that the Tribunal's observations at paras 89-
    91 of JG were obiter and that the Tribunal did not hear submissions  on
    the point. Nevertheless, these observations deserve respect. I did hear
    submissions, albeit only in brief. I was  not  referred  to  any  other
    authorities.

62. Section 117b(6) reads:


          (6)     In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
              the public interest does not require the person's removal
              where-


            (a)   the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                   relationship with a qualifying child, and
            (b)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
              the United Kingdom.

63. In my view, if it had been intended to limit the ambit of  s.117B(6)(b)
    so that parents of qualifying children who  can  reasonably  leave  the
    United Kingdom for a temporary period whilst the parent makes an  entry
    clearance application are excluded from benefiting from s.117B(6),  one
    would expect Parliament to have said so. In the absence of any words of
    qualification, I draw the inference that "leave the United Kingdom"  in
    s.117B(6)(b) refers to a child leaving the United Kingdom in  order  to
    live, permanently, elsewhere.

64. I  therefore  do  not  accept  Mr  Tufan's  submission  concerning  the
    construction of s.117B(6)(b). I agree with Mr Slatter on this point.

65. The  second  general  issue  of  principle  concerns  whether,  in  its
    consideration of reasonableness for the  purposes  of  s.117B(6)(b)  as
    well  as  in  conducting  the  balancing  exercise   in   relation   to
    proportionality, the Tribunal is precluded (as  Mr  Slatter  submitted)
    from  considering  whether  it  is  reasonable  for  the  parent  of  a
    qualifying child who is entitled to live in the United Kingdom and  who
    is not subject to removal action to leave the United Kingdom  with  the
    child and the other parent in order to enjoy family life elsewhere  (my
    para 44 above). Mr Slatter's submission was based on paras 18-19 of  KO
    (Nigeria) which read:

          "18.    On the other hand, as the IDI  guidance  acknowledges,  it
              seems to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to  consider
              where the parents, apart from  the  relevant  provision,  are
              expected to be, since it will normally be reasonable for  the
              child to be with them. To  that  extent  the  record  of  the
              parents may become indirectly material, if it leads to  their
              ceasing to have a right to remain here, and having to  leave.
              It is only if, even on  that  hypothesis,  it  would  not  be
              reasonable for the child to leave that the provision may give
              the parents a right to remain. The point  was  well-expressed
              by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for  the
              Home Department 2017 SLT 1245:


                  "22. In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment  of
                       whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave
                       the UK one has to address the  question,  'Why  would
                       the child be expected to leave the  United  Kingdom?'
                       In a case such as this there can only be one  answer:
                       'because the parents have no right to remain  in  the
                       UK'. To approach the question in any other way strips
                       away  the  context  in  which   the   assessment   of
                       reasonableness is being made ..."


          19.     He noted (para 21) that Lewison  LJ  had  made  a  similar
              point in considering the "best interests" of children in  the
              context  of  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
              Immigration Act 2009 in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of State
              for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:


                  "58. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best
                       interests of the children must be made on  the  basis
                       that the facts are as they are in the real world.  If
                       one parent has no right  to  remain,  but  the  other
                       parent does, that is the background against which the
                       assessment is conducted. If neither  parent  has  the
                       right to remain, then that is the background  against
                       which the assessment is conducted. Thus the  ultimate
                       question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
                       child to follow the parent with no right to remain to
                       the country of origin?"


          To the extent that Elias LJ may have  suggested  otherwise  in  MA
          (Pakistan) para  40,  I  would  respectfully  disagree.  There  is
          nothing in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is  to  be
          considered otherwise than in the real world in which the  children
          find themselves.

66. Para 19 of the judgment in KO (Nigeria) approves  of  para  58  of  the
    Court of Appeal's judgment in EV (Philippines) where  Lewison  LJ  said
    that "the best interests of a child must be assessed on the basis  that
    the facts are as they are in the real world" and that  "If  one  parent
    has no right to  remain,  but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
    background against which the assessment is conducted".

67. In my judgement, it is simply impossible to draw from paras 18-19 of KO
    (Nigeria) any authority for the proposition Mr Slatter relies upon.  An
    assessment of the facts "as they are in the real  world"  must  include
    consideration of whether  it  is  reasonable  for  the  parent  who  is
    entitled to remain in the United Kingdom to leave  the  United  Kingdom
    with the parent facing removal. If  Mr  Slatter  is  correct,  and  the
    circumstances of the parent entitled to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
    are left out of account, this may (depending on the facts) work to  the
    detriment of the parent facing removal. For example, suppose the parent
    entitled to remain suffers from an illness for which he or she would be
    unable to access suitable treatment in the third country. It  would  be
    wrong to leave this out of account in assessing  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable for a qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom  for  the
    purposes of s.117B(6)(b). Plainly, this would be relevant  in  deciding
    whether it is reasonable to expect the qualifying child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

68. I have therefore concluded that the Tribunal's duty to assess the facts
    as they are in the real world does not  preclude  it  from  considering
    whether it would be reasonable  for  a  British  citizen  parent  of  a
    qualifying child to enjoy family life with the  child  and  the  parent
    facing removal outside the United Kingdom in  reaching  its  conclusion
    whether it would be reasonable for the qualifying child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom for the purposes of s.117B(6)(b) of the 2002 Act and  in
    reaching its decision on proportionality, if that issue is  reached.  I
    reject Mr Slatter's submission on this point.

69. The third general issue of principle concerns Mr Slatter's  submission,
    in reliance upon the extracts of the respondent's policies set  out  at
    my paras 41-42 above, that is the respondent's position that it is  not
    reasonable for a British citizen child to leave the United Kingdom  and
    that, on this basis alone, s.117B(6)(b) is satisfied.

70. I have no hesitation in rejecting this submission. It is simply  wrong.
    The policy dated 22 February 2018 has been withdrawn. The version dated
    19 December 2018 does not yet take into account JG.

71. In addition, Mr Slatter's submission, in reliance upon para 23  of  the
    Error of law decision, that the respondent  "expects"  the  appellant's
    children to remain in the  United  Kingdom  and  therefore  it  is  not
    reasonable to "expect" them to leave the United Kingdom is based  on  a
    misunderstanding of the panel's use of the  word  "expect".  The  panel
    made it clear at para 23 of the Error of law decision that there was no
    acceptance by the respondent that it would not be  reasonable  for  the
    appellant's children to leave the United Kingdom.

72. Before turning to assess the evidence, I make  it  clear  that  I  have
    considered all of  the  evidence  before  me.  This  comprises  of  the
    respondent's bundle, the appellant's bundles A, B and C  and  the  oral
    evidence given before the judge (summarised in her decision) and before
    me. It is for the appellant to establish that the decision is  unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. The standard of proof  is
    the balance of probabilities. Since this appeal affects two children, I
    have kept in mind throughout my assessment  the  duty  to  promote  and
    safeguard the best interests of the children as a primary,  though  not
    paramount, consideration. I have also taken into account the impact  of
    the decision on FB.

The  first  issue  -  assessment  of  reasonableness  for  the  purposes  of
s.117B(6)(b)

73. I shall first assess credibility and make relevant findings of fact.

74. I did not find the appellant and her husband credible  in  relation  to
    the evidence concerning X's claimed speech impediment. The NELFT letter
    indicates that X attended one block of five speech and language therapy
    sessions. When asked how long X had attended the school where  she  was
    found to have a speech impediment, the appellant said that it  will  be
    two years this summer that X has been attending the school. This  means
    X has been attending this school since summer 2017. The hearing  before
    the judge took place in June 2018. There  was  no  mention  before  the
    judge of any speech impediment. It is simply incredible that, if X  had
    had a speech impediment to the extent claimed by the appellant and  FB,
    i.e. that she did not say words and could only say  a  few  words,  the
    appellant and FB would not have mentioned it in their evidence  at  the
    hearing before the judge.  At  para  19  of  her  decision,  the  judge
    recorded that the appellant had said that  both  children  could  speak
    both English and Albanian. That  was  a  perfect  opportunity  for  the
    appellant to have mentioned the concerns that both she and FB said they
    had raised with the school but the appellant failed to  mention  it  at
    the hearing in the FtT.

75. Plainly, there is a gap in timing. According to the  evidence  of  both
    the appellant and FB, they raised their concerns about X's speech  when
    they took her to her present  school.  Given  that  she  first  started
    attending this school (according to the appellant's evidence) in summer
    2017, they either did not raise it in summer  2017  or,  if  they  did,
    nothing was done about it until recently, before  the  first  block  of
    sessions started. Either they delayed raising  their  concerns  or  the
    authorities delayed  in  arranging  the  speech  and  language  therapy
    sessions. Neither scenario is credible.

76. FB was asked several times  whether  there  was  any  report  from  the
    psychologist before X commenced her first block of  five  sessions.  He
    was evasive in his replies (see my summary at paras  27-30  above).  He
    had to be asked several times before he finally said that there was  no
    report from the psychologist before X  commenced  the  first  block  of
    sessions. He was then asked to confirm that it was  his  evidence  that
    there was no report from the psychologist before X commenced the  first
    block of sessions. His evidence that  there  was  no  report  from  the
    psychologist contradicts the appellant's evidence that there was such a
    report before X commenced the speech  and  language  therapy  sessions.
    This is a material aspect of their case.

77. When the appellant was asked why the psychologist's report had not been
    submitted, she said that she had given the  psychologist's  report  and
    all of the letters that she had received to her solicitors,  the  clear
    implication being that, if the report was not in the bundle before  us,
    the fault lay with her solicitors. However, as I have  said,  according
    to FB's evidence, there was no such report from the psychologist.

78. There is no medical evidence at all to confirm  that  X  has  a  speech
    impediment. The letter which the appellant and FB both  said  they  had
    received stating that it was necessary for X to attend another block of
    sessions was not submitted, the appellant saying that she had forgotten
    it and left it at home. This is important when one considers  the  fact
    that the NELFT letter states that X had "fully"  achieved  two  of  the
    aims of the therapy sessions and "mostly" achieved the  remaining  five
    aims.

79. I take into account also the fact that  the  first  block  of  sessions
    commenced on 10 January 2019 just a month before  the  "error  of  law"
    hearing on 12 February 2019.

80. On the whole of the evidence before me, I find that  it  has  not  been
    shown that X has a serious speech impediment or that she  requires  any
    further speech and language therapy sessions.

81. At the hearing before the judge, FB was asked whether he  would  return
    to Kosovo. He said (para 21 of the judge's decision):


          "21.    .... [FB] stated that he would not want to go back but  if
              he had to he  would  do  so  in  order  to  keep  his  family
              together. He stated that  it  would  be  extremely  difficult
              returning to Kosovo as he would have no  means,  finances  or
              property to start his life over again. He  would  be  placing
              his children into a situation of poverty."

82. However, at the hearing before me, FB said  (para  33  above)  that  he
    could not follow the appellant to Kosovo because his  children  are  in
    school in the United Kingdom and everything they need is in the  United
    Kingdom. Asked to explain why he had said at the hearing before the FtT
    that, if he had to do so in order to keep his family together, he would
    return to Kosovo, he said that his children are now in school and that,
    at the time of the hearing before the FtT, X was attending a play group
    and Y was not attending any play group or school.

83. I do not accept FB's evidence before me reflects a  genuine  change  of
    mind and/or intention. It is clear from the evidence he gave before the
    judge that he had the circumstances of his  children  in  mind.  Y  was
    already attending a play group and it would therefore have been in  his
    reasonable contemplation that, if he returned to Kosovo  to  live  with
    his family, both of his children would have to access  educational  and
    medical services in Kosovo and lose the opportunity of accessing  these
    services in the United Kingdom.

84. On the whole of the evidence, I find that the evidence FB  gave  before
    the judge about his intentions was true and the evidence he gave before
    me was feigned because he now realises that the evidence he gave before
    the judge worked against the appellant. I find, as  a  fact,  that,  FB
    would return to Kosovo to keep his family together.

85. In any event, I find that it is reasonable for FB to relocate to Kosovo
    with the appellant and his children in order to enjoy  family  life  in
    Kosovo, for the following reasons:

    (i)     Mr Slatter relied upon the fact that FB is  a  British  citizen
        and has been living in the United Kingdom since 2000 in support  of
        his submission that it would not be reasonable for FB  to  relocate
        the Kosovo to enjoy family life with the  appellant.  However,  the
        fact is that decided cases on Article 8 provide  many  examples  of
        cases in which it was considered  reasonable  for  British  citizen
        spouses and partners who were born in the United Kingdom  and  have
        lived all of their lives in the United Kingdom to relocate  outside
        the United Kingdom to enjoy family life whereas  FB  was  born  and
        brought up in Kosovo.

    (ii)    If FB were to relocate to Kosovo, there is  no  reason  why  he
        should not be able to start a business there. It is  true  that  he
        has lived in the United Kingdom for 19 years  but  he  nevertheless
        grew up in Kosovo from birth until the age of 26/27 years.  On  the
        judge's findings, there are a number of family members  in  Kosovo,
        both on the appellant's and FB's side. The appellant's mother,  two
        brothers and a sister live in Kosovo, although  I  note  that  they
        have families and children  of  their  own  (paragraph  20  of  the
        judge's decision). FB also has immediate family  in  Kosovo.  There
        are therefore family  homes  they  can  access,  at  least  in  the
        immediate future until they re-establish themselves, as  the  judge
        found (para 22 of the judge's decision).

86. Accordingly, I find that FB is willing to return to Kosovo and that, in
    any event, it would be reasonable for him to do so. This means that the
    family unit would be kept  together.  The  appellant's  children  would
    continue to  be  with  both  parents,  as  is  plainly  in  their  best
    interests.

87. Although there is no report from a social worker, it would  plainly  be
    in the  best  interests  of  the  children  for  their  current  stable
    environment, in which both parents are present playing their respective
    parts, to continue. I take their  best  interests  into  account  as  a
    primary consideration. I have already given my reasons for finding that
    FB would relocate to Kosovo with the appellant  and  the  children  and
    that, in any event, it would be reasonable for him to do so.

88. In considering the circumstances of each of the children, the fact that
    they are British citizens is an important factor.  I  was  referred  to
    para 30 of ZH (Tanzania) which I take into account and which reads:


          "30.    Although nationality is  not  a  "trump  card"  it  is  of
              particular importance in assessing the best interests of  any
              child. The UNCRC recognises the right of every  child  to  be
              registered and acquire  a  nationality  (Article  7)  and  to
              preserve her identity, including her nationality (Article 8).
              In Wan, the Federal Court of Australia, pointed out  at  para
              30 that, when considering the  possibility  of  the  children
              accompanying their father to  China,  the  tribunal  had  not
              considered any of the  following  matters,  which  the  Court
              clearly regarded as important:


                  "(a)  the  fact  that  the  children,  as   citizens   of
                  Australia, would be deprived of the country of their  own
                  and their mother's citizenship, 'and  of  its  protection
                  and support, socially, culturally and medically,  and  in
                  many other ways evoked by, but not confined to, the broad
                  concept  of   lifestyle'   (Vaitaiki   v   Minister   for
                  Immigration and Ethnic Affairs [1998] FCA 5,  (1998)  150
                  ALR 608, 614);


                  (b) the resultant social  and  linguistic  disruption  of
                  their childhood as well as the loss of their homeland;


                  (c) the loss of educational  opportunities  available  to
                  the children in Australia; and


                  (d) their resultant isolation from the normal contacts of
                  children with their mother and their mother's family."

89. Plainly, if the appellant's children were to go to Kosovo to live, they
    would lose out on  the  opportunities  of  growing  up  in  the  United
    Kingdom, the country of their nationality, not to mention the  loss  of
    educational opportunities and medical services available to children in
    the United Kingdom.

90. On the other hand, it is clear from the  appellant's  evidence  at  the
    hearing before the judge as well as her evidence at the hearing  before
    me that both children speak Albanian. Accordingly, as the judge said at
    para 19 of her decision, neither of the children will face  a  language
    barrier. They are very young, X being about 4 years old and Y  about  3
    years old. They have not commenced  mainstream  education.  Given  that
    they are very young, their primary focus will be their parents, as  the
    judge found at para 19 of her decision. In addition, X and  Y  will  be
    able to establish relationships with their cousins, aunts,  uncles  and
    grandmother in Kosovo.

91. I have already found that it has not been shown that X  has  a  serious
    speech impediment or that she requires any further speech and  language
    therapy sessions. However, it has to be said that, even if  she  is  in
    need of further speech and language therapy sessions, there  is  simply
    no background evidence to show that this would not be available to  her
    in Kosovo. Both the appellant and FB said that such therapy  would  not
    be available. However, the judge made an adverse credibility assessment
    and I did not find them credible in their  evidence  about  X's  speech
    impediment.

92. It has not been suggested that Y suffers from any difficulties or  that
    she has any needs. It has not been suggested  that  X  and  Y  are  not
    entitled to live in Kosovo as the appellant's children even  if  (which
    has not been shown) FB no longer has the nationality of his birth.

93. On the whole of the evidence, and considering the circumstances of each
    child separately, I find that it would be reasonable for X and for Y to
    leave the United Kingdom.

94. Accordingly, s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act does not apply.

The second issue - proportionality

95. In relation to the five-step approach explained in R  (Razgar)  v  SSHD
    (2004) UKHL 27, it is clear that the judge accepted that the  appellant
    enjoyed family life with her husband and two  children  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The appellant has been living in the United  Kingdom  since  6
    October 2013 when she arrived with leave as FB's spouse valid  from  22
    August 2013 until 22 November 2015. Her family  life  and  her  private
    life were established at a time when she had leave as a spouse. She was
    on a path to settlement, albeit that she did not have settled status at
    the time. On the very limited evidence before me concerning the quality
    of the appellant's private life, I find that her private life  ties  in
    the United Kingdom are very weak.

96. Plainly, the second and third  steps  are  satisfied.  The  real  issue
    concerns the balancing exercise in relation to  the  fourth  and  fifth
    steps. The question  is  whether  the  circumstances  are  sufficiently
    compelling  to  reach  the  conclusion  that  the   decision   produces
    unjustifiably harsh consequences such as  to  amount  to  a  breach  of
    Article 8.

97. In the assessment of proportionality,  it  is  relevant  to  take  into
    account that the appellant does not satisfy the Immigration Rules.  The
    panel set out at para 4 of the Error of law decision  the  respondent's
    reasons for refusing the appellant's application under the  Immigration
    Rules. It was accepted before the judge that the appellant did not meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules (para 5 of the Error  of  law
    decision and para 14 of the judge's decision).

98. Given that the Immigration Rules are not satisfied, a very strong  case
    is required in order to outweigh the  public  interest  in  immigration
    control.

99. When the Error of law decision was made, the sole issue was  stated  to
    be s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act. It is in that context that the panel  set
    out the findings that were to stand at para 30 of its  decision.  Since
    the behaviour of the appellant in submitting a  false  certificate  was
    not relevant to an assessment of reasonableness  for  the  purposes  of
    s.117B(6)(b),  the  panel  omitted  the  judge's  assessment   of   the
    credibility of the appellant's evidence concerning the reasons why  she
    submitted a false certificate, at para 25 of her decision.

100. Given that it was agreed  between  Mr  Slatter  and  Mr  Tufan  at  the
    hearing before me that, if I found (as I have) that  s.117B(6)  of  the
    2002 Act is not satisfied, I would have to consider proportionality and
    therefore take into account the public interest arising on  account  of
    the fact that the appellant had submitted a false  certificate,  it  is
    necessary for me to take into account the judge's reasoning in relation
    to the appellant's deception.

101. The judge rejected the appellant's explanation  that  she  had  thought
    that obtaining  the  test  certificate  in  the  way  she  had  was  an
    "alternative way of meeting the test". It is also clear that she  found
    that there was a deliberate  act  of  deception  on  the  part  of  the
    appellant to which her husband had agreed, i.e. she found that both the
    appellant and FB had agreed to undertake the course of action that  she
    took. I take this into account in deciding the weight to be  placed  on
    the public interest.

102. In my consideration of proportionality and the  balancing  exercise,  I
    also take into account, and consider afresh, my assessment and findings
    in relation to the first issue. There is no need for me  to  repeat  it
    all. When I say I have considered everything afresh, I mean just  that,
    the difference being that I am now conducting a balancing  exercise  in
    order to answer a different question, i.e. the question set out  at  my
    para 96 above. I also take into account the  appellant's  private  life
    and family life established in the United Kingdom,  established  whilst
    she had leave as a spouse and was on a  path  to  settlement,  and  the
    length of her residence.

103. Having taken everything into account, I have  concluded  that,  on  the
    whole of the evidence before me and for the reasons I have  given,  the
    respondent's   decision   is   not   disproportionate.   It   is    not
    disproportionate for the appellant, FB and their two young children  to
    relocate to Kosovo in order to enjoy family life  in  Kosovo.  This  is
    determinative of the second issue, irrespective of my observations  and
    findings at paras 104-106 below.

104. I turn to the question whether it is reasonable  for  FB  to  accompany
    the appellant and his children to Kosovo  whilst  she  makes  an  entry
    clearance application. I have considered Chikwamba and Chen.  Chikwamba
    can be readily be distinguished. There was  no  question  of  deception
    having been deployed by the claimant in Chikwamba. Her  husband  was  a
    refugee and therefore the United Kingdom was the only  place  in  which
    they  could  safely  enjoy  family  life.  It  was  accepted  that  any
    application for entry clearance was bound to succeed.

105. In the instant case, it simply cannot be said that an  entry  clearance
    application would be bound to succeed, as the appellant has not  passed
    the relevant English language and "Life in the UK"  tests.  Mr  Slatter
    sought to suggest that  the  respondent  ought  to  have  released  the
    appellant's passport. However,  Mr  Tufan  said  that  she  could  have
    requested the respondent to provide her with  a  certified  copy  which
    would have enabled her to sit for the relevant tests.  I  have  to  say
    that Mr Slatter's submission simply ignores the  judge's  reasoning  at
    para 27 where she considered the appellant's explanation that she would
    learn English but that she is taking care of the children for now.  The
    judge considered that the appellant had done very  littlie  during  the
    period from 2015 when her application was made and August 2017 when the
    decision was made to rectify the position in  terms  of  improving  her
    language skills; that the appellant has young children but one of  them
    attends -pre-school; and that she has a supportive  husband  who  could
    assist. Furthermore, as Mr Tufan submitted, the  appellant  could  have
    requested the respondent to provide her with a certified  copy  of  her
    passport to facilitate her enrolment for  the  tests.  In  all  of  the
    circumstances, I find that the appellant finds herself in the  position
    of being unable to meet the English language  requirement  because  she
    has made very little effort to help herself.

106.  Given  that  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the   English   language
    requirement, it cannot be said that an application for entry  clearance
    would succeed. This is relevant. The appellant has young  children.  As
    the Upper Tribunal observed in Chen, it may be easier to  show  that  a
    decision is disproportionate  if  children  will  be  impacted  by  it.
    Nonetheless, Chikwamba can  be  distinguished  for  the  reasons  given
    earlier.

107. Mr Slatter's submission (para 51  above)  that  it  has  not  been  the
    respondent's case that the appellant should  make  an  entry  clearance
    application ignores the fact that the  issue  falls  for  consideration
    when the Tribunal considers proportionality, if it is relevant, whether
    or not the respondent raises it.

108. Finally, if s.117B(6)(b) of the  2002  Act  is  not  satisfied,  it  is
    difficult to see how an appellant can establish a  sufficiently  strong
    case to outweigh the public interest in immigration control, given that
    the  balancing  exercise  in  relation  to   proportionality   requires
    consideration  of  any  relevant  public   interest   factors   whereas
    reasonableness for the purposes of s.117B(6)(b) does not.

109. The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.


      Decision

    The decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Mace  involved  the
    making of any error of law sufficient to require it to  be  set  aside.
    The decision was set aside.


    I  re-make  the  decision  on  the  appellant's  appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision by dismissing it.



[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                          Date:  24 April 2019
