
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/10798/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27 November 2017                       |On 29 November 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                 RASIM GJOKA
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms B. Maistry, Counsel instructed by ABM Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr P. Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the  respondent's  decision  dated  28  October
    2015 to refuse a human rights claim in the context  of  an  application
    for further leave to remain as a person exercising access rights  to  a
    child.

2.    In a decision promulgated on 06 August 2017 I  set  aside  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision because inadequate consideration  was  given  to
    the best interests of the children in circumstances where the  evidence
    indicated that the appellant had  made  some  efforts  to  re-establish
    contact with them, albeit  at  that  time,  rather  slow  and  sporadic
    efforts. The First-tier Tribunal decision was set aside and the  appeal
    listed for a resumed hearing to allow time for the appellant to produce
    evidence of the current situation.

3.    The appellant's bundle included a number of pieces  of  correspondence
    from a solicitor who is advising him in relation to family law matters.
    The correspondence shows that they have recently been able  to  contact
    the mother of the appellant's children in order to begin the process of
    re-establishing contact pursuant to a family court order dated 28 March
    2012. The appellant's evidence is that his former  partner  moved  away
    and that he was unable to establish contact with her for some time. The
    family court has given permission for the  order  to  be  disclosed  in
    these proceedings. The order stated that  the  children  were  to  have
    monthly contact with their father at a specific contact centre and made
    provision for increasing contact if certain conditions were met.

4.    Mr Duffy accepted that the evidence showed  that  it  was  appropriate
    for limited leave to be granted to allow  the  appellant  time  to  re-
    establish contact with his children. I indicated that it had also  been
    my provisional view that refusal of leave to remain did  not  strike  a
    fair balance in relation  to  the  appellant's  family  life  with  his
    children given the current evidence showing that his solicitors are now
    in  negotiation  with  the  children's  mother  about   re-establishing
    contact. In light of the concession made at the hearing, it is a matter
    for the respondent to decide what period of  limited  leave  to  remain
    should be granted. Mr Gjoka is aware that he will  need  to  show  that
    there has been  real  progress  in  re-establishing  contact  with  his
    children if and when he applies to extend any period of  limited  leave
    that might be granted following this decision.

5.    I am satisfied that the decision is unlawful under section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998 because it does not strike a fair balance between
    the  appellant's  right  to  family  life  and  the  public  policy  of
    maintaining and effective system of immigration control.

DECISION

The appeal is ALLOWED on human rights grounds


Signed   [pic]   Date   27 November 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan





