
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/10823/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 28 July 2017                        |     On 29 August 2017               |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                         ms Olajumoke Adesola Aluko
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Garrod of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  3  March  1979.   The
    appellant entered the United  Kingdom  on  29  September  2005  with  a
    student visa valid until 31 January 2007.  She thereafter  applied  for
    leave to remain as a student nurse and was granted leave valid until 30
    April 2008.  On 17 September 2008 the appellant applied  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 General Migrant and was granted a visa  valid  until
    22 March 2013.

 2. On 14 March 2013 the  appellant  applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student.  That application was  refused.   On  18  September  2013  the
    appellant applied for leave to remain outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
    That application also was refused.  On 11 February 2014 the  appellant
    was served with form IS151A.  On 24 February 2014 the appellant applied
    for leave to remain on a human rights basis.   She  was  granted  leave
    outside the Immigration Rules until 7 August 2015.

 3. On 6 August 2015 she made a  human  rights  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of her daughter's time  spent
    in the UK and in order to attend her PhD degree  ceremony  in  December
    2015.  The respondent refused the appellant's application on 28 October
    2015.  It is that decision that the appellant appealed against  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. In a decision promulgated on 13 December 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Colyer dismissed the appellant's appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal found
    that it would not be unreasonable for the appellant's daughter,  D,  to
    leave the United Kingdom,  that  the  appellant  did  not  satisfy  the
    requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and   that   it   would   be
    proportionate to expect her  and  her  daughter  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant applied for permission to  appeal  against  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision.

 5. On 13 June  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

 6. The grounds of appeal assert that the  issue  is  very  narrow,  namely
    whether the reasonableness test  applied  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was correct in law.  It is stated that the child has been in  the
    UK for over seven years, that the child's father is estranged and  that
    these facts were accepted by all the parties.

 7. It is submitted that the only issue is at paragraphs  70  to  89  where
    Judge Colyer states why it would be reasonable to expect the  child  to
    leave the United Kingdom and applies an  unduly  harsh  test  which  is
    incorrect as the test is reasonableness.

 8. It is asserted that the judge materially erred in law because the  Home
    Office policy clearly states that it would not be reasonable to  expect
    a British child to leave the UK.  Reference is made to the  Immigration
    Directorate Instruction Family Migration: Appendix FM, Section 10.0(b):
    Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: Ten Year Routes:
    August 2015.

 9. The appellant asserts that what could not be considered  would  be  the
    conduct and immigration history of the parents - MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705 at paragraph  47.   Reference  is  made  to  the  case  of
    Treebhawon and Others (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674 (IAC) and it is
    submitted that if the criteria in 117B(6) are met then Article  8  will
    be infringed,  no  further  balancing  consideration  is  needed.   The
    grounds assert that the starting point of an assessment of a  child  in
    the UK who has seven years' residence is to remain in the UK as part of
    the family unit.

10. It is asserted that Judge Colyer  erred  in  law  at  paragraph  84  in
    stating that "I find the welfare and best interests of the  appellant's
    child would be to continue to live  with  and  be  brought  up  by  the
    mother".  This is not the test to follow. The deep roots  developed  by
    the child  are  well  established  in  the  evidence.  The  seven  year
    residency of a child needs to be given significant weight -paragraph 49
    of MA (Pakistan).

11. It is submitted that the fact a child has been  in  the  UK  for  seven
    years would need to be given significant weight in the  proportionality
    exercise.  Judge Colyer's  approach  to  the  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the child was materially wrong.  Reference is made to  the
    case of PD and Others (Article 8 - conjoined family claims) Sri  Lanka
    [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC) at paragraph 43.  It is submitted that the First-
    tier Tribunal has failed to assess the exceptionality and the impact on
    the family unit.  It is asserted that at paragraph 34 of  the  decision
    the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in concluding  that  Section  117B
    applied only to a child who is a British citizen or has settled status.



12. In oral submissions  Mr  Garrod  adopted  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
    submitted that there were two key  issues.   Everything  considered  by
    Judge  Colyer  was  seen  through  the  prism  of  the  appellant,  not
    considered through D's interests in her own right.  At the date of  the
    hearing D had been in the United Kingdom for seven years and Article  8
    requires matters to be considered as at the date of  the  hearing.   He
    referred to paragraph 13 of MA (Pakistan) which makes that  clear.   He
    submitted that throughout the decision the judge has failed to consider
    reasonableness correctly.  There is no consideration of the evidence of
    the witnesses and there is no findings with regard  to  the  effect  on
    those witnesses of D's removal from the United Kingdom.   He  submitted
    that in accordance with Beoku-Betts (FC)  (Appellant)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2005]EWCA Civ 828  the  judge  ought  to
    have considered the effect on those witnesses.

13. He submitted that the whole approach taken by the judge  was  to  treat
    117B(6) as not applicable.  The principles in Treebhawon set  out  that
    the test is whether it would be reasonable for the child to be expected
    to leave the UK. The conduct and the immigration history of the parents
    cannot be taken into consideration.  The judge considered matters based
    on the appellant's rights, rather than the rights  of  the  child.   He
    submitted that the  approach  the  judge  took  was  deficient  as  the
    interests of the child were not at the forefront.  He  referred  to  MA
    (Pakistan) at paragraph 13 where it stated that if it is  in  the  best
    interests of the child to remain in the United Kingdom then that should
    decide the matter.  He referred to  paragraph  14  of  the  grounds  of
    appeal and said that the balancing exercise has not taken place by  the
    judge in light of the child's interests.

14. Mr Armstrong relied on the Rule 24  response  and  submitted  that  the
    judge has considered all the matters and that the grounds amount  to  a
    disagreement with the findings of the judge.   He  submitted  that  the
    assessment made by the judge of reasonableness  was  considered  fully.
    It was not a failure of the judge to consider the appellant's  position
    as well, as that links into whether or not it is reasonable  to  expect
    the child to leave the United Kingdom.  For example, the ability of the
    appellant to integrate into Nigeria will factor into  a  reasonableness
    assessment and into the assessment of the best interests of the  child.



15. He submitted that when considering the case of MA (Pakistan) as a whole
    it is clear that the conduct of the parents is  a  relevant  factor  to
    take into consideration in the proportionality assessment.  He referred
    to paragraphs 88 and 107.  He submitted that the fact  that  the  child
    has been in the United  Kingdom  for  seven  years,  whilst  attracting
    considerable weight, is only one factor to be taken into consideration.
     The appellant from 22 March 2013 was an overstayer and  that  she  had
    been encountered in 2014 and served with IS15A.

16. He submitted that  the  judge  applied  the  reasonableness  test  when
    considering the application outside the Immigration Rules and that  the
    judge has given a number of reasons for reaching his  conclusions.   He
    referred to the case of AM Pakistan and Others [2017] EWCA Civ 180.  He
    submitted the appellant came here as a student,  her  stay  was  always
    precarious, she had her daughter against  the  backdrop  of  having  no
    expectation that she could stay in  the  United  Kingdom  indefinitely.
    She is no longer in a relationship with the child's father.  He has  no
    status in the United Kingdom according  to  the  appellant's  evidence.
    The appellant and her daughter have parents and grandparents and  other
    relatives in Nigeria. The appellant is highly  educated  and  can  find
    employment in Nigeria.

17. Mr Garrod in reply submitted that the  judge  has  not  considered  the
    child's father and whether it is in the best interests of the child  to
    have both parents.  He submitted that no proper consideration has  been
    given to the relationship with the father.

Discussion

18. The core of the appellant's appeal  is  the  judge's  approach  to  and
    application of the reasonableness test. The reasonableness test  arises
    under both paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and under s117B(6)
    of the 2002 Act. However, the child had not been in the UK for 7  years
    at the date of application so  does  not  satisfy  the  requirement  in
    276ADE (iv). Both sides relied on the case of MA (Pakistan).

19. In MA (Pakistan) the court of appeal  considered  how  a  court  should
    approach the reasonableness test. The approach in Treebhawon (the  2015
    decision) (i.e. that s117B(6) precluded  consideration  of  the  public
    interest issues in 117B(1)-(3)) was not approved. The court held:
         45. However, the approach I favour is inconsistent  with  the  very
         recent decision of the Court of Appeal in MM  (Uganda) where  the
         court came down firmly in favour of the approach urged upon  us  by
         Ms Giovannetti, and I do not think that we ought to depart from it.
         In my judgment, if the court should have regard to the  conduct  of
         the applicant and any other matters relevant to the public interest
         when applying the "unduly harsh" concept under section 117C(5),  so
         should it when considering the  question  of  reasonableness  under
         section 117B(6). I recognise that the provisions  in  section  117C
         are directed towards the particular considerations which have to be
         borne in mind in the case of foreign criminals, and it is true that
         the court placed some weight on section 117C(2) which  states  that
         the more serious the  offence,  the  greater  is  the  interest  in
         deportation of the prisoner. But the critical point is that section
         117C(5) is in substance a free-standing provision in the  same  way
         as section 117B(6), and even so the court in MM (Uganda) held that
         wider public interest considerations must  be  taken  into  account
         when applying the "unduly harsh" criterion. It seems to me that  it
         must be equally so with respect to the reasonableness criterion  in
         section 117B(6). It would not be appropriate  to  distinguish  that
         decision simply because I have reservations whether it is  correct.
         Accordingly, in line with the approach in that case, I will analyse
         the appeals on the basis that the Secretary of  State's  submission
         on this point is correct and that the only significance of  section
         117B(6) is that where the seven year rule is  satisfied,  it  is  a
         factor of some weight leaning in favour of leave  to  remain  being
         granted.[emphasis added]

  21. It is clear that when assessing reasonableness either under  paragraph
      276ADE(iv) or s117B(6)  the  conduct  of  the  appellant  and  matters
      relevant to the public interest should be taken into consideration.

  22. The court of appeal emphasised that the fact that a child has been  in
      the UK for seven years must be given significant weight when  carrying
      out the proportionality exercise (paragraph 46).

  23. With regard to the best interests assessment the court held:

         47. ... Even where the child's best interests are to stay,  it  may
         still be not unreasonable to require the child to leave. That  will
         depend upon a careful analysis of the  nature  and  extent  of  the
         links in the UK and in the country where it is proposed  he  should
         return. What could not be considered, however, would be the conduct
         and immigration history of the parents...

         ...
         ...There is nothing intrinsically illogical in the notion that
         whilst the child's best interests are for him or her to stay, it is
         not unreasonable to expect him or her to go. That is so even if the
         reasonableness test should be applied so as to exclude public
         interest considerations bearing upon the parents.



20. It is necessary to consider in some detail the approach of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal judge in this case.  There is certainly some looseness of
    language in parts of the  decision.  At  paragraph  34  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge set out:

         34.  ...Sub-Section (6) provides for the exceptional case where the
             public interest does not require the removal of a  person  who
             is not liable to deportation (i.e. the Home Secretary does not
             deem his deportation to be conducive to the public good) in  a
             case where (i)  he  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
             relationship with a child who is either a British  citizen  or
             has settled status and (ii) it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
             expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

21. The judge refers to settled status incorrectly  as  that  is  not  what
    Section 117B requires.  It might be that the judge was referring to the
    7 year residence requirement as settled status. However,  even  if  the
    judge was considering that a status other than the 7  year's  residence
    was the test I do not consider that this is a material error of law for
    the reasons which are set out below.

22. With regard  to  the  appellant's  daughter  the  judge  set  out  from
    paragraphs 48 to 54 the evidence that she had considered.  Later in the
    decision under a heading "the best interests of the  child"  the  judge
    set out:

    70.  The respondent and any other decision maker is obliged to consider
         and to take into account the need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
         welfare of children  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with
         Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

23. In paragraphs 71 and 72 the judge set out in some detail aspects of the
    relevant case law.  At paragraph 73 the judge set out the  respondent's
    decision when refusing to grant leave and  when  considering  the  best
    interests of the child.  At paragraph 79 the judge set out:

    79.  At the date of the appellant's application on 5  August  2015  the
         child was aged 6 years and 8 months.  She had not lived in  the  UK
         continuously for at least seven years and was not aged 18 years  or
         above and under 25 years of age and therefore the child  could  not
         meet the requirements of Rule 276ADE(iv) and 276ADE(v).

    80.  I have given consideration  to  the  child's  private  life  under
         Article 8 applying the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)  of  the
         Immigration Rules.  I find that at  the  date  of  the  appellant's
         application that the child had lived in the UK for  six  years  and
         eight months so she had not lived continuously in  the  UK  for  at
         least  twenty  years.   Consequently  she   fails   to   meet   the
         requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the Immigration  Rules.



    81.  A further area of relevant consideration is whether the  child  is
         likely to be  able  to  integrate  readily  into  life  in  another
         country.  I find that the children (sic) are citizen of Nigeria and
         both parents are also citizens of that country.  The appellant  and
         the child will be able to enjoy the full rights of  being  citizens
         of Nigeria.  It is probable that both parents have lived in Nigeria
         for their formative years.  I accept the evidence  that  the  child
         has not lived in Nigeria before however  she  is  young  enough  to
         adapt and therefore that this is  not  a  significant  factor.   In
         addition the child has been brought up in a Nigerian  household  in
         the United  Kingdom  and  therefore  Nigerian  culture  and  social
         considerations will be familiar to the child.

    82.  I find that it is not unreasonable for the child  to  relocate  to
         Nigeria with one or both parents and given her  dependency  on  her
         mother, whilst at a relatively young age  she  can  do  so  without
         facing undue hardship in the process.  I find that the child  fails
         to  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  of   the
         Immigration Rules.

    83.  Section 55  does  not  override  the  Immigration  Rules.   Public
         interest remains the starting point.  In this case the parents  and
         the child do not have settled status to be in the  United  Kingdom.
         It may be argued that the action of the parents should not  have  a
         direct impact on the child.  I accept that it  is  in  the  child's
         best interests that  she  accompany  the  mother  (the  appellant),
         therefore they would remain as a family unit and would  be  such  a
         unit living in Nigeria on removal to their country of  nationality.



    84.  I find that the welfare and  best  interests  of  the  appellant's
         child would be to continue to live with and to be brought up by her
         mother.  The child's removal with her parent does not  involve  any
         separation of family life.

    85.  I find that in the course of the time that the child has  been  in
         the UK some roots have been put down,  her  personal  identity  has
         started to be developed, some friendships were formed  and  limited
         links have been made with the community outside  the  family  unit.
         The child's ties are primarily with her mother, her school and  her
         church.  The child will remain with her mother; her  education  can
         continue in Nigeria as  can  her  participation  in  the  Christian
         Church.

    86.  This child is still in her very early years, and she is  primarily
         focused on self and the caring parent.  The child  has  started  to
         have formed ties outside the family through a school and church but
         she is still young and these ties are not yet so significant as  to
         outweigh the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

    87.  The commenced her family during a period of study in the UK and in
         the light of expectation of return.

    88.  I find the school reports indicate that the child  is  intelligent
         and able.  I find the ability of this  young  child  is  indicative
         that she will be able to adapt to life in a new  country  with  the
         help of her mother.

    89.  I find that it would not be unduly harsh to remove the child  with
         her mother as they would be removed as a family unit and the  child
         is still at a developmental age.  Integration in Nigeria would  not
         be difficult especially when returning to a country  that  embodies
         the same culture and language of the parents.

24. The judge was wrong  to  consider  that  the  public  interest  is  the
    starting point. I do not consider that this (if an  error  of  law)  is
    material as when analysing the approach of the judge it is  clear  that
    she has applied the relevant principles from the case law and has taken
    into account all the factors that are relevant when assessing what  D's
    best  interests  are.  Although  there  is  some  conflation   of   the
    consideration of best interests and the reasonableness  test,  many  of
    the  issues  are  pertinent  to  both.  The  judge  has  undertaken  an
    appropriate exercise to consider what the child's  best  interests  are
    under Section 55.  As set out above, at paragraph 84 the judge has made
    a finding that the welfare and best interests of the appellant's  child
    would be to continue to live with and to be brought up by  her  mother.
    The judge considered the evidence regarding her education,  friendships
    and the links she is starting  to  form  (outside  her  life  with  her
    mother)  with  the  community  and  church  when  assessing  her   best
    interests. As set out by the judge this is a 'child still in  her  very
    early years, and she is  primarily  focused  on  self  and  the  caring
    parent'. Looking at all the evidence taken into  consideration  by  the
    judge, her conclusion that D's best interests are to continue  to  live
    with and be brought up by her mother is  uncontroversial  and  to  some
    extent an inevitable conclusion on the facts of this case. The judge is
    not required to make a finding on  whether  or  not  the  child's  best
    interests are to remain in the UK as opposed to in another country.  In
    any event, as found in MA (Pakistan) it is not necessarily inconsistent
    even with a finding that a child's best interest are to remain  in  the
    UK for it to be considered reasonable for a  child  to  leave  the  UK.
    There was no error of law in the judge findings on D's best interests.

25. The judge has taken into consideration, when assessing whether  or  not
    it would be reasonable for D to leave the UK, the impact  upon  her  of
    settling in Nigeria. This includes consideration of how her mother will
    be able to integrate which is a relevant factor to  take  into  account
    when assessing reasonableness. I do not consider  that  the  judge  has
    approached either the best interests of the child or the reasonableness
    test through the prism of the appellant. The  judge  considered  issues
    such as the fact that D's education can continue in Nigeria as can  her
    participation in the Christian Church  into  account  as  well  as  the
    child's educational ability. These all factor into whether or not it is
    reasonable to expect D to leave the UK. Although  the  judge  considers
    that D can do so without facing undue hardship in the process this  was
    preceded by 'and'.  When that sentence is considered properly I do  not
    consider that the judge has applied an undue hardship test rather  than
    a reasonableness test. The judge found 'that it is not unreasonable for
    the child to relocate to Nigeria with one or both parents and given her
    dependency on her mother, whilst at a relatively young age she  can  do
    so without facing undue hardship in  the  process.'  Properly  analysed
    what the judge found was that in addition to it not being  unreasonable
    to leave the UK D could do so without undue harshness. If I am wrong on
    that there was in any event a clear separate finding that  it  was  not
    unreasonable for D to leave the  UK.  There  was  no  evidence  of  any
    particular difficulties that this child would face if she  were  to  be
    removed with her mother.  The judge has not erred in the assessment  of
    reasonableness and has applied the correct test.

26. The judge considered the evidence in relation to the child's father (as
    set out by the judge in paragraph 77). The judge had no confirmation as
    to his whereabouts or where he is in the UK or his status or whether or
    not he is even still in the UK.  There was no evidence from the father.
    I note in the grounds of appeal at paragraph 3 it is  stated  that  the
    child's father is estranged.  It is not clear that the  child's  father
    has any right to be in the United Kingdom. The  appellant's  arguments,
    that the judge has failed to take into consideration  the  relationship
    with the father do not take the  matter  any  further  as  the  child's
    father is estranged (according to the grounds of appeal) and it is  not
    clear that he is even in the UK.

27. With regard to paragraph 117B(6) the judge  does  not  make  a  finding
    specifically that it does not apply, however clearly the judge has  not
    considered this section when assessing the proportionality  of  removal
    under Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules.  However,  I  do  not
    consider this is a material error of  law.   The  judge  made  specific
    findings on the reasonableness of the appellant's daughter, D,  leaving
    the United Kingdom when assessing the best interests of  the  child  as
    set out above.  At paragraph 82 there was a clear finding of the  judge
    that it was not unreasonable for the child to relocate to Nigeria.   As
    the test under Section 117B(6) is whether or not it would be reasonable
    to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom - the same as the  test
    under paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  -,  the  judge  would  inevitably  have
    arrived at the same conclusion had he considered  the  child  to  be  a
    qualifying child which at the date of the hearing the child clearly was
    for the purposes of Section 117B(6).   The  judge  considered  all  the
    relevant factors and undertook an appropriate balancing  exercise  when
    considering Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

28. There was nothing in the  grounds  of  appeal  regarding  the  argument
    advanced at the hearing that the judge had failed to take into  account
    the effect on the witnesses of removal of the appellant and D.  In  any
    event none of the witnesses were family members. They were  friends  of
    the  appellant  and  members  of  the  church  community.   Beoku-Betts
    concerned family relationships. The court considered that  family  life
    encompasses the right  to  respect  for  the  family  life  of  others,
    normally a spouse or minor children, with  whom  that  family  life  is
    enjoyed. I do not consider that the ratio of Beoku-Betts extends to the
    sort  of  relationships  that  exist  between  the  witnesses  and  the
    appellant and her daughter.

29. I find that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Notice of  Decision



There was no error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.  The
decision of the Secretary of State stands.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed   P M Ramshaw                         Date 27 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw






