
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/10539/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 February 2019                      |On 19 March 2019                   |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                           Mr Amarjit Singh Bassi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Wilford, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, HOPO

                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Obhi  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    decision of  the  respondent  made  on  24  August  2017  refusing  his
    application to remain on Article 8 family and private life grounds.

2.   The appellant made his application on 15 December  2016  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK on the basis of  his  family  life  with  his  partner
    Surjit  Kaur  Bassi.   The  Secretary  of  State  considered  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of  paragraphs  276ADE(1)(iii)-
    (iv) because he failed to meet paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) as he  had  not
    resided in the UK for twenty years.  Also, he did  not  meet  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) because the Secretary of State did not  find  that  there
    would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration  in  India  to
    which he would have to go if required to leave the UK.   The  Secretary
    of State also considered that there were no  exceptional  circumstances
    in his case which would render refusal in breach of Article  8  or  the
    ECHR because it would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for
    him, his partner, a relevant  child  or  another  family  member.   The
    Secretary of State further considered that the appellant did  not  fall
    for a grant of leave to remain outside the  Immigration  Rules  on  the
    basis of compassionate factors.

3.   In the respondent's Reasons for Refusal Letter dated  24  August  2017,
    under "Immigration History", it said:

    . October 1998 - you claim to have entered the United Kingdom.


    . However, at the top  of  page  4  of  the  same  refusal  letter,  the
      Secretary of State stated: "from the information you have provided, it
      is noted that you are a national of India and you entered  the  UK  in
      October 1998."

4.   The judge said at paragraph 13 that at the outset  of  the  hearing  Mr
    Wilford had asked her to accept that the respondent had accepted in the
    refusal letter that the appellant had been in the  UK  since  1998  and
    that if it was not agreed, it was a new issue which  would  require  an
    adjournment for the appellant to bring his  witnesses  to  court.   The
    judge stated that having looked at the refusal letter she indicated  to
    Mr Wilford that she  did  not  necessarily  agree  with  him  that  the
    respondent had accepted that the appellant had been  in  the  UK  since
    that time.  As the relevant sentence in  the  refusal  letter  referred
    back to what had been claimed  by  the  appellant  and  to  this  being
    "noted" rather than accepted or indeed rejected.

5.   The judge's failure to agree  to  the  adjournment  request  became  an
    issue of challenge by Mr Wilford.  Mr. Wilford argued  in  his  grounds
    that given the wording of the RFRL, the failure of the judge to proceed
    on the basis that the respondent had accepted  the  appellant  to  have
    been in the UK since October 1998 amounted to the  respondent's  unfair
    reliance upon a new  issue.   The  unfairness  was  compounded  by  the
    judge's refusal to grant the  appellant's  application  to  adjourn  in
    light of the raising of a new issue.

6.   Ms Cunha on the other hand submitted that the respondent accepted  that
    the appellant entered the UK in  1998  but  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant had lived in the UK continuously since  1998.   I  find  that
    this was not the position adopted by the HOPO below.  At  paragraph  28
    the judge recorded that Mr. Tallachi noted that the appellant  and  his
    wife had not been in the UK lawfully since  their  arrival  which  they
    claimed was in 1998.  It appears from this that Mr.  Tallachi  did  not
    accept that the appellant and his wife had entered the UK in  1998.  He
    did not raise any issue with the appellant's continuous residence since
    1998.

7.   I accept Mr. Wilford's  submission  that  in  the  light  of  what  the
    Secretary of State said at the top of page 4 of the RFRL the respondent
    had accepted that the appellant had been in the UK since 1998.

8.   It was apparent from the determination that the judge  could  not  make
    up her mind as to whether she should accept that the appellant  entered
    the UK in 1998.  That being the case, the judge should have  given  the
    appellant the opportunity to provide evidence  to  support  his  claim.
    The appellant's assertion that there existed  compelling  circumstances
    in his  case  to  warrant  examination  of  his  case  outside  of  the
    immigration  rules  required  a  fair  consideration  of  the  factors,
    including the length of residence in the UK.

9.   I accept Mr Wilford's argument that the judge's findings  at  paragraph
    11 were  not  relevant  to  the  appellant.    I  find  that  this  was
    indicative of the judge  failing  to  apply  anxious  scrutiny  to  the
    appellant's case.

10.  Mr. Wilford's third argument was  that  the  judge  failed  to  provide
    clear reasons for her decision.  He cited paragraph 34 where the  judge
    held as follows:

         I find that the evidence of each of the witnesses I heard  from  to
         be  wholly  unsatisfactory,  and  basically  unreliable.  What  was
         apparent was that the appellant had  come  and  gone  from  the  UK
         illegally for many decades.  He  had  not  provided  her  with  any
         evidence that he was legally in the UK in 1970s, but I  don't  know
         the basis upon which he was hear.  It may be, and I  give  him  the
         benefit of the doubt, that he was here legally at that point. It is
         more likely than not that the appellant and his wife have travelled
         to and from India, illegally to suit themselves. He may  well  have
         come to the UK in 1998.  I don't make that finding because I  don't
         accept that I am being told the truth so I have to look at all  the
         other facts, but even if he did come to the UK I  1998,  I  am  not
         satisfied that he did not leave and then return  to  suit  himself.



11.  I accept Mr. Wilford's submission that there was absence of  evidential
    basis for the conclusion that the  appellant  and  his  wife  may  have
    entered and exited the UK since their arrival in 1998.  I find that Mr.
    Wilford's arguments hark back to the judge's failure to accept that the
    appellant and his wife entered the UK in 1998 and have been here since.
     I find that the  judge  strayed  from  the  issues  that  she  had  to
    consider.

12.  Accordingly, I find that the judge erred in law in her  decision.   The
    judge's decision cannot stand.  It is set aside in order to be remade.

13.  The appellant's appeal is remitted to Taylor House for rehearing  by  a
    First-tier Judge other than FtTJ Obhi.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date:  14 March 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
