
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10906/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Remotely via Skype for Business      |                                     |
|On 12 February 2021                  |On 1 March 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     DDS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Not represented (see below)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a  female  citizen  of  Brazil,  appeals  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  on
    14 February 2020 which dismissed her  appeal  against  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's refusal of her application for entry clearance.

 2. The respondent agrees that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law for the
    reasons advanced in the grounds of  appeal.  As  I  was  aware  of  the
    respondent's position prior to the appeal  (it  was  stated  in  a  R24
    notice dated 3  September  2020),  I  released  the  Senior  Presenting
    Officer, Mrs Aboni. At the time given  for  the  hearing  to  commence,
    there  was  no  appearance   by   the   appellant,   sponsor   or   any
    representative. I proceeded in the absence of the parties accordingly.

 3. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.  The  appeal  is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal for that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision.




    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.  The  appeal  is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal for that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision. (Listing directions: First-tier Tribunal to determine if face
    to face or remote hearing; not  Judge  MPW  Harris;  Hatton  Cross;  no
    interpreter; first available date)


Signed                              Date 12 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
