
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/10721/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 11 January 2019                   |On 14 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE
               DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SUTHERLAND WILLIAMS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                KEVIN KIARIE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Khubber, Counsel, instructed by Turpin and
Miller LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is a resumed hearing following a decision  of  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Kebede, dated 23 October 2018, finding  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge had failed to give proper appreciation to  the  high
         threshold that needed to be  met  to  establish  'very  significant
         obstacles' and had thus erred in law.

      2. In short, First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Rourke initially disposed  of
         this deportation appeal on 13 March 2018, finding in favour of  the
         appellant. He  concluded  that  there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to the appellant's  integration  into  Kenya,  and  as  a
         result, found that the appellant  met  one  of  the  Exceptions  in
         paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules (hereafter 'the Rules').

      3. The  Secretary  of  State  appealed  that  decision  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal. On 23 October 2018, Judge  Kebede  allowed  that  appeal,
         noting that while she found no error of law in the judge's decision
         on social and cultural integration, she did find that the judge had
         erred in law by falling into speculation about a number of  factors
         (as set out in paragraph 17 of her decision, dated 23 October 2018)
         and that as a result, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  allow
         the appeal under paragraph 339A  of  the  Rules,  and  consequently
         under   Article   8   of   the   European   Convention   on Human
         Rights ('ECHR'), with reference to section 117C (3) and (4) of the
         Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as   amended)
         (hereafter, 'the NIAA'), was  not  sustainable  and  needed  to  be
         remade on a full and proper assessment of  the  facts  and  with  a
         proper  consideration  of  the  high  test  of  'very   significant
         obstacles'.

      4. It is against the above background  that  this  matter  was  listed
         before us. We  are  grateful  to  both  representatives  for  their
         assistance in this matter.

Overview

      5. By way of introduction, we repeat the  findings  of  fact  made  by
         Judge Kebede on 23 October 2018 (the decision of which  is  annexed
         hereto):

             "3.  The appellant is a citizen of Kenya born  on  28  October
             1993. He arrived in the United Kingdom  on  27  January  1997,
             aged 3 years, together with his mother and was included  as  a
             dependent in her application for asylum, which was refused  on
             30 May 1997. Appeals  against  that  decision  and  a  further
             decision on 14 August 2001 were unsuccessful, but  the  family
             were eventually granted indefinite  leave  to  enter  the  UK,
             outside the immigration rules, on 20 October 2004.

             4.   Between 20 September 2013 and 2 May  2014  the  appellant
             received  four  convictions  for  ten   offences,   including:
             possession  of  a  controlled  drug  -  class  B  -  cannabis;
             possession of a controlled drug with intent to supply -  class
             A - heroin; possession of a controlled  drug  with  intent  to
             supply - class A - cocaine; and commission of further offences
             (possessing a controlled drug - class A -  crack  cocaine  and
             possession of a controlled drug - class B, - cannabis)  during
             the operational period of a suspended sentence order.  He  was
             sentenced on 2 May 2014 to 2 years imprisonment,  implementing
             the suspended sentence previously made. On 28 July  2014,  the
             appellant was served with a liability to automatic deportation
             and he responded by raising Article 8 grounds. On  10  October
             2014, a Deportation Order was signed against him  and  on  the
             same day the respondent refused his  human  rights  claim  and
             certified the claim under  section  94B  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002....

             5.   A new decision was made on 23 August 2017, in  which  the
             appellant's human rights claim was refused, but  with  an  in-
             country right of appeal. The appellant  appealed  against  the
             decision. His appeal was heard in the First-tier  Tribunal  on
             13 March 2018 by Judge O'Rourke and was allowed in a  decision
             promulgated on 26 March 2018. The Secretary of State has  been
             granted permission to appeal that decision."

      6. The above facts were not in dispute before us. We find accordingly.

      7. By way of  further  background,  the  apparent  delay  between  the
         decision  to  deport  the  appellant  in  October  2014   and   the
         intervening period was taken up with a series  of  appeals  against
         the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  certify  his  case,  thus
         granting the appellant only the right to an out of country  appeal,
         which  culminated  in  the  judgement  in  Kiarie  and  Byndloss  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 42.

      8. The issues that we must now determine, as agreed by  both  parties,
         are firstly, whether  or  not  there  would  be  'very  significant
         obstacles' to integration on return to Kenya; and secondly, if not,
         whether there are any 'very  compelling  circumstances'  above  and
         beyond the Exceptions.

The law

      9. The appellant was made the subject of  a  deportation  order  under
         section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 because he is classed as a
         'foreign criminal' (as defined by section 32(1) of the  UK  Borders
         Act 2007).

     10. Paragraph 398 of the Rules provides that where a person claims that
         their deportation would be contrary to the UK's  obligations  under
         Article 8 of the ECHR, and -

             "(b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months;

             ... the Secretary  of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
             consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does
             not,  the  public  interest  in  deportation  will   only   be
             outweighed by other factors where there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399
             and 399A."

     11. There was no dispute between the parties that in  this  regard  the
         tribunal should focus upon paragraph 399A, which provides:

             "399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)
             applies if -

                  (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for
                  most of his life; and

                  (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK;
                  and

                  (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to his
                  integration into the country to which it is proposed he is
                  deported."

     12. On 28 July 2014, section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014  came  into
         force and amended the  NIAA  by  introducing  a  new  Part  5A  (SI
         2014/1820). Section 117A(2)(b) provides that,  in  considering  the
         public interest (per para 398 of the Rules,  above),  the  tribunal
         must have regard to the considerations listed in sections 117B  and
         117C.

     13. This provides as follows:

             "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in
             all cases

             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
             the public interest.

             (2)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-

                  (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (3)  It is in the public interest, and in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

                  (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

                  (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

             (4)  Little weight should be given to-

                  (a)  a private life, or

                  (b)  ...

                  that is established by a person at a time when the  person
                  is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

             (5)   Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private   life
             established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when   the   person's
             immigration status is precarious.

             (6)  ...

             117C Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving
             foreign criminals

             (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

             (2)  The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.

             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

             (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

                  (a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom
                  for most of C's life,

                  (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
                  Kingdom, and

                  (c)  there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

             (5)  ...

             (6)  ...

             (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be
             taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted."

     14. It can  be  seen  that  Exception  1  reflects  the  provisions  of
         paragraph 399A of the Rules. It is for the appellant to demonstrate
         his case in this regard, including any interference with his  human
         rights. If that is established, it is then  for  the  appellant  to
         show that any interference is  justified.  The  burden  of  proving
         contested facts rests on the appellant and the standard of proof in
         relation to this ground of  appeal  is  the  civil  standard  of  a
         balance of probabilities.

Preliminary findings

     15. With regard to Exception 1, we find (and it was not disputed before
         us) that, firstly, the appellant has been lawfully resident in  the
         United Kingdom for most of his life (a matter the  decision  letter
         served by the Home Office on 23 August 2017 accepted). He  has  now
         lived in the UK for over 20 years. He arrived here when  he  was  3
         years of age and his family were granted indefinite leave to remain
         in 2004. Notwithstanding the periods of proven criminality, he  has
         resided lawfully within the UK for most of those 20+ years.

     16. Secondly, he is socially and culturally integrated into the  United
         Kingdom. He went to  school  here.  He  grew  up  in  the  UK.  His
         immediate family, his  work  and  his  interests  are  in  the  UK.
         Pursuant to the finding of Judge Kebede on 23 October 2018, we find
         there was no error of law in First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Rourke's
         decision on social and cultural integration.

     17. For the avoidance of doubt, it was not argued before  us  that  the
         appellant had any parental relationship with a child;  nor  was  it
         advanced that he had any genuine or subsisting relationship with  a
         qualifying partner. Exception 2 therefore had  no  application.  We
         find accordingly, and therefore have only considered Exception 1.

     18. The  above  findings  narrow  the  issue  before  us  to  primarily
         considering whether there would be very  significant  obstacles  to
         the appellant's  integration  into  the  country  to  which  it  is
         proposed he is deported, namely Kenya. If the appellant succeeds on
         this point, the rest of the appeal essentially falls away, and  the
         tribunal does not need to go on to consider  the  further  test  of
         'very compelling circumstances.'

Evidence

     19. We received prior to the hearing a court bundle, on behalf  of  the
         Home Office, that included the  case  management  history  of  this
         matter; an appeal determination made in relation to the appellant's
         mother, Jane Catherine Enganasa, dated  14  July  1999;  subsequent
         'reasons for refusal' letters; the judge's sentencing remarks  from
         the criminal offending, dated 2 May 2014;  the  signed  deportation
         order, dated 10 October  2014;  Police  National  Computer  ('PNC')
         records; and other documents submitted in support of the appeal  to
         the Upper Tribunal.

     20. Further, we received from the appellant's representatives a bundle,
         dated 6 March 2018, which included a statement from  the  appellant
         and a statement from the appellant's mother (both also relied  upon
         at the hearing  below),  and  a  PNC  report,  which  detailed  the
         appellant's offending up to August 2017.

     21. In addition to the above, we received a skeleton argument on behalf
         of the appellant, dated 9 January 2019; and a comprehensive  bundle
         of authorities setting out much of the relevant law.

     22. We heard evidence from both the appellant, who adopted his  witness
         statement dated 5 March 2018  and  gave  oral  updates  by  way  of
         evidence; and we heard from the appellant's mother,  Mrs  Enganosa,
         who also adopted her witness statement, dated  7  March  2018,  and
         provided answers to further questions.

     23. There is one matter that did not  arise  at  the  hearing.  In  the
         bundles identified above, both parties provided  copies  of  a  PNC
         printout. Both essentially ran to 23 August 2017 and identified the
         period of  offending  outlined  above.  However,  at  the  previous
         hearing at the Upper Tribunal, the Home Office  presenting  officer
         provided an updated PNC.  That  showed  3  further  and  subsequent
         offences, namely possessing a controlled drug - class  A,  cocaine;
         possessing a controlled drug, class B, cannabis/cannabis resin; and
         possessing a controlled drug - class A  -  heroin;  for  which  the
         appellant had been given, on 29 June 2018, a conditional  discharge
         for 2 years.

     24. The evidence now provided to the tribunal  did  not  reflect  this.
         Judge Kebede had  commented  upon  this  evidence  in  her  initial
         decision, dated 23 October 2018.  Therein,  at  paragraph  13,  she
         referred to the said PNC record as including updates that  had  not
         been before the First-tier Tribunal. She paid  no  regard  to  that
         updated PNC at the initial hearing, firstly, because she was solely
         concerned with whether the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         contained a material  error  of  law;  and  secondly,  because  the
         subsequent convictions had occurred only after  the  first  hearing
         had taken place.

     25. It was however of potential relevance to the issues we were  having
         to decide. Firstly, it went to credibility; secondly, it  showed  a
         possible propensity to reoffend. It is, in part,  for  this  reason
         that Judge Kebede gave this direction on 23 October 2018:

             "No later than 14 days before the date of  the  next  hearing,
             any additional documentary  evidence  relied  upon  by  either
             party is to be filed with this  tribunal  and  served  on  the
             opposing party, together with the relevant  application  under
             rule 15 (2 a) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
             2008 (as amended) ('the TPR')."

     26. Principal Resident Judge O'Connor had given similar  directions  on
         14 September 2018.

     27. For reasons that are not  immediately  apparent,  the  Home  Office
         failed to comply with these directions. As a result, neither  party
         referred to, nor were asked about, the subsequent convictions. Rule
         15(2A) of the TPR provides as follows:

             "(2A) In an asylum case or an immigration case- (a) if a party
             wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider evidence  that  was  not
             before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that  party  must  send  or
             deliver a notice to the Upper Tribunal and  any  other  party-
             (i) indicating the nature of the evidence; and (ii) explaining
             why it was not submitted to the First-tier Tribunal;  and  (b)
             when considering whether to admit evidence that was not before
             the First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal must  have  regard
             to whether there has been unreasonable delay in producing that
             evidence."

     28. The Home Office's failure to  serve  this  PNC  properly  upon  the
         appellant's  representatives  or  the  tribunal  is  on  one  view,
         unfortunate. We have decided that we should put  to  one  side  the
         contents of this new PNC. It was not before  the  judge  at  first-
         instance, no evidence has been given about it, it does not directly
         assist us with the question  of  'very  significant  obstacles'  to
         integration upon return to Kenya, and it  will  therefore  play  no
         part in our final decision. Such an  approach  is  also  consistent
         with the view Judge Kebede took in October 2018.

     29.  Importantly  however   for   these   purposes,   the   appellant's
         representative indicated during the course of the hearing before us
         that he did not rely  upon  a  low  risk  of  re-offending  in  his
         submissions.  That is a concession  we  do  appropriately  bear  in
         mind.

The respective submissions - very significant obstacles

     30. Mr Kotas, on behalf of the Home Office, referred to  the  case  law
         considering 'very significant obstacles', in particular,  Kamara  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 813, and
         the conclusions therein  (about  which  there  was  some  agreement
         between the  two  representatives),  namely  that  the  concept  of
         integration into the country to which it was proposed an individual
         be deported, as set out in section 117C (4) and paragraph 399A, was
         a broad one:

             "14.  ...  The  idea  of  'integration'  calls  for  a   broad
             evaluative judgement to be made as to whether  the  individual
             will be enough of an insider in  terms  of  understanding  how
             life in the society in that other country is carried on and  a
             capacity to participate in it, so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
             opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate  on  a
             day-to-day basis in that society and  to  build  up  within  a
             reasonable time a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give
             substance to the individual's private or family life."

     31. This, Mr Kotas advanced, needed to be looked at through the lens of
         this particular case: 'a person is not  integrated  the  moment  he
         lands on the tarmac....it takes time to build up a variety of human
         relationships and that does not happen overnight'. He observed that
         the appellant was of good health, had  a  number  of  work  skills,
         spoke English (one of the official languages), and  in  part  could
         rely  on  his  parent's  heritage  and  his  own  nationality   and
         knowledge. These were all highly relevant, it was submitted, to the
         conclusion he invited us to  reach,  namely,  that  if  there  were
         obstacles, they  were  not  significant,  and  certainly  not  very
         significant.

     32. It was accepted on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  Mrs
         Enganosa's account of the grandmother's circumstances  was  honest.
         His grandmother was his main relative in Kenya.  She  had  dementia
         and was financially supported by Mrs Enganosa who sent payments for
         rent. Mr Kotas also accepted that the  appellant  did  not  have  a
         wider family there. He further conceded  that  there  would  be  no
         financial  support  forthcoming  for  the  appellant  from   family
         members, either in Kenya or in the UK. That having  been  said,  he
         advanced that there was  accommodation  in  Kenya,  albeit  at  his
         grandmother's home and not ideal, but that the appellant would  not
         be 'street homeless'. He would be able to make ties.  He  would  be
         able to integrate.

     33. These submissions reflected to a  degree  the  grounds  of  appeal,
         which suggested that the appellant would be  able  to  establish  a
         private life in Kenya. It was a country that was known to  him  and
         his family members, it was a country he had visited,  and  that  if
         required, family members could accompany him to help him  establish
         himself if required. There was no proper basis, it  was  submitted,
         for advancing that no one could be removed to  Kenya  because  they
         were not fluent in  both  official  languages.  One  language,  the
         language  of  commerce  and   government,   namely   English,   was
         sufficient.

     34. These submissions flowed, it was advanced, from paragraphs 47-59 of
         S. v Secretary of State for the Home Department 2017 EWCA Civ 1284,
         where it was held that generic factors can be of  significance  and
         can clearly  support  the  conclusion  that  the  person  will  not
         encounter very significant obstacles to integration.

     35. The contra submissions on behalf of the appellant  also  rested  on
         Kamara  (supra),  reiterating  the  need  for  a  broad  evaluative
         judgement. Counsel, Mr Khubber, suggested that  the  appellant  had
         lived in the UK since the age of 3 and lacked any tangible links to
         Kenya, which was at best known to him as a holiday destination.  He
         had no family or familial links or friends in Kenya, and that  made
         the appellant in reality an  outsider,  without  anyone  who  could
         afford him assistance on return.

     36. Further, it  was  suggested  he  had  no  knowledge  of  the  local
         language, namely Swahili. While it was accepted that English was an
         official language and was widely spoken in commerce and government,
         it was advanced on the appellant's behalf that he would  inevitably
         suffer disadvantage in terms of employment, social interaction  and
         personal development in lacking the second official language.

     37. His lack of maturity was also relied upon. It  was  suggested  that
         the  appellant  did  not  have  the  robustness  of  character  and
         independence of mind that would support him  in  integrating  in  a
         foreign land. This combined with the lack of financial support  his
         parents in the UK were able to give, (something his mother was able
         to confirm in evidence, as a result of her having to provide  funds
         to his grandmother in Kenya and their  own  limited  income)  meant
         integration would not be possible. It was also submitted  that  the
         appellant had a limited  education  and  no  particular  specialist
         skills, meaning he could  not  compete  in  the  employment  market
         effectively.

     38. Further, it was said that the appellant had a huge link with the UK
         and a huge lack of a link with Kenya and its  characteristics.  His
         links to Kenya could only be based on  his  parents'  nationalities
         and was limited to holiday periods. It was advanced that  while  he
         had now matured away from his offending ways, this did not mean  he
         was robust in terms of integration. The concession made by the Home
         Office supported the assertion that there was a lack of any  family
         to turn to. His grandmother was seriously ill and had dementia,  it
         was simply not realistic that he lived in  her  rented  residential
         property.

     39. This meant there was no tangible structure for him. Simply put,  Mr
         Khubber asked: how would he survive? He had limited skills, limited
         education,  and  lacked  the  robustness  of  character   to   live
         independently. Taken together, it was  suggested  that  the  higher
         threshold of very significant obstacles was  reached,  particularly
         if one took a more nuanced approach, including when considering the
         Article 8  dimension,  and  what  were  described  as  the  unusual
         circumstances of this case.

The tribunal's findings in  relation  to  'very  significant  obstacles'  to
integration

     40. We accept and find that the appellant is integrated into UK society
         both through his family and no doubt socially (he  has  lived  here
         for over 22 years).

     41. We accept that he has resided here lawfully for most of that  time,
         from the age of 3 up until the age of 15. We also find that he  has
         a strong  relationship  with  his  family,  including  his  younger
         brother, and we accept it is unlikely that his family members would
         be able to relocate to Kenya for any great period, being  long-term
         settled in the UK. We also  accept  that  he  was  young  when  the
         offending took place and that he is now financially independent and
         in work.

     42. Further, it was conceded on behalf of the Secretary of  State  that
         the appellant's mother, Mrs Enganosa, had given an  honest  account
         of the remaining family in Kenya - or lack of - a concession we did
         not seek to go behind. We also accepted that the appellant did  not
         have a wider family there. We further found that there would be  no
         financial  support  forthcoming  for  the  appellant  from   family
         members, either in Kenya or in the UK.

     43.  We  find  that  the  above  individual  factors  can   be   viewed
         cumulatively, and, adopting the background circumstance set out  in
         Kiarie  and  Byndloss  (supra)  [at   53],   that   'the   proposed
         deportations would be  events  of  profound  significance  for  the
         future lives of Mr Kiarie, his parents and siblings'.

     44. While we bear in mind the above obstacles  to  integration,  it  is
         however necessary  to  also  consider  the  other  aspects  of  the
         submissions we received. The conclusions we draw are as follows:

               a. It was suggested on his behalf that the  appellant  lacked
                  both an education and specialist skills. In  our  finding,
                  the evidence suggests that  the  appellant  had  benefited
                  from the education he received growing up in the UK,  both
                  primary and secondary (as borne out by paragraph 8 of  his
                  witness statement, dated 5  March  2018),  culminating  he
                  told us in GCSEs in science, physics,  grade  C,  biology,
                  grade C, maths grade C, English, grade C,  and  geography,
                  grade D. Furthermore, he  went  on  to  college  where  he
                  studied an extended level III business diploma. The  OASYS
                  report, dated 3 June 2015, states that he did not complete
                  this, but  in  any  event,  in  our  view,  his  level  of
                  education and interest in business was likely to serve him
                  well in terms of employment prospects upon relocation.

               b. In terms of lacking specialist skills, we  noted  that  he
                  had had a number of  jobs  in  the  UK  according  to  his
                  witness statement, including as a painter  and  decorator,
                  delivery driver, and as a mechanic. Latterly, he had found
                  employment as a full-time forklift driver.  This,  in  our
                  finding, suggests not only an ability  to  drive,  but  an
                  ability  to   learn   new   skills   and   a   degree   of
                  resourcefulness.

               c. We concluded that he would be able to take that  skill-set
                  and his qualifications and experience to Kenya,  and  both
                  would likely advance his job prospects and integration.

               d. Further, in our finding,  his  ability  to  speak  to  his
                  parents about life  in  Kenya  and  thereby  increase  his
                  knowledge  of  the  situation  there,   including   Kenyan
                  culture, would stand him in good stead, both in  terms  of
                  integration  and  acceptance.  His   mother   and   father
                  originate  from  Kenya  and  are  Kenyan   nationals   The
                  appellant accepts in his statement that he  has  discussed
                  Kenya with his father 'because of the situation  in  Kenya
                  being on the news', and while he says he had  no  interest
                  in the country in the past, one is entitled to infer  from
                  that that since the deportation question  has  arisen,  he
                  has shown more of an interest.

               e. It is apparent that notwithstanding the  passage  of  time
                  since they left, both parents would have had  considerable
                  insight into life in  Kenya,  some  of  which  would  have
                  filtered through to their son. (In her statement, dated  7
                  March 2018, his mother, Mrs Enganasa, refers to  the  fact
                  that she grew up in Kenya, went to school in Nairobi,  and
                  then went to secretarial college before finding employment
                  with an auditing company in Nairobi. A  previous  tribunal
                  (14 July 1999) found she had worked there as  a  secretary
                  for about 10 years). In evidence, the  appellant's  mother
                  also stated that she discussed with her son  news  stories
                  about Kenya generally; adding that they saw things on  the
                  news and he asked questions about Kenya, 'why it was  like
                  that? why it was different? and why people  lived  there?'
                  Mrs Enganasa knows the person who looks  after  and  lives
                  with her mother. She told the tribunal she talks  to  that
                  person on the phone. She is familiar  with  the  area  her
                  mother lives in; she pays rent on a  property  there.  She
                  continued to have contact therefore with  Kenya;  and  can
                  continue to discuss with her  son  the  social  norms  and
                  cultural differences in society there.

               f. We do not therefore accept that  the  appellant  does  not
                  have any tangible links with or  knowledge  of  Kenya.  It
                  appears to us, by virtue of his parents' heritage and  his
                  own nationality that he has grown up with a connection  to
                  that country. His grandmother lives there. At a time,  per
                  his mother's witness statement, cousins and  more  distant
                  family members also lived there.

               g. While not conclusive, it is relevant that he has holidayed
                  there and visited Kenya. (We note that in  his  statement,
                  dated 5 March 2018, the appellant states:  'I  have  never
                  been outside the UK since I arrived over 21 years ago'. He
                  makes no mention of visits or holidays to Kenya.  However,
                  his mother confirms in her statement: 'the only experience
                  Kevin has of Kenya is as a  holiday  destination.  It  has
                  been over 5 years since Kevin was there. When he has  gone
                  it was on short family holidays. We would stay in a  hotel
                  or apartment'. This implies that the appellant has been on
                  more than one occasion to Kenya.)

               h. We therefore accepted the submission on behalf of the Home
                  Office that his parents  would  be  able  to  discuss  and
                  prepare the appellant for life in Kenya in order to aid in
                  the process of integration and in becoming an insider. His
                  lack of familial  support  there  could  in  part  be  met
                  through regular contact with his  parents  through  modern
                  means of communication. Planning, research  and  emotional
                  assistance  from  his  parents  would  all  aid   in   his
                  integration and acceptance.

               i. At 25 years of age we cannot find any dependency in  terms
                  of his relationship  with  his  parents/siblings  or  vice
                  versa, other than the normal relationship he would have as
                  an adult person with his immediate family. We concur  with
                  the decision letter, served on 29  August  2017,  in  that
                  whilst it is acknowledged that the appellant's deportation
                  will have an impact on his younger brother,  the  need  to
                  protect the interests of children (set out in  section  55
                  of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009),
                  would  not  outweigh  the  decision  to  deport  him.  The
                  appellant has no parental responsibility for  his  younger
                  brother who can remain in the care of his parents and they
                  can continue to provide him with  support.  The  appellant
                  can continue to remain in contact with him and the rest of
                  his family via telephone or the Internet. They  will  also
                  have the opportunity to visit him in Kenya or elsewhere  -
                  outside of the United Kingdom - should they wish to do so.



               j. We found his representatives assertion that the  appellant
                  could  not  speak  Swahili,  and  therefore   was   at   a
                  disadvantage, was overstated. The appellant spoke  one  of
                  the main official languages, English, and it was  accepted
                  that that was the language of business and government.  We
                  found  that  the  appellant's  knowledge  of  the  English
                  language was likely to serve him well  both  in  terms  of
                  employability and in terms of integration more widely.

               k. While the appellant asked the tribunal 'not  to  send  him
                  away because of mistakes I made when  I  was  younger  and
                  immature', this implied he felt he was now more mature. He
                  confirmed at para 23: 'I am more mature and more aware.  I
                  am now motivated and have ambitions to be someone to  make
                  something of my life', and at paragraph 24: 'I am  my  own
                  person now. I'm not someone  who  like  before,  could  be
                  easily led, who would just take chances because  of  greed
                  or wanting to please someone. I now listen to those people
                  I can trust. I have learnt to make the right decisions  in
                  life'. In our finding, taken together with his employment,
                  his age (mid-twenties) and his life experiences  to  date,
                  these statements demonstrated the appellant did  have  the
                  maturity to cope and develop  if  required  to  do  so  in
                  Kenya.

               l.  Nor  did  we  accept  that  he  lacked  a  robustness  of
                  character.  He  had  been  dealing  drugs  since  being  a
                  teenager, he had served time in  prison,  he  had  secured
                  employment and, according to his  statement,  had  entered
                  into a relationship with  a  girlfriend  and  her  family.
                  There were no apparent adverse health issues, (no evidence
                  was produced of any mental well-being issues  or  physical
                  health concerns). There was nothing to immediately suggest
                  that he lacked the degree  of  robustness  or  ability  to
                  adapt and manage in new surroundings. While we  understood
                  that most mothers would have concerns in this  regard,  we
                  did not see his maturity or character as being  a  bar  to
                  his integration or acceptance as an  insider  into  Kenyan
                  society.

     45. In making a broad evaluative judgement, as per Kamara, we struggled
         to  find  the  very  significant  obstacles  required.   While   we
         acknowledge that there are likely to be some obstacles, including a
         lack of family in Kenya and a requirement to arrange  accommodation
         and employment, we did not  see  this  as  amounting  to  either  a
         significant or a very significant obstacle in terms of  integration
         as an insider for  the  reasons  outlined.  The  obstacles  we  did
         identify were largely not dissimilar to any person  relocating  and
         could be generally overcome by a resourceful  25-year-old  in  good
         health with some  planning.  Their  significance  was  considerably
         diluted as a result.

     46. In so concluding, we further note that there was at times a lack of
         evidential support  in  terms  of  some  of  the  claims  advanced,
         notwithstanding the amount  of  time  that  this  appeal  has  been
         extant, and  the  burden  placed  upon  the  appellant.  While  not
         determinative to our final conclusion, we merely  observe  that  no
         statement has been produced by the  appellant's  father,  Mr  Peter
         Kiaro. We were unable therefore to see tested the assertion that he
         had no family in Kenya. Further, we received no evidence  from  the
         appellant's sister, Christine Kiarie, who is also resident  in  the
         UK. We received no evidence  from  his  claimed  girlfriend,  Sarah
         Williams. We received no medical evidence about his health in terms
         of any lack of robustness. We received no detailed evidence of  his
         current income or savings.

     47. We do not ignore the profound significance for the future lives  of
         the  appellant,  his  parents  and   siblings   in   the   proposed
         deportation. It may be both inconvenient and emotional. There  will
         be an element of upheaval and initially  there  may  be  a  culture
         shock. However, in our judgement, when considering very significant
         obstacles, the  threshold  is  high.  As  was  said  in  Parveen  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2018] EWCA Civ 932  at
         paragraph 9: '... I have no difficulty with  the  observation  that
         the test will not be met by "mere inconvenience or upheaval" and in
         Secretary of State for the Home Department v Olarewaju [2018]  EWCA
         Civ 557 [at 26] the Court confirmed that a culture shock is not the
         same as a very significant obstacle; and  nor  is  the  age  of  an
         individual i.e. their relative youth, determinative of the question
         of very significant obstacles.

     48. We had little difficulty in concluding  that,  having  performed  a
         broad evaluation, there were not very significant obstacles to  the
         appellant's integration and there was no proper reason to  conclude
         that he would not after a reasonable period become  an  insider  in
         the sense intended by the legislation.

     49. As neither Exception applies  to  the  appellant,  section  117C(3)
         prevails and this states that  the  public  interest  requires  the
         appellant's deportation. The principle enshrined in section 117C(1)
         must be given decisive weight.  Parliament  has  circumscribed  the
         conditions to be met under which a person may  be  able  to  resist
         deportation and those conditions have not been  met  in  this  case
         (see para 14 of NE-A (Nigeria) v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ  239,  where
         the  Court  of  Appeal  held  that  the  new   sections   reflected
         Parliament's assessment of the public interest).

Very compelling circumstances over and above the Exceptions

     50. The second limb in terms of  the  law  we  were  invited  to  apply
         therefore  became  relevant:  namely,  whether  there   were   very
         compelling circumstances over and above the Exceptions  that  meant
         the appellant should not be deported to Kenya.

The respective submissions - very compelling circumstances

     51. On behalf of the respondent, the  Home  Office  presenting  officer
         submitted that there was nothing compelling or particularly unusual
         about  the  appellant's  circumstances.  While  the  appellant  may
         currently be living at home, the Article 8  claim  to  family  life
         could not be based  upon  the  relationship  between  him  and  his
         parents. Other than the normal emotional ties that  adult  children
         have with their parents, it was suggested there was nothing unusual
         or compelling about the  appellant's  situation.  Further,  it  was
         submitted that while the appellant  may  have  a  girlfriend,  that
         relationship should be regarded as precarious and had only  started
         after the deportation procedure had commenced.

     52. In terms of the longevity of  his  residence  in  the  UK,  it  was
         submitted on behalf of the Home Office that that matter went to the
         issue of significant obstacles. While Mr Kotas  accepted  that  the
         appellant had been lawfully resident in the  UK  for  most  of  his
         life, none of this he said, even taken  cumulatively,  amounted  to
         very compelling circumstances and there  was  nothing  powerful  or
         irresistible in effect to displace the public  interest,  which  in
         the Home Office's submission ought to prevail.

     53. In reply, it was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the test
         of very compelling circumstances, like the test before, required  a
         global assessment of a combination  of  factors  and  that  in  the
         context of NA (Pakistan) v Home Secretary [2017]  1  WLR  207,  the
         tribunal  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  Article  8   when
         considering the Part 5 framework. In particular,  Mr  Khubber  drew
         our  attention  to  paragraph  30,  which  suggested  that  if   an
         individual could point to factors identified in Exceptions 1 and  2
         of an especially compelling kind in support of an Article 8  claim,
         they could in principle constitute 'very compelling  circumstances,
         over and above those described in  Exceptions  1  and  2',  whether
         taken by themselves or in conjunction with other  factors  relevant
         to the application of Article 8.

     54. Further, we were invited to consider Uner  v  Netherlands  2007  45
         EHRR 14 and Maslow v Austria [2009] INLR 47. It was  advanced  that
         the European Court's case law and subsequent cases provided a steer
         in relation to the criteria to be  applied.  In  a  case  like  the
         present one, where the person to be expelled is a young  adult  who
         had not yet had a family of his own,  the  relevant  criteria,  per
         para 71 of Maslov were: the nature and seriousness of  the  offence
         committed by the applicant;  the length of the applicant's stay  in
         the country from which he or  she  is  to  be  expelled;  the  time
         elapsed since the offence was committed and the applicant's conduct
         during that period; and the solidity of social, cultural and family
         ties the host country and with the country of destination.

     55. Mr Khubber invited the tribunal to take into account  that  it  was
         closer to exile, bearing in mind the circumstances, age and  impact
         in terms of deportation.

The tribunal's findings in relation to 'very compelling circumstances'

     56. While we  understood  the  points  the  appellant's  representative
         relied upon, on the facts of this matter, we could not  agree  that
         there was sufficient  support  for  there  being  'very  compelling
         circumstances':

               a. We remind ourselves of the Court of Appeal's  decision  in
                  NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
                  [2016] EWCA Civ 662 where the Court  found,  at  paragraph
                  33, that although there is no exceptionality  requirement,
                  it inexorably follows from the statutory scheme  that  the
                  cases in which circumstances are  sufficiently  compelling
                  to outweigh the high public interest in  deportation  will
                  be rare: 'the commonplace incidence of family  life,  such
                  as ageing parents in  poor  health  or  the  natural  love
                  between parents and children, will not be sufficient.'

               b. In our finding, the appellant is at an age where he should
                  be  able  to  function  independently  away   from   home,
                  including in Kenya. He is of good health. At 25 he  is  at
                  an age where he has time to create a new life for himself.
                  He is able-bodied. He would be able to function on  a  day
                  to day basis and, in our view, build up  valuable  private
                  life ties there.

               c. We did not see the appellant as being solely dependent  on
                  his family, either here or  abroad.  He  could  apply  for
                  deportation assistance (per the decision letter).  He  has
                  shown a capacity to  find  work.  His  family  could  help
                  initially with setting himself up in Kenya (if  needs  be)
                  and he could remain in  communication  with  them  through
                  methods such as the Internet, telephone, and the like.

               d. We view the nature of his offending to  be  serious  -  so
                  serious that he received a two-year prison sentence.  That
                  is not  simply  our  view,  but  reflects  the  sentencing
                  comments made at the time. The Crown Court judge  referred
                  to some of the offending as being 'very serious'.  He  was
                  an adult when he committed these crimes. Further, there is
                  a history of drug dealing and offending that dates back on
                  the appellant's own evidence to the age of 15. The effects
                  of drugs on society are well documented. They can  have  a
                  devastating effect on people's lives and damage the fabric
                  of  society.  A  risk  of  reoffending  in  our  judgement
                  remains,  (particularly  bearing  in  mind  his  counsel's
                  acceptance that he does not rely upon a low  risk  of  re-
                  offending). In his  sentencing  remarks  the  Crown  Court
                  judge records that the appellant was also in breach of  an
                  earlier  order  to  perform  unpaid  work   'on   repeated
                  occasions'.

               e. In addition  to  the  drugs  offences,  we  find  that  in
                  September  2013  the  appellant  was  also  convicted   of
                  resisting or obstructing  a  constable,  using  a  vehicle
                  while uninsured, driving otherwise than in accordance with
                  a licence, and failing to surrender.

               f. Even bearing in mind the passage of  time,  and  the  fact
                  that the appellant has now served  his  sentence  and  was
                  younger  at  the  time,  none  of  the  offending  history
                  reflects  well  upon  the  appellant  or  helps  create  a
                  landscape of  compelling  circumstances.  Other  than  the
                  expression of regret contained in the  witness  statement,
                  the   appellant   has   produced   little   evidence    of
                  rehabilitation or an understanding of his actions. We find
                  that his offending demonstrates a lack of regard for  both
                  the laws of the UK and the  society  in  which  he  lives,
                  where people are expected to respect and  abide  by  those
                  laws.  Importantly, in this regard in KO (Nigeria) 2018 UK
                  C 53, the Supreme Court held that there was  no  room  for
                  further balancing  of  the  relative  seriousness  of  the
                  appellant's acts, beyond the 2 categories.

     57. For the reasons we have already identified, we do not consider  the
         arguments advanced by the appellant to be compelling. We took  into
         account the tests in Maslov, as we were invited to do, but  observe
         that in Akpinar, R (on the application of)  v  the  Upper  Tribunal
         (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) [2014] EWCA Civ 937 the Court held
         that Maslov was not intended to create a new rule of law or  create
         an objective hurdle to be surmounted by the State in all  cases  to
         which it applied; irrespective of the  other  factors  involved.  A
         balancing exercise was still required (see paragraph 30 - 32 and 53
         of Akpinar).

     58. Finally, we bear in mind the Supreme Court's indication  in  Kiarie
         and Byndloss [at 55]:

             "55. The third is that, particularly  in  the  light  of  this
             court's decision in the Ali case, every foreign  criminal  who
             appeals against a deportation order by reference to his  human
             rights must negotiate a formidable hurdle  before  his  appeal
             will succeed: see para 33 above. He needs to be in a  position
             to assemble and present powerful evidence. I must not be taken
             to be prescriptive in  suggesting  that  the  very  compelling
             reasons which the tribunal  must  find  before  it  allows  an
             appeal are likely to relate in particular to some  or  all  of
             the following matters:

                  (a)  the  depth  of  the  appellant's  integration  in  UK
                  society in terms of family, employment and otherwise;

                  (b)  the quality  of  his  relationship  with  any  child,
                  partner or other family member in the UK;

                  (c)  the extent to  which  any  relationship  with  family
                  members  might  reasonably   be   sustained   even   after
                  deportation,  whether  by  their  joining  him  abroad  or
                  otherwise;

                  (d)   the  impact  of  his  deportation  on  the  need  to
                  safeguard and promote the welfare of any child in the UK;

                  (e)   the  likely  strength  of  the  obstacles   to   his
                  integration  in  the  society  of  the  country   of   his
                  nationality; and, surely in every case,

                  (f)  any significant risk of his re-offending in  the  UK,
                  judged, no doubt with difficulty,  in  the  light  of  his
                  criminal  record  set  against  the  credibility  of   his
                  probable assertions of remorse and reform."

     59. His integration into the UK,  relationships  with  his  family  and
         other concerns, which rest in  favour  of  the  appellant  for  the
         purposes of this appeal do not,  in  our  judgement,  outweigh  the
         public interest in terms of his deportation. In this matter,  there
         are more than sufficient reasons that overcome  such  circumstances
         and therefore dilute any matter that might otherwise be  considered
         compelling. We accept, as per paragraph 20 of Danso v Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 596, that there is  a
         strong public interest in the deterrent value of deportation.

     60. This was also reflected in Hesham Ali v Home Secretary [2016]  UKSC
         60 (the case being referred to in the above paragraph of Kiarie and
         Byndloss), where Lord Reed stated at paragraph 46:

             "It  is  the  duty  of  appellate  tribunals,  as  independent
             judicial  bodies,  to  make  their  own  assessment   of   the
             proportionality of deportation in any particular case  on  the
             basis of  their  own  findings  as  to  the  facts  and  their
             understanding of the relevant law.  ...  great  weight  should
             generally be given to the public interest in  the  deportation
             of a foreign offender who has received a custodial sentence of
             more than 12 months; and that, where the circumstances do  not
             fall within rules 399 or 399A,  the  public  interest  in  the
             deportation of such offenders can generally be outweighed only
             by  countervailing  factors  which  are  very  compelling,  as
             explained in paras 37-38 above."

     61. At paragraph 50 he went on to conclude that,

             "... The critical issue for the  tribunal  will  generally  be
             whether, giving due weight  to  the  strength  of  the  public
             interest in the deportation of the offender in the case before
             it, the article 8 claim is sufficiently strong to outweigh it.
             In general, only a claim which is very strong  indeed  -  very
             compelling, as it was put in MF (Nigeria) - will succeed."

     62. Finally, in  MF  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192; [2014] 1 WLR  544,  the  Court  of
         Appeal  suggests  "something  very   compelling   which   will   be
         exceptional is required to outweigh the public interest in removal"
         (para 42).

     63. In conclusion, we struggled to  find  any  sufficiently  compelling
         circumstances, even, as we  were  encouraged  to  do,  viewing  the
         different elements cumulatively.

Article 8

     64. The public interest considerations set out at section 117B identify
         the matters the tribunal and /or court  at  first  instance  should
         take into account in all cases when considering Article 8.

     65. Importantly for these purposes, sections 117A - 117D of  the  NIAA,
         taken together, are intended to provide for a  structured  approach
         to the application of Article 8, which, in the words of Sir Stephen
         Richards in NE-A (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2017] EWCA Civ 239 at paragraph 14,  'produces  in  all
         cases the final result, which is compatible with Article  8',  (see
         also paragraph 36 of NA (Pakistan)).

     66. As a result, this appeal by the Secretary of State must succeed and
         the appellant's Article 8 appeal must fail.



Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to this Upper Tribunal is allowed.

Mr Kiarie's appeal is dismissed.



No application was made for anonymity in this appeal. The  general  rule  is
that hearings are held in public and judicial decisions are published  (A  v
BBC [2014] UKSC 25) and we saw no reason to depart from the general rule  in
this case.


Signed   [pic]
     Date 4 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sutherland Williams
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
