
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/11744/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 March 2019                         |On 12 April 2019                   |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between

                                     SHC
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Parkes, promulgated on 9 January 2019. Permission to appeal was granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on 12 February 2019.

Anonymity

  2. An anonymity direction was made previously and is reiterated below.

Background

 3. The appellant's husband entered the  United  Kingdom  using  a  British
    passport in the identity of a deceased person. The  appellant  and  her
    son (S), now aged 9, were granted leave to enter the United Kingdom  as
    a partner and  minor  child  of  the  person  named  in  her  husband's
    fraudulently obtained passport and entered the  United  Kingdom  on  14
    December 2011. The appellant and (S)  were  granted  further  leave  to
    remain until 1 October 2016. The appellant gave birth to a daughter (R)
    in the United Kingdom in 2012 who is now aged 6. R was issued a British
    passport in 2014, however this was revoked in  2016.  On  16  September
    2016, the appellant's husband was convicted of  a  series  of  offences
    involving the use of  false  documents  and  sentenced  to  consecutive
    prison sentences amounting to 53 months, in total. On 19 October  2016,
    the  appellant's  husband  was  served  with  a  decision  to  make   a
    deportation order against him under section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act
    2007.

 4. The appellant applied for further leave to  remain  under  the  10-year
    family  life  route  24  August  2017  which  remains  outstanding.  In
    addition, a human rights claim was raised in response to the  Secretary
    of State's decision to make  a  deportation  order  against  her  on  8
    January 2018.

 5. The Secretary of State, in the decision  letter  of  28  January  2018,
    relied on paragraph 363(ii) of the Immigration  Rules,  considering  it
    was appropriate to deport the appellant as a family member of a  person
    ordered to be deported. It was  emphasised  that  the  appellant  might
    relocate to Bangladesh voluntarily.  Consideration  was  given  to  the
    appellant's Article 8 claim, based on the presence of her  husband  and
    children in the United  Kingdom  as  well  as  her  own  private  life,
    established since her arrival in 2011. In short, it was noted that  the
    requirements of paragraph 399(a) were not met because neither child had
    lived in the United Kingdom for at least 7 years  and  furthermore,  it
    was not  considered  harsh  for  the  appellant's  children,  who  were
    considered to also be Bangladeshi nationals, to accompany her  and  her
    husband to Bangladesh.  Nor did the appellant meet the requirements  of
    paragraph 399A given her short and unlawful  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom. Consideration was given to whether there were any  exceptional
    circumstances as the appellant  had  indicated  that  S  had  a  health
    condition. The outstanding application for further leave to remain  was
    refused under paragraph 322(1B) of the Rules because the appellant  was
    subject to a deportation order as well as under S-LTR 1.6 owing to  her
    association with her husband. Separate decisions  were  made,  refusing
    the human rights claims of the appellant's husband and each child.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. Prior to the appeal hearing, Kalam Solicitors wrote to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 17 July 2108, in the following terms, "Appellant  does  not
    wish her appeal to be joined with her husband's appeal. This is because
    she has been separated from her husband since October 2016. She has  no
    communication with her husband since that date. Appellant do  not  want
    her children  to  see  their  father  for  the  best  interest  of  her
    children's upbringing because of her husband's present circumstances. "

 7. The application to unlink the  appellant's  appeal  from  that  of  her
    husband was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  M  Robertson  because
    the case papers indicated that the  appellant  had  been  visiting  her
    husband in prison with the children throughout 2017.

 8. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the  appellant's  appeal
    remained linked to that  of  her  husband,  which  included  an  appeal
    against a refusal to recognise him as a refugee. There were no  appeals
    in relation to the decisions to deport the children.

 9. The judge's conclusions on the linked appeals are set out in  a  single
    decision. The judge found the asylum claim of the  appellant's  husband
    to lack credibility and did not therefore accept that he was of adverse
    interest  to  the  Bangladeshi  authorities.  The  judge  rejected  the
    appellant's claim that she was no longer in  a  relationship  with  her
    husband as a ruse designed to avoid deportation. By  the  time  of  the
    hearing, S had resided in the United Kingdom for 7 years,  however  the
    judge found that it was not unreasonable to expect  him  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom with his parents.

Permission to appeal

10. The appellant appealed however her husband did  not.  Firstly,  it  was
    argued that the judge was wrong to find that  it  did  not  affect  the
    outcome of the appeal whether or not the appellant and her husband were
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship because if they were not,  the
    deportation order against the appellant would cease to have effect.

11. Secondly, the judge  was  said  to  have  erred  in  finding  that  the
    appellant remained in a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  her
    husband because the judge had taken into  consideration  the  husband's
    demeanour, which was  an  irrelevant  consideration.  Furthermore,  the
    judge had not considered the appellant's evidence that she visited  her
    husband in prison for the sake of the children; that  her  husband  had
    called her from the prison as opposed  to  the  appellant  calling  her
    husband; that the judge engaged in speculation and that  the  appellant
    was not  asked  for  an  explanation  as  to  the  recent  relationship
    breakdown.

12. Thirdly, the judge's findings as whether it was either unreasonable  or
    unduly harsh for the children to leave the United Kingdom were said  to
    be erroneous in a number of respects.

13. It was contended that the judge did not engage with the findings in  EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874; that the appellant's  case  was  not
    analogous to that of the claimant NS in KO  (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  53
    because it was not the  respondent's  case  that  she  had  engaged  in
    deception;   that  the  judge  considered  parental  conduct   in   his
    reasonableness assessment and imposed unduly stringent  requirement  in
    failing to recognise that it did not need to be shown that the children
    would be without support or unable to reintegrate in Bangladesh, MT and
    ET (child's best interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria  [2018]  UKUT  88
    (IAC).

14. Permission to appeal was granted on the following basis;

    "a fair reading of the judge's decision arguably established  that  the
    judge did embark upon speculation at paragraph 46 of the  decision  and
    did engage in unjustified speculation if regard was had  to  paragraphs
    49, 50 and 52 of the decision and the judge arguably took into  account
    irrelevant considerations.

Submissions


 15. The appellant did not attend the hearing of her appeal on 20 March
     2019 and nor was she represented.


 16. An appellant's bundle was emailed to the Tribunal in advance of the
     hearing, which lacked a detailed index but consisted of several
     hundred pages. Having examined the documents therein, it transpired
     that there was nothing there which was not already present on the case
     file.


 17. On 19 March 2019, Kalam Solicitors wrote to the Upper Tribunal in the
     following terms;


 "We write to confirm that we are unable to instruct counsel  to  represent
      the above client at the hearing  as  the  appellant  is  going  (sic)
      extreme financial difficulties and could not arrange  money  for  the
      hearing. The appellant has now instructed us to make a request to the
      Upper Tribunal to decide the appeal on papers on the file.

 We are therefore requesting the Upper Tribunal Judge to decide this  appeal
      in our absence on the basis of papers and in light of the  grounds  of
      appeal."

 18. In view of the clear request from the appellant's solicitors, I
     decided to proceed with the hearing in the absence of the appellant
     and her representative.


 19. I heard submissions from  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  which  are  summarised
     here. She confirmed that the appellant's husband had not appealed  the
     dismissal of his appeal, but that removal action  had  been  postponed
     pending the outcome of the appellant's appeal.  The main  argument  of
     the appellant was summarised as that the judge  should  have  accepted
     that the appellant and her husband were no longer in a relationship.

 20. Regarding the first ground,  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  accepted  that  the
     respondent's guidance said that if an applicant no longer formed  part
     of the family of a person subject to the Deportation Order, they would
     not be liable for deportation. However, while the judge indicated that
     it made no difference if the appellant and her husband  were  together
     or  not,  this  error  was  immaterial  because  he  found  that   the
     relationship was still subsisting.

 21. On  the  second  ground,  it  was  said  that  the  judge  engaged  in
     speculation at [49, 50 and 52]; that the appellant  only  visited  her
     husband because of the children and that the judge was not entitled to
     consider other matters. Ms Willocks-Briscoe drew my attention to  [47-
     48] of the decision where  the  judge  referred  to  the  evidence  of
     telephone records  and  family  visits  provided  by  the  appellant's
     husband in his bundle. The evidence presented to the Tribunal  by  the
     appellant's  husband  was  that  he  and  the  appellant  were  in   a
     relationship.

 22. Ms Willocks-Briscoe argued that the judge had not taken  into  account
     irrelevant considerations and on the contrary directed himself at [49-
     50] that his comments regarding  the  circumstances  of  the  arranged
     marriage were to be disregarded. As to the demeanour issue, she argued
     that the judge was entitled at [51] to have regard  to  the  husband's
     conduct on apparently learning that the relationship was over  at  the
     hearing.

 23. Regarding the allegation that the judge had not  asked  the  appellant
     for an explanation as to  the  relationship  breakdown,  Ms  Willocks-
     Briscoe took me to her two witness statements which provided  such  an
     explanation. She argued that it was open for the judge to consider the
     appellant's explanation in the light of the  evidence  of  visits  and
     telephone records which went well into 2018, which were relied upon by
     the appellant's husband to show family life was continuing.

 24. Ms Willocks-Briscoe contended that the  findings  of  the  judge  were
     properly assessed, dealt with the evidence  holistically  and  he  was
     entitled to find that the marriage was still  subsisting  as  well  as
     that the appellant was attempting to distance herself from her husband
     as this was the only way the appeal could succeed.


 25. As for the last ground, there had been no evidence  before  the  judge
     about the likely circumstances in Bangladesh or  why  there  would  be
     difficulties for the children or why the  parents  could  not  protect
     their best interests. At [57], [58] and [62], the judge looked at  the
     circumstances of the children and could not be criticised for  failing
     to make findings on arguments or evidence not before him.  Lastly,  Ms
     Willocks-Briscoe argued that there was no  reason  why  the  appellant
     could not have attended the hearing in the absence of counsel and that
     the reality was that she is in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
     with her husband.

 26. At the end of the hearing, I announced that I found no material  error
     of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  My reasons are set
     out below.

Discussion

27. The first ground is unarguable. The grounds assert that the  judge  was
    wrong to state that the issue as  to  whether  the  appellant  and  her
    husband were or were not in a subsisting relationship  did  not  affect
    the outcome of  the  appeal.  This  is  a  misreading  of  the  judge's
    findings. When the paragraph is read as a whole it is obvious that  the
    judge made no such finding.  At [61], which  was  at  the  end  of  the
    decision, the judge was summarising the  protection  and  human  rights
    issues, saying as follows;

    "None of the family have any legal status in the UK. Whether the  First
    and Second Appellants are still in a  subsisting  relationship  or  not
    does not affect the outcome."

28. The judge was correct in finding that the appellant  had  no  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom and that this  would  still  be  the  case
    whether or not she was in a subsisting relationship with  her  husband.
    Even were the grounds correct in stating that an error had occurred, it
    would be immaterial because the judge considered the  position  of  the
    relationship between the appellant at her husband in depth from [45-58]
    and  firmly  concluded  at  [60]  that  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and her husband remained genuine and subsisting.

29. I now address the second ground of appeal.  In  assessing  whether  the
    appellant's marriage was genuine and subsisting, it is argued that  the
    judge took into account the demeanour of the appellant's husband, which
    was an irrelevant consideration. It was further argued that  the  judge
    failed to take into consideration the appellant's evidence  as  to  the
    reason for the continued contact with her husband and for  the  claimed
    relationship breakdown and embarked on speculation.

30. The appeal of the appellant's husband was partially based on his family
    life with the appellant  and  their  children.  That  relationship  was
    accepted as genuine and subsisting by the respondent  in  the  decision
    refusing the appellant's husband's challenge to the deportation order.

31. Recent authority on the issue of demeanour was given at [41] of SS (Sri
    Lanka) [2018] EWCA Civ 1391;


    "No doubt it is impossible, and perhaps undesirable, to ignore
    altogether the impression created by the demeanour of a witness giving
    evidence. But to attach any significant weight to such impressions in
    assessing credibility risks making judgments which at best have no
    rational basis and at worst reflect conscious or unconscious biases and
    prejudices. One of the most important qualities expected of a judge is
    that they will strive to avoid being influenced by personal biases and
    prejudices in their decision-making. That requires eschewing judgments
    based on the appearance of a witness or on their tone, manner or other
    aspects of their behaviour in answering questions. Rather than
    attempting to assess whether testimony is truthful from the manner in
    which it is given, the only objective and reliable approach is to focus
    on the content of the testimony and to consider whether it is
    consistent with other evidence (including evidence of what the witness
    has said on other occasions) and with known or probable facts. "

32. The appellant married her husband in August 2007 and lived with him and
    their two children until he was arrested in 2016. It is not in  dispute
    that since then she has frequently visited  her  husband  and  accepted
    lengthy telephone calls from him and documentary evidence of  this  was
    contained in the bundle submitted by her  husband  in  support  of  his
    family life in the United Kingdom. She  has  also  sent  money  to  her
    husband in prison. In her witness statement dated 8 January  2018,  the
    appellant made no mention of her relationship with her  husband  having
    ended. However, her statement of 17 December 2018 says  the  following,
    "I am eager for my husband to return home for the sake of  my  children
    so we can co-parent together to give our children  the  best  start  in
    life despite the circumstances. However  I  do  not  want  any  marital
    relationship with my husband because I still feel angry and hurt due to
    him being unfaithful about his immigration past."

33. At [46] the judge records that he was informed that it was only  during
    cross-examination of the appellant's husband  that  the  latter  became
    aware that the appellant had ended their relationship.  Therefore,  the
    judge's comment that if it was the case that this was the first time he
    had heard of it, the appellant's husband was  "remarkably  composed  by
    the news that his married life had come to an end,"  must  be  seen  in
    that context and with the proviso added by the judge of  "if  that  was
    so."  A fair reading of the judge's comments indicates that he does not
    wholly accept that the appellant's husband was unaware of the basis  of
    her case.  Furthermore at [51-53] the judge sets out why  he  does  not
    accept that the marriage is over based on the  appellant's  conduct  in
    continuing to visit, accept telephone calls  and  send  money  and  her
    unsatisfactory explanation for the conduct. It is only after the  judge
    concludes that "their relationship remains genuine and subsisting" that
    he mentioned that his  findings  were  "reinforced"  by  the  husband's
    demeanour. There is no indication that judge arrived at his conclusions
    on the state of the marriage based solely  or  even  partially  on  her
    husband's apparent lack of distress regarding this issue. In any event,
    the appellant's most recent witness statement  does  not  unequivocally
    state that the marriage is over.

34. There is no basis for finding  that  the  judge  failed  to  take  into
    consideration the appellant's explanation for the visits to her husband
    as well as the telephone calls. That explanation was contained  in  her
    witness statement of 11 September 2018 at  paragraph  6,  which  formed
    part of her evidence and which was referred to at [21][52] and [55]  of
    the judge's decision. At [52],  the  judge  sets  out  the  appellant's
    evidence as to why she continued to visit, communicate  with  and  send
    money to her husband and clearly states that  he  did  not  accept  her
    explanation.

35. The judge was  faced  with  conflicting  evidence.  The  appellant  was
    stating that her marriage was over whereas her husband was  relying  on
    his continuing  family  life.  The  judge  resolved  that  conflict  by
    concluding that the appellant had  chosen  to  visit  her  husband  and
    accept his calls in circumstances where she was not compelled to do  so
    and furthermore that there was no need to send her  husband  money  for
    food, given that he would be fed by the prison.

36. It is clear from a fair  reading  of  the  decision  that  the  judge's
    findings regarding the state of the marriage were not  based  upon  the
    demeanour of her husband alone but solely  upon  discrepancies  in  the
    evidence of the  appellant  and  her  husband  as  to  the  nature  and
    subsistence of  their  relationship  and  the  appellant's  implausible
    explanation for her conduct.

37. The grounds assert that  at  [49]  the  judge  engaged  in  speculation
    regarding his view that the appellant would  have  been  aware  of  her
    husband's true identity given that they  had  a  marriage  arranged  by
    their respective families.

38. There is no merit in this argument when one looks  at  [50]  where  the
    judge demonstrates that he did not attach  weight  to  this  matter  in
    arriving at his conclusions. He said the following:

    "This aspect is not an important point and can be disregarded  as  part
    of the overall consideration of the cases..."

39. It is further argued that the judge engaged in speculation at  [52]  in
    his assessment of whether the appellant's conduct in regularly visiting
    and speaking to her husband indicated that the marriage was subsisting.
    At [47-48] of the decision the judge summarised the evidence of regular
    visits and lengthy  telephone  calls  between  the  appellant  and  her
    husband and was entitled to  reject  the  appellant's  claim  that  the
    marriage was over and conclude that the evidence of  contact  showed  a
    subsisting marriage.  It was not speculation, but common sense, for the
    judge to state that the  appellant  was  not  compelled  to  visit  her
    husband in prison or accept his telephone calls and that there  was  no
    need to send him money for food.

40. The last ground, upon which permission was not  granted,  is  not  made
    out. The judge fully considered the circumstances  of  the  appellant's
    children which included the extent of support available to  the  family
    unit in Bangladesh [57], as well as the stage of their education [54  &
    58] and that the third appellant had resided in the United Kingdom  for
    7 years by the time of the appeal. The judge records that  he  was  not
    informed of there being any circumstances  out  of  the  ordinary  [62]
    which would outweigh the public interest in  deportation.  Indeed,  the
    grounds identify no such circumstances.

41. The judge directed himself appropriately, having regard to the relevant
    case law including KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53. Indeed, at [18] of  KO,
    the following is said;

    "it seems to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to consider  where
    the parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected  to  be,
    since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.  To
    that extent the record of the parents may become  indirectly  material,
    if it leads to their ceasing to have a right to remain here, and having
    to leave."

42.  The judge did not punish the children for the parents'  behaviour.  At
    [57], the judge took the appellant's case  at  its  highest,  accepting
    that she was unaware of her husband's use of deception including on her
    own behalf.

43. The judge did not err in stating that the parents were  in  the  United
    Kingdom without leave and at [59] that there was no evidence to support
    a conclusion that it would not be reasonable to expect the eldest child
    to accompany his parents to Bangladesh.


Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 05 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
