
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11877/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On Wednesday 6 January 2021                |On 19 January 2021              |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                   G C Z N
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For  the  Appellant:      Mr  R  Solomons,  Counsel   instructed   by   Kent
                    Immigration and Visa Advice
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  The  case  concerns
the  medical  conditions  of  the  Appellant  which   is   highly   personal
information. Accordingly, it is appropriate to continue the  order.   Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify her or any member of her family. This  direction  applies,  amongst
others, to both parties. Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead
to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Reid promulgated on 31 December 2019 ("the Decision"). By the Decision,
    the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's
    decision dated 17 June 2019 refusing her human rights claims made in
    the context of an application for entry as the adult dependent citizen
    of her daughter who is a British citizen (hereafter "the Sponsor").

 2. The Appellant is a national of Venezuela.  She lived in the UK in the
    1980s and owned property here.  She returned to Venezuela in 1990 with
    her son.  She was issued with a multi-entry visit visa in 2015 valid to
    2020 and spent the majority of the time from late 2017 to late 2019 in
    the UK living with her daughter pursuant to visits made with the
    benefit of that visa.  As an aside, although the Appellant was living
    in Venezuela at the time of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal
    in December 2019, she came to the UK thereafter before the first
    lockdown measures were imposed in March 2020 (lawfully using her visit
    visa) and has remained since.  Although, strictly, her leave as a
    visitor will, I assume, have expired, given the current pandemic, she
    is permitted to remain for the time being on an exceptional basis.

 3. The Appellant has a son and other relatives still living in Venezuela.
    Until 2017, whilst living in Venezuela, she lived with her son and was
    cared for by her granddaughters.  However, following an attack on the
    house in 2016 during which one of her granddaughters was assaulted, her
    granddaughters moved to Spain in 2017.  Following the Appellant's
    return to Venezuela in 2019, she once more lived with her son and his
    wife.  Her son travels away on business within Venezuela.  The
    Appellant does not have a good relationship with her daughter-in-law.
    She also has a niece in Venezuela who cares for her own mother (the
    Appellant's sister). The Appellant suffers from a number of medical
    conditions.

 4. There is no substantial dispute about the facts of this case, the
    majority of which were accepted as proven by Judge Reid.  However,
    whilst accepting that the Appellant needs some assistance to meet her
    physical and emotional needs, the Judge did not accept that such care
    would not be available to her in Venezuela.  The Judge therefore
    concluded that the Appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules ("the
    Rules").  She went on to consider the human rights claim outside the
    Rules but concluded that the refusal to grant entry clearance was not a
    disproportionate interference with the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR
    rights.  She therefore dismissed the appeal.

 5. The Appellant appeals the Decision on four grounds which can be broadly
    summarised as follows:

         Ground one: the Judge erred by deciding the issues as at date of
         decision rather than date of hearing.  Additionally, the Judge
         erred by failing to take the Sponsor's Article 8 rights as a
         starting point.

         Ground two: the Judge erred by failing properly to consider the
         evidence in various regards, reaching findings which were not open
         to her on the evidence or reaching findings which are perverse.

         Ground three: in light of the matters raised in ground two, the
         Judge ought to have found that the Appellant satisfies the Rules.
         That would be determinative of the human rights claim in the
         Appellant's favour and the Judge was wrong to conclude that it was
         not.

         Ground four: the Judge erred by considering the Appellant's family
         life separately from her private life rather than considering both
         aspects together. The Judge also erred by concluding that the
         effect of the Decision was not such as to require the Sponsor to
         leave the UK.

 6. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey on
    8 April 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 4.  The Appellant was seeking entry clearance to join her
         daughter in the UK as an adult dependent relative.  The grounds
         rightly identified that the Judge misdirected herself as to the
         date of consideration of the issues before her (at [1]).  However,
         it was clear from the body of the determination that the Judge had
         proper regard to all the evidence and circumstances before her,
         including that which post-dated the decision.  Similarly, any
         misdirection regarding the impact upon proportionality of meeting
         the Immigration Rules (at [9]) was of no impact, since the Judge's
         findings that the Rules were not met in any event is not
         challenged.  To that end, the errors of direction were not material
         to the outcome of the appeal.  The Judge is criticised for
         speculating as to the existence of paid care in Venezuela in the
         absence of evidence.  The criticism is ill-founded.  It was for the
         Appellant to advance such evidence and, in the absence of the same,
         it was open to the Judge to find the unavailability of such care
         not made out.  The Judge went on to consider all the relevant
         evidence and analysed the same in a clear, structured and cogent
         way (at [19] to [46]).  She reached findings open to her on that
         evidence and provided sufficient reasons for her conclusions.
         There was nothing inherently flawed in the Judge's approach to how
         she analysed the Appellant's family and private life (separately,
         rather than cumulatively).  That approach did not, without more,
         indicate that the Judge had not gone on to determine the
         proportionality of the Article 8 interference cumulatively.

         5.   As such, the grounds disclosed no arguable errors of law and
         permission to appeal is refused."

 7. On renewal of the application, permission to appeal was granted by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on 21 July 2020 in the following terms so
    far as relevant:

         "... 3.  It is arguable that the judge erred in deciding the issues
         as at the date of the decision rather than the hearing.  It is
         further arguable that the judge erred in making a finding regarding
         the availability of paid care without considering the context of
         the country concerned.  The grounds emphasise that the crux of this
         case is that of the emotional needs of the appellant who lived with
         the sponsor until 2017 and her distress at being separated from the
         sponsor.

         4.   Permission is granted on all grounds."

 8. The hearing before me was conducted via Skype for Business. There were
    some minor technical issues with Mr Clarke's connection and when the
    Sponsor addressed me at the end of the hearing but, overall, that did
    not affect my understanding of the submissions made.  In addition to
    the representatives for the parties, the hearing was joined remotely by
    the Sponsor and the Appellant.  The parties confirmed that they were
    able to follow the proceedings throughout. I had before me the
    Appellant's bundle for the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal as
    well as the skeleton argument for that hearing.  I refer to documents
    in the Appellant's bundle as [AB/xx]. Mr Clarke also provided me with a
    copy of the Court of Appeal's judgment in Britcits v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 368 ("Britcits") on which
    reliance was placed by both parties.

 9. The matter comes before me to determine whether the Decision contains
    an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-make the decision
    or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so. It was
    accepted by the parties that, if I found an error in the Decision, I
    could go on to re-make the Decision on the evidence before me.  There
    was no application to adduce further evidence, the facts were not in
    dispute and there was no challenge to the Judge's record of the
    evidence given to her.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

10. I deal with the grounds in turn but in a different order given the
    emphasis of the oral submissions.

Ground 1

11. This ground did not form a major part of the Appellant's case before
    me.  Mr Clarke accepted that the Judge has misdirected herself at [1]
    and [17] of the Decision where she said that, as an appeal against an
    entry clearance decision, the issues have to be decided as at date of
    the Respondent's decision rather than date of hearing.  The case on
    which the Judge relies at [17] of the Decision pre-dates the changes in
    appeal rights brought about by the Immigration Act 2014.  The relevant
    date for determination of all issues including in an entry clearance
    appeal is date of hearing.

12. As such, Mr Clarke conceded this was an error.  However, as he pointed
    out and as Judge Povey noted when refusing permission, notwithstanding
    the misdirection, the Judge has in fact gone on to consider the
    evidence after the date of the Respondent's decision, in particular the
    report of Dr De Lima dated December 2019 to which I will need to
    return.  As Mr Clarke also pointed out, the passage of time in this
    case between the Respondent's decision (in June 2019) and date of
    hearing before Judge Reid (in December 2019) is not lengthy and there
    is no indication that the issues or evidential position had changed
    between those dates or, if it had, that later evidence had been
    considered. As such, either there is not an error in the way in which
    the Judge approached the issues notwithstanding the erroneous self-
    direction or the error is not material.

13. I can also deal very shortly with the second sub-set of ground one,
    concerning the focus of the Article 8 claim.  As I pointed out to Mr
    Solomon (and he did not disagree), the question of the focus of the
    Article 8 claim depends on the facts.  The case relied upon in the
    grounds (KF and others (entry clearance, relatives of refugees) Syria
    [2019] UKUT 413 (IAC) is distinguishable on its facts. In that case,
    the main impact in Article 8 terms was on the family life of a young
    man who was recognised as a refugee in the UK by reason of the denial
    of entry clearance to his relatives living abroad.  In this case, the
    main impact complained of is on the Appellant herself who, although
    living abroad, is unable to come to the UK to join her daughter
    permanently and be cared for by her.  It is the Appellant's rights
    rather than the Sponsor which are the main focus of both the issues and
    the evidence.  The Judge did not err therefore in dealing with the case
    as it was presented to her.

Ground three

14. At [9] of the Decision, the Judge said this about the way in which the
    Rules interact with the Article 8 issues:

         "The decision was made in the context of the family and private
         life provisions of the Immigration Rules and so consideration of
         the position under the Rules forms part of the overall
         consideration of the appeal as regards the claimed breach of
         Article 8, even though the only ground of appeal available is under
         s6 Human Rights Act 1998.  If however an appellant meets the Rules
         then the fact that they do so is a weighty (though not
         determinative) matter in deciding whether the decision is
         proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing immigration
         control (Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112
         (IAC))."

    Whilst the Judge is right to say that whether an appellant meets the
    Rules may not always be determinative (for example if a person who
    otherwise meets the Rules has a poor immigration history or there is
    other reason for refusal falling outside the general grounds), in this
    case, if the Appellant does meet the Rules, as Mr Clarke accepted, the
    Appellant would be entitled to succeed.  I agree with Judge Povey
    however that this is immaterial if the Judge's conclusion that the
    Appellant does not meet the Rules is sound.

Ground two

15. I therefore turn to ground two which challenges the Judge's conclusion
    that the Appellant cannot meet the Rules.  Ground two is divided into
    five sections ((a) to (e)).  The focus of Mr Solomon's oral submissions
    was on (c) and (d) which largely overlap and encompass also ground 2(e)
    and I will therefore take those together at the outset.  Those concern
    the Judge's findings about the availability and adequacy of care for
    the Appellant on an emotional level in Venezuela.

16. Before I do so however I set out that part of the Decision dealing with
    availability and adequacy of care in Venezuela generally in order to
    set the grounds and submissions in context:

         "23. Taking the above findings into account I therefore find that
         in terms of the physical help day to day the Appellant needs help
         with washing and dressing (including handwashing) due to the
         arthritis (or osteoporosis) in her right knee and right shoulder.
         She also needs some help with cooking for herself though is not
         totally unable to take any part in cooking for herself or preparing
         basic food for herself if already pre-cooked for her or if she is
         helped to cook.  Whilst it was said she could not use a kettle I
         find that her arthritis does not affect her left side or either of
         her hands and wrists such that she could use a small kettle or
         simple implements using mostly her left hand if necessary.  She
         also needs support with her medication regime (ie organising it in
         a way which helps her to remember the doses and timings even if
         someone is not with her) due to the slowing of her cognitive
         processes and issues with short-term memory (page A18).  It was not
         suggested that she needed any toilet help.  I therefore find that
         in terms of her physical needs the Appellant does not need round
         the clock care or supervision (for example in a care home) but
         needs a visit once a day to help with these tasks.  This is
         consistent with what is currently happening in practice now that
         the Appellant has returned to Venezuela (thus indicative of the
         needs of the situation at the time of the decision); based on the
         Sponsor's oral evidence when the Appellant's son [C] is away for
         work [L] her niece comes in every day to visit the Appellant.
         Given the Appellant is financially secure (see findings below) and
         no issues were raised as to the affordability of daily care visits,
         I find that the Appellant can afford to pay for that level of care
         and support.  Whilst I accept that some of that involves personal
         care, and the Appellant would prefer that to come from a female
         relative, it could be provided by a female paid carer.  There may
         also be adaptations to the annexe where she currently lives (and
         lived till 2017) which can be made to allow her to be more
         independent or to make things easier for her.

         24.  In terms of emotional and psychological support I find that
         whilst the Appellant has relied on the Sponsor when in the UK for
         emotional support, and this is important support, since returning
         to Venezuela recently she has had support of her son (although not
         apparently also her son's wife who is not very supportive).  Whilst
         the Appellant has spent significant periods of time in the UK since
         November 2017 (page A10) and has not lived with her son during
         those periods in the UK, she lived primarily with him until 2017
         when her granddaughters left Venezuela.  There does not seem to
         have been any issue with her returning to live with him when she
         returned to Venezuela in December 2019, taking into account she
         appears to have helped her son and his wife buy a bigger property
         (page A2).  Because the Appellant says she sold her house to enable
         her son and his wife to buy a bigger property (which she then also
         lived in) I find that the plan had been that there be the space for
         her to live with them in a bigger property, having sold hers (there
         is an annexe page A2 para 24).  There was no suggestion that the
         annexe was no longer available for her use.  The house holds some
         bad memories for the family since a frightening incident in 2016
         (page A3) but they have not moved.  I therefore find that the
         Appellant needs emotional support but that does not have to come
         entirely from the Sponsor when physically present (though they
         would both want it that way).  The Sponsor's evidence was that she
         supported her mother by talking to her (the Sponsor is a qualified
         therapist) but that does not need to stop if the Appellant is not
         in the UK.  The Sponsor is a British citizen and can travel to
         visit her mother at any time without any restriction on her ability
         to return to the UK.  The Sponsor is no longer solely responsible
         for her son D now that he is in supported accommodation.  The
         Appellant is financially secure (see below) and can help with the
         costs of travel for the Sponsor.

         Availability of the required level of care for the Appellant in
         Venezuela

         25.  I find based on the Sponsor's oral evidence that neither she
         nor her brother has done any real research into obtaining paid care
         at the level identified above (ie the level of care which is
         actually required).  Whilst it was said at the hearing that the
         Appellant's son had made some enquiries there was no witness
         statement from him identifying what he had researched and the
         outcome.  The Appellant does not need 24 hour care in a care home.
         In any event the Sponsor (page A10) says that the Appellant's view
         is that hiring in help is out of the question for the Appellant,
         from which I find that whether or not care could be arranged, the
         Appellant would not want to accept it.  However I find that the
         Appellant does not take this attitude when in the UK (page A10 para
         26,29).

         26.  I was provided with newspaper articles setting out the
         difficult healthcare situation in Venezuela (pages A122-132) and Dr
         Harris and Dr De Lima commented on the general situation (pages
         A13, A19).  Whilst I accept that the situation as regards public
         healthcare in general is difficult and that there are shortages in
         qualified staff, treatment and medication supply, what the
         Appellant needs is daily care and the evidence provided, when taken
         in conjunction with the absence of any real enquiries made to
         obtain such care, does not support the absence of the availability
         of the relatively basic level of care the Appellant needs.  As
         regards healthcare in general and access to medications the
         Appellant is in practice in the same position as all citizens of
         Venezuela, and the key thing for her is the day to day care she
         needs, which on the evidence before me is not unavailable and not
         unaffordable.  She is not for example awaiting significant surgery
         she cannot have because it is not available.  Her medical needs are
         those which might be expected in an elderly lady of 85 and not for
         example complex medical needs arising from a complex or unusual
         condition or conditions, which needs would be likely to be more
         severely affected by the current problems across healthcare in
         Venezuela.  She has family in Venezuela who can help her access
         healthcare."

17. The Appellant's grounds do not challenge the Judge's findings as to the
    level of physical care which the Appellant requires.  The Judge
    considered the evidence in that regard at [20] of the Decision which,
    since her findings in that regard are not challenged, I do not need to
    set out. Although the Judge gave some of the medical evidence less
    weight for reasons there given, she reached findings about the
    Appellant's physical, medical conditions and needs consistent with that
    evidence and which are not in dispute.

18. The Appellant's grounds also do not challenge the Judge's summary of
    the evidence about the Appellant emotional needs which evidence is to
    be found in the report of Dr Dr De Lima (to be found translated at
    [AB/17-18]).  Since it is that aspect of care which formed the major
    part of the oral submissions, however, I set out the summary of that
    evidence at [21] of the Decision as follows:

         "The Appellant saw a psychiatrist in December 2019 (Dr De Lima,
         page A17) who diagnosed a mild neurocognitive disorder and an
         adjustment disorder.  Despite reporting forgetfulness and
         repetitive conversations, there was no diagnosis of dementia type
         conditions or Alzheimer's.  Her cognitive speed is however slowed
         (page A18).  Dr De Lima makes no mention of any physical health
         conditions also affecting her or making her mood worse.  From Dr De
         Lima's report I find that the primary cause of the Appellant's
         symptoms was her sadness at being away from her daughter (pages A17-
         18)."

19. Mr Clarke did not have access to the Appellant's bundle.  Mr Solomon
    took issue with Mr Clarke's submission that the Appellant's condition
    was described as mild overall, pointing to the reference to "mild
    neurocognitive disorder" and "an adjustment disorder" (not described as
    mild) in the report itself.  However, since Mr Clarke did not have the
    report, his mischaracterisation can be forgiven; he was simply
    intending to refer to the Judge's summary.  Although Mr Solomon
    referred me to the report itself, he was constrained to accept that the
    grounds do not take issue with the Judge's summary of that report as
    being accurate.

20. I did not understand the relevant legal test as to adequacy and
    availability of care to be at issue but for completeness, I set out
    [59] of the judgment in Britcits on which both parties rely as follows:

         "Second, as is apparent from the Rules and the Guidance, the focus
         is on whether the care required by the ADR applicant can be
         'reasonably' provided and to 'the required level' in their home
         country.  As Mr Sheldon confirmed in his oral submissions, the
         provision of care in the home country must be reasonable both from
         the perspective of the provider and the perspective of the
         applicant, and the standard of such care must be what is required
         for that particular applicant.  It is possible that insufficient
         attention has been paid in the past to these considerations, which
         focus on what care is both necessary and reasonable for the
         applicant to receive in their home country.  Those considerations
         include issues as to the accessibility and geographical location of
         the provision of care and the standard of care.  They are capable
         of embracing emotional and psychological requirements verified by
         expert medical evidence.  What is reasonable is, of course, to be
         objectively assessed"

    In relation to that extract, Mr Clarke relied on the fact specific
    nature of the consideration of what care is reasonably available and
    adequacy of that care whereas Mr Solomon relied on the reference to the
    need to consider "emotional and psychological requirements" alongside
    physical requirements and pointed to the report of Dr De Lima as
    satisfying the need for "expert medical evidence".

21. Returning then to grounds 2(c) to 2(e), it cannot sensibly be said that
    the Judge did not consider the Appellant's emotional needs or care
    available.  So much is evident from [25] of the Decision.  I have
    already pointed to the summary of the evidence in that regard at [21]
    of the Decision which summary is not challenged.

22. The first point made in ground 2(c) is that the Judge's consideration
    of the Appellant's emotional needs in Venezuela is inadequate.  The
    Appellant asserts there and in grounds 2(d) and 2(e) that the Judge
    fails to take into account relevant factors.

23. In ground 2(c) itself, in addition to the reference to the Appellant's
    "sadness at being away from her daughter" ([21]) and that the Appellant
    "has relied on the Sponsor when in the UK for emotional support, and
    this is important support" ([24]), the Appellant also relies on the
    Judge's finding at [37] of the Decision that the emotional ties between
    Appellant and Sponsor go beyond the normal emotional ties and amount to
    family life ([37] of the Decision), that the Appellant and Sponsor have
    "a good relationship" and are "close" because they have lived together
    for most of the time since 2017 ([41]) and that the Appellant is
    distressed at being apart from the Sponsor ([41]).  The Judge also
    acknowledges at [42] of the Decision that the separation is difficult
    for both the Appellant and the Sponsor as they "miss each other and are
    very upset by the situation" ([42] of the Decision).

24. The difficulty with the Appellant's submission that the Judge fails
    adequately to consider the emotional and psychological needs when
    assessing the claim under the Rules is however evident from that
    summary.  The references to parts of the Decision which follow the
    consideration of the needs and adequacy of care under the Rules relate
    to factors which are already to be found in what is said at [21] and
    [24] of the Decision.  All of those factors are expressly considered.
    There is no merit to the submission that the Appellant's emotional
    needs are not properly considered against the evidence of the report of
    Dr De Lima.

25. Nor can it sensibly be suggested that the Judge did not take into
    account all factors when considering the availability and adequacy of
    care for those emotional needs at [24] of the Decision.   Dealing with
    ground 2(e), the Judge was clearly aware that the Appellant's son works
    away ([23] of the Decision).  She also made reference to the
    Appellant's daughter-in-law being unsupportive ([24]).  Although it is
    suggested at ground 2(e) that the Judge has failed to take into account
    that the Appellant's niece also cares for her own mother and "is about
    to move to Spain", at [23] of the Decision, the Judge is merely
    recording what care was actually available at the time of the hearing,
    according to the Sponsor's oral evidence.

26. There was no evidence from either the Appellant's son or niece.  The
    Appellant's own evidence is that her son "works away for a week at a
    time" ([[24] at [AB/2]).  The Sponsor says that he "needs to travel
    constantly for his work" ([28] at [AB/10]) but both references are
    quite vague.  As the Judge notes at [24] of the Decision, the Appellant
    has lived with her son and his family "primarily ... until 2017"
    ([24]).  The Appellant's own evidence at [8] to [10] of her statement
    at [AB/1-2] is that she returned to live in Venezuela in 1990 because
    her son's studies in the UK ended and that, at that time, she sold her
    house in London and invested her money in the UK.  She lived with her
    son in an annexe to his property from then until late 2017 when her
    granddaughters left Venezuela (as the Judge notes at [24] of the
    Decision).  She then returned to live with her son in late 2019
    following a period of two years living with the Sponsor in the UK.

27. The findings at [24] of the Decision are that the Appellant could live
    in Venezuela as she had done in the past with the support of her son
    and that the Sponsor could continue to speak to her from the UK and
    visit her.    The Judge recognised that the situation had changed
    somewhat from that which pertained in 2017 as the Appellant's
    granddaughters had left Venezuela and were no longer available to offer
    her care as they had been prior to that date.  However, there was no
    evidence before the Judge that the Appellant could not continue to live
    with her son and his wife (even if it is the case that his wife is
    unsupportive) and would receive support from her son (when he is not
    away on business).  The Judge's finding is that this, coupled with
    remote and intermittent physical support from the Sponsor is available
    and adequate.

28. At ground 2(d), the Appellant refers to the approach taken in LD
    (Article 8 - best interests of child) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC)
    and submits that the Judge's finding regarding remote support runs
    contrary to that approach.  The Appellant's grounds cite from [21] of
    that decision which reads as follows:

         "We therefore turn to consider the Immigration Judge's reasoning on
         the question of proportionality. We confess we find it is wholly
         absent.  This is not a case about physical or mental illness of
         anybody, but whether the family life that had been enjoyed over
         eleven years with authority afforded to each member of the family
         should now be interfered with.  The Immigration Judge has wholly
         failed to grapple with this. We find his reference to maintain
         contact with his family 'in the normal manner' is extraordinary.
         Families normally live together. Family life consists of the inter-
         dependent bonds between spouses or stable partners and between
         parents and children with particular strength being placed upon the
         interests and welfare of minor children. It is not normal for
         family life to be enjoyed by correspondence and occasional visits
         (even assuming that there were no obstacles to such visits
         following this immigration decision). Although the Immigration
         Judge has cited the case as Beoku-Betts he appears singularly to
         have misunderstood the core principles to be applied in this area
         of the law, as exemplified by the other important House of Lords
         cases Huang, EB (Kosovo) and numerous decisions in the Court of
         Appeal noted above as well as the decision in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL
         40."

29. That paragraph does not appear in the headnote for which the case is
    reported.  As the headnote and indeed the cited paragraph make clear,
    that case involved family life between parents and minor children whose
    interests are a primary consideration.  As such, the reported guidance
    is that "weighty reasons would be required to justify separating a
    parent from a lawfully settled minor child or child from a community in
    which he or she had grown up and lived for most of his or her life".
    That is very far from the factual position in this case.  Whilst I
    accept that the finding that there is family life between the Sponsor
    and the Appellant is not irrelevant to the proportionality assessment
    (as the Judge accepted), the guidance given in LD (Zimbabwe) is of no
    relevance to this case.  As the headnote makes clear, the guidance is
    to be read according to the facts of a case and the facts of this case
    are entirely different to the facts in that case, not least because,
    here, the Appellant also has family living in Venezuela with whom she
    has lived for the majority of the past thirty years.

30. I turn then to the second part of ground 2(c) which is a submission
    that the Judge's conclusion in relation to emotional needs and adequacy
    of care in that regard is perverse. As Mr Clarke pointed out, a
    submission that a decision is perverse involves an extremely high
    threshold.  It is to the effect that no Tribunal Judge properly
    directed could have reached the conclusion which Judge Reid reached on
    the evidence.  That submission is unsustainable in this case.  The
    Judge considered all the evidence and took into account relevant
    factors.  She did not take into account irrelevant factors.  Other
    Judges might have reached a different decision but that is not the
    test.  It cannot be said that her conclusion is so manifestly
    unreasonable as to be perverse.

31. That then deals with grounds 2(c) to 2(e).  I take grounds 2(a) and (b)
    together as they both concern the findings at [23] of the Decision as
    to the availability of paid care in Venezuela on the evidence and in
    light of the general country background evidence. This was a point
    which appears to have impressed Judge Kamara in her grant of
    permission.

32. I can deal with ground 2(a) very shortly.  It is said that the Judge
    speculates at [25] and [26] of the Decision when finding that paid care
    could be obtained in Venezuela because there was no evidence to that
    effect.  As Mr Clarke (and the Judge) pointed out, though, it was for
    the Appellant to produce that evidence.  That no such evidence was
    provided is the reason why the Judge concluded that such care might be
    available.

33. The Sponsor addressed me at the end of the hearing and said that
    although she had not done any research, her brother in Venezuela had
    done such research and paid care is not available.  However, the Judge
    records at [25] of the Decision that it was said that the Appellant's
    son had done some research but makes the point that there was no
    evidence to that effect.  There is no statement from the Appellant's
    son.

34. Further and in any event, the Judge's secondary finding in that regard
    is that, whether or not paid care is available, the Appellant would not
    take advantage of it whilst in Venezuela whereas she would in the UK.
    It is that evidence which led the Judge to note as she did at [40] of
    the Decision that "[t]here has been little effort made to substantiate
    the assertion that appropriate care is not available in Venezuela and
    the Appellant appears to take the approach that this condition should
    either not be applied to her or that third party daily care in the UK
    would be acceptable whereas in Venezuela it would not".  That reference
    is made in the context of the public interest in denial of entry
    clearance and is not relevant in itself to the findings in relation to
    adequacy of care as ground 2(a) appears to suggest.

35. I can deal with ground 2(b) even more shortly in light of what I have
    just said.  That challenges the Judge's findings about the healthcare
    situation in Venezuela in the context of the availability of paid care.
     However, as the Judge notes at [26] of the Decision the background
    evidence about the healthcare system was in the context of public
    healthcare.  In any event, as I have already noted, the Appellant's
    position is that she would not take advantage of paid healthcare
    whether available or not.  As I have already recorded, the Judge was
    entitled to take into account the lack of specific evidence about the
    availability of paid (as opposed to public) healthcare.

36. For all of the foregoing reasons, ground two has no merit.  There is no
    error of law disclosed by this ground.

Ground Four

37. As I conclude at [14] above, ground three falls away if there is no
    error of law disclosed by ground two. In light of what I say about
    ground two therefore, ground three does not identify any error of law.

38. Ground four challenges the Judge's approach to the Appellant's family
    and private life and the separation of the two in the proportionality
    assessment.  Mr Clarke accepted that this should have been a holistic
    assessment but submitted that it could make no difference if the Judge
    was entitled to reach the conclusion she had about the claim under the
    Rules.  He also pointed out that the Judge's finding in relation to
    private life was that Article 8 was not even engaged so that it could
    add nothing to the family life assessment.

39. I agree with both submissions.  There is a public interest in denying
    entry to those who do not meet the Rules.  The Judge has explained at
    [37] to [42] of the Decision why she has reached the conclusion that
    the refusal of entry clearance is proportionate in the context of the
    Appellant's family life with the Sponsor.  She has reached that
    conclusion having conducted a balancing exercise between the
    interference and public interest, having regard also to Section 117
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Although she has gone on
    at [44] to [46] of the Decision to conduct a further balancing exercise
    in relation to private life, she does so having made a primary finding
    that Article 8 is not even engaged in that regard.  That is
    unsurprising on the facts of this case.  The Appellant's main ties with
    the UK, at least recently, are based on her relationship with the
    Sponsor which the Judge has found to be part of the Appellant's and the
    Sponsor's family life.

40. For those reasons, even though it would have been better if the Judge
    had taken the Appellant's family and private life together when
    conducting the balancing exercise outside the Rules, her approach makes
    no difference to the outcome of the case. In any event, as Judge Povey
    pointed out when refusing permission, the Judge, at [47] of the
    Decision, reaches a cumulative conclusion taking into account both the
    Appellant's family and private life.  For those reasons, ground four
    does not disclose any error of law or any error is not material.

Conclusion

41. For the foregoing reasons, I conclude that there is no error of law in
    the Decision and I uphold it.




    DECISION

    The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Reid promulgated on 31
    December 2019 does not involve the making of an error on a point of
    law. I therefore uphold the Decision with the consequence that the
    Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


Signed: L K Smith
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated:  11 January 2021
