
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/11867/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 23rd March 2018                        | On 1st May 2018                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                             mr cardon muyengwa
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Moffatt, instructed by Legal Rights Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on  22  November  1974.  He
    appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham, dated
    14 July 2017, dismissing his appeal against the  refusal  of  leave  to
    remain as a spouse and as a parent of British citizen children on human
    rights grounds.

2.   The  Appellant  appealed  on  the  grounds  that  the  judge  made  the
    following errors of law:
    (i)  The burden of  proving  the  suitability  provisions  was  on  the
         Respondent and she failed to  provide  documents  relating  to  the
         drink driving offences. The  judge  failed  to  apply  the  correct
         burden of proof;
    (ii) The judge failed to apply the correct test in concluding that  the
         Appellant was a persistent offender;
    (iii)    The judge failed to determine whether the Appellant  showed  a
         particular disregard for the law;
    (iv) The judge failed to consider the Respondent's guidance;
    (v)  The judge failed to consider  the  Appellant's  case  outside  the
         Immigration Rules under Article 8;
    (vi) The judge erred in assuming that the Appellant could return to the
         UK by applying for entry clearance;
    (vii)    The judge failed to conduct a proper analysis of the impact of
         the Appellant's removal on the entire family;
    (viii)   The judge failed to conduct a  proper  analysis  of  the  best
         interests of the children and to properly apply section 117B(6)  of
         the Nationality and Immigration Act 2002.
    (ix) The judge relied on authorities not referred to  at  the  hearing,
         but failed to consider the authority relied on  by  the  Appellant,
         which was not a deportation case;
    (x)  The judge made speculative findings.
    Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hodgkinson  on  23
    January 2018 on all grounds except ground (v).

The Appellant's immigration history

3.   The Appellant  arrived  in  the  UK  in  October  2000.   He  has  been
    continuously resident since then. The Appellant is married to a British
    citizen  and  has  two  British  citizen  children.  He   was   granted
    discretionary leave to remain in the UK on 9 June 2009 for three years,
    extended for a further period of three years to 12 January 2016.  On  6
    January 2016, the Appellant applied for further leave to remain in  the
    UK. This application was rejected  and  returned  as  invalid  and  the
    Appellant submitted a further application,  which  was  refused  on  22
    April 2016.

4.   The Appellant has  four  convictions  for  drink  driving  and  related
    offences between 2006 and 2016. The basis of the  Respondent's  refusal
    is that the Appellant does not meet  the  suitability  requirements  of
    Appendix FM by reference to  paragraph  S-LTR1.5,  which  states:  "The
    presence of the applicant in the UK is not conducive to the public good
    because, in the view of the Secretary of  State,  their  offending  has
    caused serious harm  or  they  are  a  persistent  offender  who  shows
    particular disregard for the law." In considering Article 8 outside the
    Rules,  the  Respondent  concluded  that  there  were  no   exceptional
    circumstances and the Appellant's  prolonged  and  persistent  criminal
    conduct over the past ten years outweighed his right  to  family  life.
    His British children, aged 3 and 11, could continue to reside in the UK
    whilst he attempted to regularise his stay.

5.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant  was
    excluded under the suitability requirements in that he was a persistent
    offender and therefore his presence in the UK was not conducive to  the
    public good. The judge also found that the  Appellant's  removal  would
    not be disproportionate.

The Appellant's previous convictions

6.   The Appellant was convicted of the following offences:
    (1)  17 May 2006:  Failing to provide a specimen  for  analysis.  Fined
         �150 and disqualified from driving.
    (2)  11 June 2007: Driving a motor vehicle with excess alcohol, driving
         whilst disqualified and using a vehicle whilst uninsured. Community
         order to do unpaid work of 180 hours and disqualified from driving.
         Subsequently varied to four months imprisonment following breach of
         a community order on 12 July 2007 and further offences  of  driving
         whilst disqualified and using a vehicle whilst uninsured  committed
         on 10 October 2007. Sentenced to  four  months  imprisonment  on  8
         November 2007 and disqualified from driving.
    (3)  19 August 2009: Driving  a  motor  vehicle  with  excess  alcohol,
         driving whilst disqualified, driving a motor vehicle taken  without
         consent and using a vehicle whilst uninsured.  Suspended  sentence;
         four months, suspended for two years and disqualified from driving.
    (4)  19 January 2016: Failing  to  provide  a  specimen  for  analysis.
         Sentenced to  three  month's  imprisonment  and  disqualified  from
         driving.

Submissions

7.   Ms Moffatt relied on her  skeleton  argument  and  submitted  that  the
    judge had failed to appreciate that the burden was on the Respondent to
    establish that the Appellant could be excluded  under  the  suitability
    requirements. At paragraph 6 of the decision  the  judge  set  out  the
    burden and standard of proof stating that in  immigration  appeals  the
    standard of proof is the civil standard of the balance of probabilities
    and the legal burden falls on the Appellant to discharge the burden  of
    proof. Ms Moffatt submitted that in assessing whether the Appellant was
    a persistent offender the judge failed to appreciate that the onus  was
    on the Respondent to establish this  fact.   This  error  was  material
    because at paragraph 19 the judge stated:

         "I make the following findings. I am concerned that the Home Office
         bundle does not contain a PNC printout of the Appellant's  criminal
         convictions or the Judge's sentencing remarks in  relation  to  the
         offences. The absence of these documents is important as I have  no
         material details of the offences, i.e.  the  degree  to  which  the
         Appellant was over the legal alcohol limit, the consequences of the
         offences and any aggravating features, i.e. whether the public were
         placed at risk, whether the Appellant had passengers in the vehicle
         etc. In addition, I do not have the precise date of the  2015  [sic
         2009] offence.  Therefore, I am unsure whether the offence occurred
         before or after his son's still birth in June 2009."


8.   The judge noted the absence of the  PNC  printout  and  the  sentencing
    remarks.  Accordingly, there was  missing  information  and  the  judge
    failed to recognise that the burden was on the Respondent to show  that
    the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the  suitability  requirements.   The
    circumstances of the final offence were relevant and were not addressed
    by the judge. The central question in issue in the  appeal,  identified
    in the decision at [16], was whether the Appellant should  be  excluded
    under the suitability requirements. Ms Moffatt  submitted  that,  given
    the exclusionary nature  of  the  suitability  requirements  and  their
    reference to wrongdoing, for the purposes of the burden and standard of
    proof they are germane to the general grounds of  refusal.  The  burden
    was on the Respondent to demonstrate that the Appellant  properly  fell
    within the suitability requirements, but the  judge  failed  to  direct
    herself accordingly. This error was  material  because  the  sentencing
    remarks and the date of the 2009 offence were relevant  to  determining
    whether the Appellant was a persistent offender. His last offence could
    be distinguished from the others and the 2009 offence was linked to the
    still birth of the Appellant's child. Without the  missing  information
    the judge could not determine these points properly or at all.

9.   The second point relied on by Ms Moffatt was that  the  decision  cited
    the guidelines, but the judge failed  to  apply  them.  The  guidelines
    specifically stated that the length of time a person has spent  in  the
    UK will be an appropriate consideration. For example, a person who  has
    committed four  offences  in  ten  years  might  not  be  viewed  as  a
    persistent offender, but a person who committed three offences  in  six
    months might be. Ms Moffatt submitted that where there was a  practical
    definition given in the guidance, which  was  on  all  fours  with  the
    Appellant's situation, then it was  irrational  not  to  take  it  into
    account and give reasons why the outcome was different in this case.

10.  Further, the  judge  failed  to  consider  relevant  factors  including
    whether there was an escalation in offending. The test for a persistent
    offender had two limbs: persistent offending and a particular disregard
    for the law. The judge did not direct herself  as  to  the  full  legal
    test. The additional threshold of a 'disregard for the law' should have
    been set  out  and  the  judge  should  have  given  reasons  why  that
    additional threshold was met. The reasons at paragraphs 22 to 25 of the
    decision did not distinguish between the two limbs  and  therefore  the
    judge had failed to properly direct herself.

11.   Ms  Moffatt  submitted  that  the  judge  failed   to   consider   the
    circumstances of the last offence,  which  were  not  set  out  in  the
    decision. The last offence  was  not  related  to  drink  driving.  The
    Appellant had failed to provide a breath  specimen.  The  judge  simply
    recorded that the final offence resulted in a custodial sentence, which
    was insufficient in the circumstances.  There  was  evidence  from  the
    Appellant and his wife of his remorse and that they had worked hard  to
    overcome his alcohol dependency. There  was  no  clear  finding  as  to
    whether the Appellant remained alcohol dependent.

12.  In addition, the judge failed to consider  whether  it  was  reasonable
    for the children to leave the UK. The judge in fact never asked herself
    this  question.  Section  117B(6)  was  not  included  in  the  judge's
    proportionality assessment. That section stated that where there is  no
    deportation order there is no public interest where the Appellant has a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, a
    British citizen child, and it will not be reasonable for the  child  to
    leave then UK. The judge had not taken  into  account  the  devastating
    effect on the children, in particular the Appellant's witness statement
    at paragraph 11 and his wife's witness statement at paragraph 4, 5  and
    11. Acknowledging that the Appellant and his family were close was  not
    sufficient to deal with the  devastating  effects  of  the  Appellant's
    removal.


13.  Ms Moffatt submitted that it  was  not  open  to  the  judge  to  avoid
    permanent separation.  The Appellant would be excluded from the UK  and
    it was speculative to say that he could overcome that  difficulty.  The
    judge could not rely on relocation to render a decision  proportionate.
    She failed to consider the Appellant's evidence of his wife's own  fear
    of return to Zimbabwe. At paragraph 13 of the decision the judge  dealt
    with the death of the  Appellant's  wife's  sister,  but  not  fear  of
    return. The Appellant's wife did not have a choice. If  the  judge  was
    going to rely on choice in the proportionality assessment she must make
    findings on the  Appellant's  account,  namely  whether  his  wife  was
    fearful of returning.

14.  Mr Melvin relied on the Rule 24 response and submitted that  there  was
    a lack of materiality of reversing the burden of proof. The Appellant's
    convictions were not challenged and these were sufficient to render him
    a persistent offender. It was clear from the judge's findings  and  the
    Appellant convictions that the Appellant had a clear disregard for  the
    law. The offences were similar. They were all related to alcohol. There
    was no elevated test or elevated threshold. The  judge  had  taken  all
    points into  consideration  and  the  failure  to  mention  the  phrase
    'particular disregard to the law' was not material. The  findings  made
    establish this point. There was no  separate  test  and  on  the  facts
    Immigration Rule S-LTR1.5 was satisfied. The Appellant had a conviction
    and a further three year ban for his last offence. The circumstances of
    the offence did not change the situation. The Appellant  was  convicted
    of failing to provide a specimen. He had shown a  particular  disregard
    for the law in failing to do a breath test.

15.  Mr Melvin submitted that ample consideration  was  given  to  the  best
    interests of the children and  there  was  no  material  error  in  the
    judge's failure to state the opinion of the Appellant's spouse  on  the
    difficulties  that  the  children   would   have.   There   was   ample
    consideration of Section  117B(6)  and  the  judge  considered  in  the
    alternative whether the Appellant's spouse could go to Zimbabwe.  There
    was no need to consider any fear of return given  that  the  judge  had
    already concluded that the family could remain in the UK.

16.  Persistent offender had a  different  definition  in  the  statute  and
    under  the  suitability  requirements.  This  was  a  refusal   of   an
    application for further discretionary  leave  to  remain.  Due  to  the
    Appellant's convictions he was not a  suitable  person  to  be  granted
    leave. The public interest was not limited by Section 117B(6).

17.  In response, Ms Moffatt submitted that the judge had put the burden  on
    the wrong individual and applied the wrong test in failing  to  require
    the Respondent to make out her case. The judge's findings were informed
    by the legal burden, which in this case had fallen on the wrong  party.
    She submitted that I had to be sure that there would be  no  difference
    in outcome had the judge  properly  applied  the  legal  burden,  which
    should have been done given what was at stake.

Evidence relevant to the best interests of the children

18.  In his witness statement the Appellant states:

         "11. If I am forced to return overseas then this would devastate my
             family life.  I understand that with this ground of refusal  I
             would not even be able to apply to return to the UK.  I  would
             face refusal on the same basis. I will face prolonged  if  not
             permanent separation from my wife and  children.   This  would
             have profound implications for my family members. I  would  no
             longer be able to be part of my wife and children's lives.  We
             have always been together. We are a very close knit family.  I
             am involved in every aspect of my children's lives.  I take  A
             to and from school.  I attend their parents' evenings. I spend
             a considerable amount of time with them  reading  and  helping
             them with their schoolwork and generally playing with them and
             just being there. The children have never known a day in their
             lives without me. I have not had  the  courage  to  tell  them
             about my possible permanent exclusion.  I  really  do  believe
             that this would devastate them. B is doing very well at school
             and I fear that my exclusion will knock her for 6.


         12.  A is particularly close to me. He spends most of his time with
             me. I get him out of bed get him ready for school, take him to
             school and bring him  back.   I  prepared  his  food  and  his
             clothes. I play with him and generally keep him motivated.  He
             is very clingy towards me and he doesn't like being away  from
             me for any length of time. If I  am  away  from  him  for  any
             length of time he just cries and asks after me. As soon  as  I
             get back he is the first to the  door.  If  I  was  forced  to
             return overseas then I am certain that  would  really  have  a
             devastating effect on A."


19.  In her witness statement the Appellant's wife states:

         "4.  B is now aged  12.  She  has  started  secondary  school.  She
             attends [.........]
                  School which is the best  school  in  the  area.  We  have
             worked very hard on her education.  Both  Cardon  and  I  have
             spent a lot of time  supporting  her  with  her  homework  and
             studies generally.  We  both  understand  the  value  of  good
             education and want her to  do  as  well  as  possible  in  her
             studies.  She is very bright and with the strong support  that
             we have both been providing for her I have no doubt whatsoever
             that she will do very well.


         5.   A is aged 4. He attends nursery school. Again,  Cardon  and  I
             spend considerable time with him by reading together,  playing
             with him and generally motivating him. He is also very  bright
             and academically minded. Both of the  children  are  extremely
             happy, settled and well  grounded.  Any  disruption  in  their
             lives is bound to have a profound impact on them. There can be
             nothing more significant and profound than having their father
             removed from their lives.  To date we have not even  discussed
             this issue with the children. Obviously A is too young  but  B
             has the wherewithal. The sole reason we have not mentioned  it
             to either of them is that we do not want to distract  them  in
             any way. I know how these things  can  affect  children.  They
             have a habit of even taking small things to heart but this  is
             such a significant issue and I am certain that it would have a
             significant impact on them, in particular on B. She  is  going
             through a very important phase of change in her life.  She  is
             also entering a very important phase in her  education.  I  am
             fearful that any minor distraction would distract her but  the
             prospect of losing her father would be truly profound. She  is
             very close to her father and a typical daddy's  girl.  She  is
             closer to Cardon than me. She always says that  she  finds  it
             easier to approach Cardon than me. In that way she is  typical
             of girls her age. I honestly  fear  how  she  would  react  if
             Cardon is forced to return. I  just  cannot  imagine  anything
             more significant that could affect B  than  the  loss  of  her
             father from her life.


         11.  I also wish to mention that if Cardon is forced to  return  to
             Zimbabwe then it looks like we would  face  prolonged  if  not
             permanent separation given the grounds on which  he  would  be
             removed. I feel that it would be tantamount  to  punishing  me
             and the children for Cardon's offences. We are not responsible
             for his behaviour in any way whatsoever. Indeed I worked  hard
             to help  him  overcome  his  alcohol  problem.  I  would  also
             struggle to cope with raising my children on my  own.  At  the
             moment I work full time and I am the main breadwinner.  Indeed
             Cardon has not been able to work since  his  last  application
             therefore I am the only breadwinner in the family.  If  Cardon
             is forced to return then inevitably I would also  to  go  part
             time which would mean that we would become a burden on  public
             funds. Whilst we do receive child benefit and some  child  tax
             credits inevitably the burden would be far  greater  and  that
             would remain the case for the foreseeable future. If Cardon is
             able to remain here then not only would he be able to be  part
             of the children's lives which is the most important thing  but
             it would avoid us being a burden on public  funds  altogether.
             Not only would Cardon's removal have profound implications for
             me and the children but it would mean longer  term  dependence
             on public funds as well.  That would create the worst possible
             scenario for everyone concerned.  If Cardon is able to  remain
             with us then not only will that protect the integrity  of  our
             family but also avoid our dependence on public  funds.   Given
             this and the  fact  that  Cardon  does  not  pose  a  risk  of
             reoffending I implore the Tribunal to allow his appeal."

Discussion and Conclusions

20.  The nine grounds can be encompassed under the four heads of  challenge,
    addressed by Ms Moffat in the following order: the failure to apply the
    correct  burden  of  proof,  the  failure  to   apply   guidance,   the
    misapplication of paragraph S-LTR1.5 of the Immigration Rules  and  the
    misapplication of section 117B(6).

Burden of proof

21.  The relevant requirements of R-LTRP1.1(c) and (d)  of  Appendix  FM  of
    the Immigration Rules are that the applicant must not fall for  refusal
    under S-LTR suitability of leave to remain. S-LTR1.5 states:
         "The presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to  the
         public good because in the view of the  Secretary  of  State  their
         offending has caused serious harm or they are a persistent offender
         who shows a particular disregard for the law".


22.  The Appellant was convicted on four occasions  between  2006  and  2016
    for driving under the influence of alcohol and other motoring offences.
    The Appellant accepts that he has been convicted of  the  same  offence
    four times over a ten year period (paragraph 9 of his  statement).  The
    Secretary of State  concluded  that  the  Appellant's  latest  motoring
    conviction, failing to provide  a  breath  specimen  in  January  2016,
    demonstrated that  he  had  not  learned  from  previous  mistakes  and
    continued to show a flagrant disregard for the law.

23.  It was submitted that following  JC  (China)  [2007]  UKAIT  00027,  MZ
    (Pakistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 919 and  Mumu  (paragraph  320;  Article  8;
    scope) [2012] UKUT  00143  (IAC)  the  burden  of  proof  fell  on  the
    Respondent. These cases were concerned with paragraphs 320 and 321A  of
    the Immigration Rules and general grounds  for  refusal  of  leave.  In
    relation to all the general grounds contained in Part 9, the burden  of
    proof rests on the decision maker to establish any contested  precedent
    fact. In this case the Respondent  has  established  a  precedent  fact
    because it was accepted that the Appellant  had  four  convictions  for
    drink driving and failing to provide a  breath  specimen.  The  judge's
    failure to state that it  is  for  the  Respondent  to  show  that  the
    Appellant's conduct is  not  conducive  to  the  public  good  was  not
    material to the judge's findings. In any  event,  the  Respondent  made
    clear her view in the refusal letter and the judge properly applied the
    relevant Immigration Rule. I find that there was no material  error  of
    law in the judge's application of the burden of proof.



Guidance

24.  The judge set out the Home Office Guidance  on  the  interpretation  of
    paragraph S-LTR1.5 in full at paragraphs 17 and 18:
         "References to a  persistent  offender  who  in  the  view  of  the
         Secretary of State has shown a particular  disregard  for  the  law
         involves a case-specific assessment of the nature, the extent,  the
         seriousness  and  the  impact  of  the  person's  offending."   The
         guidelines state: "You must take into account  the  following  non-
         exhaustive list of factors.  However, you must note this is not the
         same as the aggregate offences threshold which  routinely  triggers
         consideration for deportation."

    The factors to be considered are:
        . the number of offences committed;
        . the seriousness of those offences, including the degree of  public
          nuisance and the cost of reoffending;
        . any escalation in the seriousness of the offences;
        . the timescale over which they were committed;
        . the frequency within which they were committed, and
        . any action taken to address the cause of the offending.

25.  The judge acknowledged the deficiencies in  the  Respondent's  evidence
    in relation to the PNC printout and  the  judge's  sentencing  remarks.
    However, it was accepted that the Appellant had  the  four  convictions
    relied upon by the Secretary of State and had  received  the  sentences
    set out for those convictions. The judge then applied the  guidance  in
    assessing those convictions and looking at whether the Appellant was  a
    persistent offender who had a particular disregard  for  the  law.  The
    judge dealt with each element of the guidance. There was an example  in
    the guidance, that somebody who had  committed  four  offences  in  ten
    years might not be viewed as a persistent offender, but someone who had
    committed three in just six months might be. I am not persuaded  by  Ms
    Moffatt's submission that the  judge  should  have  given  reasons  for
    finding the contrary in this case. The judge applied the guidance.  She
    was not bound to follow examples given in the guidance  as  an  aid  to
    interpretation.

Immigration Rules

26.  I find that the judge took  into  account  all  relevant  factors.  The
    circumstances of the last offence  did  not  alter  the  position.  The
    Appellant had  failed  to  provide  a  breath  specimen  and  had  been
    sentenced to a term of imprisonment.  This  offence  clearly  showed  a
    blatant disregard for the law in failing to cooperate with  the  police
    officer. The circumstances of that offence were that the Appellant  was
    at a party when police arrived and stated that  his  vehicle  had  been
    involved in an accident.  He  refused  to  provide  a  breath  specimen
    because he had been drinking alcohol since his arrival at the party. It
    transpired that his vehicle had not been involved in an  accident.  The
    judge considered the circumstances of this offence,  at  paragraph  11,
    and stated that the Appellant attempted to draw a  distinction  between
    this offence and his earlier offences of driving with  excess  alcohol.
    She rejected this submission at paragraph 22 and  gave  cogent  reasons
    for doing so. This offence is alcohol related and  an  example  of  the
    Appellant's 'particular disregard for the law'. The judge concluded, at
    paragraph  26,  that  by  committing  repeated  criminal  offences  the
    Appellant had shown a disregard for the law.

27.  The matters set out  at  paragraphs  20  to  25  show  that  the  judge
    considered all elements of the guidance: The  Appellant's  convictions,
    the period of time over which they took place and the reasons  for  why
    he might have committed such offences.  The judge was  not  obliged  to
    deal  first  with  persistent  offending  and  then  with   'particular
    disregard for the law'. The judge's finding that the  presence  of  the
    applicant in the UK was not conducive to the public good because he  is
    a persistent offender who shows particular disregard for  the  law  was
    one which was open to her on the evidence. The judge would have come to
    the same conclusion had she applied the two-limb test advocated  by  Ms
    Moffat.

Section 117B(6)

 28. It is evident from reading the decision  as  a  whole  that  the  judge
    considered  the  witness   statements   and   the   Appellant's   close
    relationship with his children. She found that the Appellant's wife and
    family appeared to have no influence  on  his  drinking  and  she  gave
    cogent reasons for coming to this conclusion at paragraph 21. The judge
    considered the alcohol awareness course, which predated the offences in
    2009. The Appellant had not sought  any  help  since  he  attended  the
    course in 2008 and was subsequently convicted of further offences.  The
    evidence supported her conclusion  that  the  suitability  requirements
    were not met because the Appellant's behaviour speaks  for  itself.  He
    has continued to offend,  he  has  committed  four  offences  of  drink
    driving and refusing to provide a specimen.  He  received  a  custodial
    sentence for the  latter,  which  demonstrates  an  escalation  in  the
    seriousness of the offences. Although they took place  over  ten  years
    the latest offence was recent and he had failed to take any  action  to
    address his offending  behaviour,  save  for  a  course  in  2008.  The
    Appellant could not satisfy the Immigration Rules.

29.  The judge properly addressed the public interest and took into  account
    the best interests of the children. The public interest was not limited
    under Section 117B(6) and the judge was entitled to take  into  account
    the Appellant's criminal behaviour.  She set out all  relevant  factors
    in relation to the best interests of the children at paragraph 28 which
    clearly demonstrated that she had in mind the paragraphs referred to in
    the witness statements. I am not satisfied  that  she  failed  to  have
    regard to those witness statements or that she needed to set out  those
    parts of the witness  statement  in  full.   It  is  evident  from  her
    findings at [27] and [29] that she was aware this is a close family and
    the effect on the children will be  significant.  She  appreciated  the
    relevance of these matters in the assessment  of  proportionality.  The
    judge acknowledged that this was not a deportation case  and  that  the
    Appellant had been refused leave to remain. She took into  account  all
    relevant  circumstances  in  the  assessment  of  proportionality.  The
    children would not have to leave the UK, they could  remain  here  with
    their mother.

30.  The judge found that the public interest in section 117B(1) weighed  in
    favour of the Appellant's removal, notwithstanding  his  removal  would
    split the family (paragraph 26).  She  took  into  account  the  public
    interest in allowing the Appellant to remain in the  UK  under  section
    117B(6) (paragraph 27). She considered whether his wife could accompany
    the Appellant to Zimbabwe as  an  alternative.  Her  finding  that  the
    Appellant could apply for entry clearance if he could demonstrate  that
    he had resolved his alcohol problem was not speculative and  formed  no
    part  of  her  proportionality  assessment.  Her  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant is a persistent offender whose actions, taken  together  with
    his failure to address his offending, outweighed  the  public  interest
    under Section 117B(6) in allowing him to remain in the UK was one which
    was open to her on the evidence before her.

31.  I find that there was no error of law in the  decision  dated  14  July
    2017 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.

              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 27 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 27 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
