
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:   HU/11062/2016
      HU/12885/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 November 2017                           |                             |
|                                              |On 24 January 2018           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                 ATINUKE [A]
                                    [H A]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDERS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Moffat
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria born in 1968  and  2007.   They
      are mother and daughter.  They appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
      respondent made on 20 April 2016 to refuse  the  mother's  application
      for leave to remain.

   2. The history is that the mother arrived in the UK in 2004  on  a  visit
      visa valid for six months.  She overstayed.  In October 2014 she  made
      an application for leave to remain under the family and  private  life
      rule.  Her child was born in the UK as  a  result  of  a  relationship
      which broke down within days of her giving birth. The  father  has  no
      involvement with the child.


   3. The respondent refused the application for the mother under the parent
      and private life routes and the child under the child and private life
      routes.


   4. They appealed.


      First tier hearing


   5. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 23 May 2017 Judge of the First-
      Tier SL Farmer dismissed the appeals.


   6. Her findings are at paragraph  12ff.   Considering  the  child's  best
      interests, she noted that she is a qualifying child but not a  British
      citizen.  She considered that it would be reasonable for her to  leave
      with her mother with whom she has her primary attachment.  Her  mother
      has spent most of her life in Nigeria.  The child has been exposed  to
      the culture of her own nationality.


   7. Moving on to consider the child's education, the judge found that  she
      has over two years left of primary education. She found  that  she  is
      not at a crucial stage in her education and that whilst continuity  of
      education is important it was not  of  sufficient  importance  in  her
      circumstances to make it unreasonable for her to leave the UK and live
      in Nigeria.


   8. The judge went on to find the first appellant to  be  not  a  credible
      witness in respect of her claim not to have family, namely  a  mother,
      in Nigeria.  Also, that  she  has  been  using  different  names,  the
      indication being that she had been working illegally.


   9. Returning to the child, the judge noted that the child  is  aged  nine
      and that seven years from age four is likely to be more significant to
      a child than the first seven years of life.  The child had spent  five
      years and eight months since her fourth  birthday  and  thus  not  yet
      seven years.


  10. She went on to find that there would be no language concerns  for  the
      child, her mother would be able to work  and  there  would  be  family
      support there.  Further, there are no health concerns.


  11. The judge in the further consideration of proportionality  noted  that
      the mother has been an overstayer since 2004 and had worked  illegally
      since then.


  12. The appellant sought permission to appeal  which  was  granted  on  22
      August 2017.


      Error of law hearing


  13. At the error of law hearing before me Ms Moffat made  several  points.
      First, there had been a failure properly to consider the child's  best
      interests.  Instead of making  clear  findings  on  the  child's  best
      interests and then considering  whether  these  best  interests  might
      nonetheless be  outweighed  by  the  countervailing  public  interest,
      including an assessment of the reasonableness of relocation, the judge
      had  conflated  the  identification  of  best   interests   with   the
      reasonableness of requiring the child to leave.


  14. Second,  the  judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  relevant  evidence,
      specifically, the many letters from school friends and others who form
      the core of her private life.


  15. Third, although  the  judge  identified  seven  years  as  a  relevant
      benchmark for the development of social, cultural and educational ties
      that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, she erred in  finding  that
      since the period since her fourth birthday is less  than  seven  years
      there is no significant disruption.  Further, she had failed  to  take
      into account that the child will be entitled to register as a  British
      citizen on her tenth birthday as she was born in this country.


  16. Fourth, at one point  in  her  assessment  of  the  reasonableness  of
      relocation,  the  judge  used  a  higher  test   namely   'significant
      obstacle'.


  17. Finally, aspects of the decision showed a failure to exercise  anxious
      scrutiny.  One paragraph appears to refer to different  facts.   Also,
      the assessment under section 117B appeared incomplete.


  18. Ms Aboni's response was that  the  judge's  decision  showed  detailed
      analysis on the material issues and  that  she  had  reached  adequate
      findings.  These included careful consideration of  the  child's  best
      interests and that notwithstanding her ties here it was reasonable for
      her to relocate.


  19. On the seven years point it was clear that the judge was aware of  the
      significance of that time but she was entitled to follow the authority
      that the seven years from the age of four was the important period and
      to conclude that she had not passed that period.


  20. Looked at in the round, the judge had reached adequate conclusions for
      the reasons she gave.


      Consideration


  21. In considering this matter in respect of ground one it is  clear  that
      the judge as she was required to do gave thought to the  child's  best
      interests as a primary consideration. She did  so  in  detail  finding
      that these were to remain with her mother, but that as the mother  had
      no right to be in the UK such was the appropriate  factual  matrix  in
      which best  interests  were  to  be  considered.   I  agree  with  the
      respondent's submission that best  interests  and  reasonableness  are
      often so intertwined as to be inseparable and that the judge cannot be
      criticised for approaching best interests from a 'real world' context.
       As the court found in EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014]  EWCA
      Civ 874:-


           "In  my  judgement,  therefore,  the  assessment  of  the   best
           interests of the children must be made on  the  basis  that  the
           facts are as they are in the real world.  If one parent  has  no
           right to  remain,  but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
           background against  which  the  assessment  is  considered.   If
           neither parent has  the  right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
           background against which the assessment is considered.  Thus the
           ultimate question will be: 'is it reasonable to expect the child
           to follow the parent with no right to remain to the  country  of
           origin?'"


  22. I consider that the judge has  comprehensively  assessed  the  child's
      circumstances in the UK  and  appropriately  taken  into  account  the
      impact of removal.  In that regard she made findings that she has been
      exposed to Nigerian culture in the UK, that she would face no language
      difficulties, that her mother, who has spent the vast bulk of her life
      in Nigeria, would be able to get work and support her, that there  are
      family ties there with those who would  be  able  to  give  additional
      support, and that there  are  no  health  issues.  She  also  properly
      indicated that in considering best interests the mother's history  was
      not a matter that the child should be punished for.

  23. These were all findings  which  were  open  to  the  tribunal  on  the
      evidence.


  24. It is submitted that the judge had erred in  stating  that  the  child
      'has not established herself independently in her local community save
      for her close school  friend'.  Whilst  the  appellants'  bundle  does
      contain a  number  of  letters  of  support  from  schoolchildren  and
      schoolchildren's parents  and  several  others,  I  find  the  judge's
      failure to refer to more than one school friend to be immaterial.   It
      is undeniable that at such a young age the  child's  life  is  centred
      principally around her mother and school.  The judge's  conclusion  as
      to the limited private life was one  that  was  open  to  her  on  the
      evidence.


  25. On the issue of the child's length of residence it is clear  that  the
      judge was aware of the  significant  weight  to  be  attached  in  the
      proportionality assessment to a child who  has  been  here  for  seven
      years.  The child was nine years old.  However, the judge was entitled
      to  conclude  (per  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others   (Decisions   Affecting
      Children; Onwards Appeals) UKUT 197, that the seven years from the age
      of four were more significant than the first seven years of  life  and
      that the child, then nine years of age, was short of that period.


  26. I find no merit in the submission that the judge failed to  take  into
      account that the child will be  entitled  to  register  as  a  British
      citizen on her tenth birthday. She may apply for consideration by  the
      respondent for British citizenship to  be  granted.  At  the  date  of
      hearing she was not entitled to do so and when she  becomes  that  age
      she is required to make a successful application.  The  issue  of  her
      right to make an application in  the  future  was  irrelevant  to  the
      tribunal's consideration of reasonableness.


  27. Whilst it is correct to point out that at [20] the  reference  to  the
      child having settled well at school not being a 'significant obstacle'
      was an error, I do not find it material.  It is clear that  the  judge
      in her numerous other references was aware that the test  was  one  of
      'reasonableness'.


  28. The reference to what appears to be a  redundant  paragraph  at  [42],
      while regrettable, does not detract from the overall consideration  of
      the case.


  29. Likewise, the  incomplete  assessment  under  section  117B  does  not
      fatally undermine the  decision.   The  judge  gave  consideration  to
      section 117B(6), carefully analysing the nature and strengths  of  the
      child's best interests including that she was settled  at  school  and
      that she speaks English.  The judge did not find that the  mother  was
      financially independent.


  30. Whilst the decision could have been better structured I consider  that
      the objections go more to form than to substance.  She  concluded  for
      the reasons she gave which included that the mother had  a  very  poor
      immigration history of long term overstaying and dishonesty about what
      she was doing during that time, that  the  significant  weight  to  be
      given to the child's residence in  the  proportionality  exercise  was
      nonetheless outweighed by strong reasons  in  support  of  the  public
      interest in immigration control. Looked at  in  the  round  the  judge
      directed herself appropriately and reached findings which were open to
      her on the evidence.

Notice of Decision


The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  shows  no  material
errors of law and the decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway


