
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11273/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th February 2018                         |On 28th March 2018            |


                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JOHN FREEMAN
            DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PROFESSOR SATVINDER JUSS


                                   Between

                       MR CHRYSOGONUS CHUKWUEMEKA EBEH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Kumi (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the  determination  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Judge Raymond, promulgated on 24th October 2017, following the hearing
      at Hatton Cross on 25th September  2017.  In  the  determination,  the
      judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon  the  Appellant
      subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the
      Upper-Tier Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before us.


The Appellant


   2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nigeria, who was  born  on  25th
      November 1971.  He appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
      dated 11th April 2016 refusing his application to remain in the UK  on
      the basis of his marriage to a person present and settled in  the  UK,
      namely Miss [JL], who was a  British  citizen,  having  been  born  in
      Hackney on 29th September 1965.


   3. The basis of the refusal was expressed in terms  that  although,  "You
      have a genuine and subsisting relationship with your British partner",
      and that the Appellant had a British citizen son settled  in  the  UK,
      nevertheless,  the  Respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  there  were
      "insurmountable  obstacles  in  accordance  with  paragraph  EX.2   of
      Appendix FM" such that there would be "very  significant  difficulties
      which would be faced by you or your partner in continuing your  family
      life together outside the UK in Nigeria ..." (see page 3 of 7).


   4. It is a feature  of  this  appeal  that  there  had  been  a  previous
      determination, promulgated on 11th May 2015,  before  IJ  Cohen,  with
      respect to a previous refusal letter that was dated 6th November 2013.
       On that occasion too, the Appellant's application was on the basis of
      his relationship with his British  citizen  partner  and  the  refusal
      letter had stated that the Appellant did not meet the income threshold
      requirements under Appendix FM or the related evidential  requirements
      under Appendix FM-SE.  On the  previous  occasion,  when  the  hearing
      before Judge Cohen took place on 29th  April  2015  at  Taylor  House,
      neither the Appellant nor his British citizen wife  had  attended  the
      hearing, and this had led the  judge  to  conclude  that,  "I  am  not
      satisfied  that  the  partners  are  in  a  genuine   and   subsisting
      relationship" such that they did not have a family  life  together  in
      the UK (paragraph 17).


   5. In the present appeal, however, before Judge Raymond at  Hatton  Cross
      on 25th September 2017, which led to the decision dated  24th  October
      2017, both the Appellant and his partner, [JL], had attended  to  give
      evidence.  Judge Raymond at the outset observed  that  in  the  normal
      course  of  events  involving  a  second  appeal,  the  strictures  of
      Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00282 would have applied, except that on  this
      occasion both  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  had  attended  to  give
      evidence, which they had not done in 2015 before IJ Cohen.

   6. Judge Raymond noted how, in the circumstances, the current refusal had
      conceded under E-LTRP.1.7 that "You  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship with your British partner" (at  paragraph  26).   At  the
      outset of a rather long and  protracted  determination  (of  26  pages
      running into 205 paragraphs), Judge  Raymond  asked  rhetorically  why
      this concession had been made, since it failed to take into account IJ
      Cohen's negative finding on this point. Nor, observed  Judge  Raymond,
      did it show any appreciation that what had influenced   IJ  Cohen  was
      that neither party had appeared for the hearing, with there  being  no
      reasonable or credible reason given for their absence (paragraph 27).


   7. It was  against  this  background,  therefore,  that  the  Appellant's
      evidence, and that of his partner, was questioned during  the  hearing
      before Judge Raymond.   The  Appellant  was  asked  by  Ms  Bell,  the
      presenting officer at the hearing, about the nature of the wedding and
      the arrangements (at paragraphs 47 to 48) and a  significant  part  of
      the determination is devoted to an  analysis  of  the  nature  of  the
      marriage.


   8. At the end of the evidence,  and  in  her  closing  speech,  Ms  Bell,
      submitted that,  given  what  was  heard  by  the  Tribunal  from  the
      Appellant and his partner, "such evidence put in doubt the genuineness
      of the relationship,  although  she  did  not  formally  withdraw  the
      concession in the refusal letter" (paragraph 117).


   9. Thereafter, the judge considered the Appellant's claimed  relationship
      with his son, Daniel Tyrone Simon, which he considered was  not  borne
      out by the evidence,  as  well  as  the  financial  situation  of  the
      Appellant, which he equally considered was not such as to  enable  the
      Appellant to meet the financial threshold requirements under  Appendix
      FM.


  10. The appeal was dismissed.


The Grounds of Application


  11. The Grounds of Appeal state that the judge erred in law in questioning
      the propriety of a concession made in the Respondent's refusal  letter
      of 11th April 2016 and by placing reliance on two  cases,  neither  of
      which were directly relevant.  The first case was MSM [2015] UKUT  413
      and the second case was Davoodipanah [2004] EWCA  Civ  1064,  both  of
      which concerned  the  formal  withdrawal  of  the  concession  by  the
      Respondent, which was very  definitely  not  the  case  here  because,
      despite the judge having given Ms Bell the opportunity to do  so,  the
      concession of there being a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  had
      not been withdrawn.  Accordingly, the concession stood as it was  made
      in the refusal letter.


  12.  On 16th January  2018,  the  Upper  Tribunal  granted  permission  to
      appeal.


Submissions


  13. At the hearing before us on 27th February 2018, Mr  Kumi  of  Counsel,
      (who did not appear  below)  submitted  that  at  the  first  Tribunal
      hearing before IJ Cohen in 2015 there had been no concession  made  in
      the refusal letter of 6th November 2013,  as  there  was  now  in  the
      latest refusal letter of 11th April 2016 (at page 3 of  7).   However,
      given that there was a concession made quite explicitly in the refusal
      letter at the outset of the decision in April 2016,  the  parties  had
      gone  to  court  prepared  to  deal  with  whether  there  were  "very
      significant obstacles" to the Appellant and  his  wife  relocating  to
      Nigeria or  not,  because  the  marriage  itself  had  been  expressly
      accepted as being genuine and subsisting.  He drew  attention  to  the
      Appellant's wife's witness statement where [JL] (at  paragraphs  8  to
      10) addresses the  difficulty  she  would  have  in  bringing  up  her
      children in Nigeria, given that they were British  citizens,  and  she
      had been living in this country  herself  all  her  life.  Indeed,  at
      paragraph 10 she expressly states that she  has  no  ties  to  Nigeria
      herself.  The entire focus of the evidence, as planned to be given  in
      the  preparations  before  the  Hearing  before  IJ  Raymond,  was  on
      relocating to a country outside the UK.  It was  not  on  whether  the
      marriage was genuine and subsisting, which had been  plainly  conceded
      in the refusal letter.


  14. Mr Kumi also submitted that it ought to come as  no  surprise  if  the
      refusal letter of April 2016 did in fact concede that the marriage was
      genuine and subsisting because the parties were still living together,
      some five years after the first refusal letter of 2013,  and  evidence
      had been sent to the Respondent in the form of a marriage  certificate
      and the like since then.  He submitted that the Appellant was bound to
      have been prejudiced by being asked now to answer  a  case  which  had
      already been conceded, and remained conceded  throughout  the  lengthy
      hearing before IJ Raymond, during which time there was  no  withdrawal
      of the concession, when he and his partner had  come  to  a  court  to
      answer an entirely different case.


  15. For his  part,  Mr  Kotas  submitted  that  the  concession  had  been
      "implicitly withdrawn during the course of the hearing"  before  Judge
      Raymond as is clear from  the  cross-examination,  and  especially  at
      paragraphs 47 to 48  of  the  determination.  The  Appellant  was  not
      prejudiced  because  he  was  represented,  and   Mr   D   Riok,   his
      representative, did not object to the marriage  now  being  questioned
      once again in the manner that it was, but instead sought to answer the
      allegations  that  were  put  before  the   witnesses   by   willingly
      participating in this new line of inquiry before IJ Raymond.

  16. Second, and in any event, even  if  there  had  been  some  procedural
      unfairness, any error of law that there was had not  been  a  material
      error given  that  ultimately  the  appeal  hinged  upon  whether  the
      Appellant could satisfy EX.1.  This  was  why  the  judge  states  (at
      paragraph 189) that,


         "Even if  I  were  wrong  about  there  not  being  a  genuine  and
         subsisting marriage, which I do not accept is the case,  and  given
         that the couple could not meet financial requirements, so that EX.1
         applies, I find that there would be no insurmountable obstacles  to
         the Sponsor living with the Appellant in Nigeria".


    This particular basis of the refusal, which was known to the  Appellant
    from the outset because it had been flagged up in the  refusal  letter,
    was not in any way infected by a concentration on whether the  marriage
    was genuine and subsisting.   Instead, on the question of whether there
    were "insurmountable obstacles", the case put forward by the  Appellant
    was flimsy in the extreme as is clear from the attempt to bring medical
    evidence to the aid of the  Appellant.   The  Appellant's  partner  was
    referred to the respiratory clinic at King's College Hospital,  because
    of her asthma condition, but the evidence  (at  paragraphs  75  to  78)
    showed that the asthma did not limit her activities at all.   In  fact,
    any necessary  treatment  was  available  in  Nigeria  (paragraph  79).
    Therefore, the case could not have succeeded in any event.


  17. There was no reply by Mr Kumi.

Error of Law

  18. We are satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge involved
      the making of an error on a point of law (see Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
      2007) such that we should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
      decision.  Our reasons are as follows.


  19. First, the second refusal letter of 11th April 2016,  (notwithstanding
      a first refusal letter of November 2013 to the  contrary)  carried  an
      express  concession  that,  "You  have  a   genuine   and   subsisting
      relationship with your British  partner",  and  given  that  this  was
      written in the wake of evidence from the  Appellant  and  his  partner
      that they were still, as it  turned  out,  together  after  some  five
      years,  the  Respondent  was  justified  in  making  that  concession.
      Contrary to the situation in Devaseelan, there had been a  significant
      change of circumstances.

  20. Second, that concession was expressly not withdrawn by  Ms  Bell.  Nor
      did the judge give the Appellant the opportunity to  have  the  appeal
      adjourned, so that he could be prepared to deal with  this  point,  if
      the judge were to deal with it himself.  The Appellant had to meet the
      case against him, and any point not taken in it needed to be expressly
      raised.

  21. Third, and no less importantly, there is considerable  confusion  here
      as to precisely what that case is.  The judge at  the  outset,  having
      raised the possibility that this was  not  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      marriage (at paragraph 27) allowed  the  Appellant's  evidence  to  be
      challenged on that basis by Ms Bell, who in  her  closing  submissions
      stated that  the  "evidence  put  in  doubt  the  genuineness  of  the
      relationship", but then curiously went  on  to  just  as  emphatically
      state that, "she did not  formally  withdraw  the  concession  in  the
      refusal letter" (paragraph 117).  This led the judge to then  conclude
      that "the core issue" in this appeal was "whether there is  a  genuine
      and  subsisting  relationship"  (paragraph  123).   In  view  of   the
      concession, not resiled from at the hearing, it needed to  be  brought
      to the Appellant's  attention  that  the  judge  regarded  himself  as
      entitled to depart from it.


  22. Fourth, given that the concession  had  been  expressly  made  in  the
      refusal letter, and maintained at  the  hearing,  the  judge  was  not
      entitled to deal with it as withdrawn on the basis  of  the  Court  of
      Appeal authority in Davoodipanah [2004] EWCA Civ 106 and the  Tribunal
      decision in MSM [2015] UKUT 413, suggesting that, "that in the absence
      of prejudice, if a party  has  made  a  concession  which  appears  in
      retrospect to be a concession which would not  have  been  made,  then
      probably justice would require that the party be allowed  to  withdraw
      that concession" (paragraph 121).  The judge failed to note  that  the
      concession was not being withdrawn by Ms Bell.


  23. Finally, the judge's approach to  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  00282  is
      misconceived, where it is said that the determination by IJ  Cohen  in
      2015, "which has not been called into question due  to  permission  to
      appeal against having been refused, falls to be taken into account  by
      me under the Devaseelan guidelines" (paragraph 21).  This  is  because
      although that is plainly "the starting point"  (see  Devaseelan),  the
      fact is that there was a material difference in that on that  occasion
      the parties to the marriage had,  without  credible  explanation,  not
      turned up at the hearing to give evidence,  which  was  not  the  case
      before IJ Raymond in September 2017. There had also been a significant
      change  of  circumstances,  if  after  the  passage  of   time   their
      relationship remained in place, and the Respondent's expressed view on
      this needed to be given proper weight.


Notice of Decision


    The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.   We set aside the  decision
    of the original judge.  We remake the decision as follows.  This appeal
    is allowed to the extent that it is remitted back to a judge other than
    Judge Raymond under Practice Statement 7.2(a) because the effect of the
    error hereby identified has been to deprive a party before  the  First-
    Tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity  for  the  party's
    case to be put and considered by the First-Tier  Tribunal.  Unless  the
    Respondent expressly withdraws the concession in  the  refusal  letter,
    the re-hearing should be concerned with the  points  which  were  taken
    there. No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 16th March 2018
