
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11248/2017
                                                               HU/11255/2017
                                                               HU/11264/2017
                                                               HU/11274/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 1 November 2018                |On: 4 December 2018                |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                MUHAMMED [Y]
                                  SAFIA [T]
                                    [M T]
                                    [E T]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant:     Mr Z Raza of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr I Davies, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan and mother,  father  and  their
    two children.  They appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 13 September 2017 to refused to  grant
    them leave to remain in the United Kingdom under paragraph  276ADE  and
    Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.  First  Tier
    Tribunal Judge Povey in a decision dated 19 June 2018  dismissed  their
    appeals.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by first-tier Tribunal Judge Keane  on
    17 September  2018  stating  that  it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge's
    assessment of proportionality was arguably in error and that the  Judge
    did not adequately incorporate into his assessment the  rather  greater
    degree of upheaval and adjustment  which  [MT]  would  experience  upon
    leaving the United Kingdom as he is a qualified child who has  been  in
    the United Kingdom seven years and 11 months.

    First-tier Tribunal's findings

 3. The Judge made the following findings in his decision which in  summary
    are the following.

      I. The test under paragraph 276 ADE of the immigration rules sets  out
         the requirements to be met for leave to remain in  the  grounds  of
         the applicant's private life. In respect of the children  who  have
         been in the United Kingdom continuously for seven years,  the  test
         is whether it would be unreasonable for them to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom.

     II. The best interests of the children in any assessment are a  primary
         consideration and although  they  will  not  always  determine  the
         outcome of an immigration decision, no other factor should be given
         more weight. The best interests  of  children  must  be  considered
         first  as  they  are  an  integral  part  of  the   proportionality
         assessment under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights. A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or  she
         is not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent.

    III. The children have left their whole life lives in the United Kingdom
         and have  never  visited  Pakistan.  There  are  however  Pakistani
         citizens. The evidence was that they spoke Urdu but not as fluently
         as they spoke English. The children can speak and  understand  Urdu
         and their parents would be on hand to  assist  when  required.  The
         third appellant is nine years old at the fourth  appellant  is  six
         years old. They are both primary school in years four and one.

     IV. It is the respondent's intention that the appellant will be removed
         as a family. They are familiar with the culture of Pakistan and can
         help  their  children  integrate  into   Pakistani   society.   The
         appellants have family in Pakistan. The  first  appellant  has  his
         parents and siblings and  the  second  appellant  has  her  father,
         stepmother  and  siblings.  They  remain  in  contact  with   their
         respective relatives and they can assist them on return  to  settle
         down.

      V. The third appellant has lived continuously in  the  United  Kingdom
         for over seven years. Applying the test  under  paragraph  276  ADE
         (iv) and 117B (6) of the NIA Act 2002 regard must also  be  had  to
         the child's best  interest.  The  respondent's  decision  does  not
         interfere with any of the appellant's family lives  in  the  United
         Kingdom, as day would be removed as a family  unit.  There  was  no
         evidence of any other relationships in the United Kingdom  akin  to
         family life.

     VI.  In  assessing  the  children's  best  interests   as   a   primary
         consideration, the first and second appellant's immigration history
         and conduct are not relevant. The fact that the third appellant has
         been in the United Kingdom for over seven years significant  weight
         is accorded, with  strong  reasons  required  to  refuse  leave  to
         remain.  Thereafter,  wider  public  interest  must  be  considered
         including the first and second appellant's immigration history.

    VII. The best interests of the children are to remain and be  raised  by
         their parents within the existing family unit. The  children  would
         face a degree of upheaval and adjustment if required to  leave  the
         United Kingdom. Their parents have lived their whole lives  in  the
         United Kingdom and through them  they  have  an  awareness  of  the
         Pakistani culture and heritage. They remain adaptable to change and
         are only beginning to become more  outward  looking.  Their  social
         lives are likely to remain  dominated  by  their  parents  and  the
         family unit, remain intact in  Pakistan.  Their  parents'  previous
         lives in Pakistan and the existence of a wider family  network  are
         likely to assist the children in integrating into  Pakistani  life.
         The appellants are all Pakistani nationals and  would  be  able  to
         enjoy full rights as citizens.

   VIII. The first and second appellant came to this country with a  student
         visa and they could have had a realistic or reasonable  expectation
         of remaining in  the  United  Kingdom  for  the  long  term.  Their
         immigration history is poor, and they have  overstated  the  United
         Kingdom since 2010. After their application was refused, they  took
         no steps  to  return  to  Pakistan  and  waited  six  years  before
         submitting their current application.

     IX. When considering the evidence as a whole  and  the  maintenance  of
         effective immigration control, the interference of the  appellant's
         removal that it would have on their private life  is  proportionate
         when  regarding  the  public  interest  in  effective   immigration
         control.

      X. The Judge dismissed the appellants appeals  under  the  Immigration
         Rules and under Article 8.




    Grounds of appeal

 4. The main issue in this appeal is whether or not  it  is  reasonable  to
    expect the third appellant to leave the United Kingdom as  a  qualified
    child. In respect of Article 8,  the  Judge's  analysis  is  wrong.  To
    succeed under Article 8 the appellants need  to  demonstrate  that  the
    removal will amount to a disproportionate breach of their rights  under
    Article 8 and this does not depend upon them showing  very  substantial
    difficulties and exceptional circumstances et cetera" which  the  Judge
    found.

 5. It was made clear in MA  Pakistan  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  the  parents
    conduct is only relevant under the proportionality assessment  and  not
    for the reasonableness of return test. It is submitted that the Judge's
    reasonableness assessment is therefore materially defective, and it  is
    this consideration which is key under both the  immigration  rules  and
    section  117B  amounting  to  a  material  error  of  law.  There   was
    insufficient and consideration of the best interests of the  qualifying
    child by the Judge in this case.

    The hearing

 6. I heard submissions from both parties  at  the  hearing  which  I  have
    considered. Mr Raza said that the Judge did not  consider  that  strong
    and powerful reasons are needed to require a qualifying child to  leave
    the United Kingdom. He said that the Judge has not assessed whether the
    qualifying child could return to Pakistan. He submitted that the  Judge
    considered the gravity of the appellant's parents  immigration  conduct
    and not whether there are strong and powerful  reasons  which  was  the
    correct test to apply. The best interests of the qualifying  child  was
    to remain in the United Kingdom.

 7. Mr Jarvis on behalf of the respondent stated that that the case  of  MT
    and ET is not useful in this case and it is not binding on  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and distinguished the case from the facts in this appeal.
    He submitted that there was no error of law.

    Decision on error of law

 8. In considering this appeal I have taken into  account  the  case  of  R
    (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982, where Brooke LJ  summarised  at  [9]
    the errors on points of law that will most frequently be encountered in
    practice:

         "9.      ...

             (i) making perverse or irrational  findings  on  a  matter  or
             matters that were material to the outcome;

             (ii)      failing to give reasons or any adequate reasons  for
             findings on material matters;

             (iii)      failing  to  take  into  account   and/or   resolve
             conflicts of fact or opinion on material matters;

             (iv)      giving weight to immaterial matters;

             (v) making a material misdirection  of  law  on  any  material
             matter;

             (vi)      committing  or  permitting  a  procedural  or  other
             irregularity capable of making a material  difference  to  the
             outcome or the fairness of the proceedings;

             (vii)     making a mistake as to a material fact  which  could
             be established by objective and uncontentious evidence,  where
             the appellant and/or his advisers were not responsible for the
             mistake, and where unfairness resulted from the  fact  that  a
             mistake was made."

 9. The grounds of appeal essentially argue  that  the  Judge  should  have
    considered  whether  there  are  "powerful  reasons"  to   expect   the
    qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom given that he has been  in
    this country for over seven years. Therefore, the case  for  the  other
    appellants claim for leave to remain rests on the best interests of the
    eight-year-old qualifying child.

10. The argument advanced by the appellant's counsel is  that  once  it  is
    established that a child has been in this country for seven  years,  he
    cannot be removed under any circumstances. I do not read  the  law  and
    jurisprudence as a more nuanced approach  is  necessary,  and  all  the
    circumstances of the child and his family must be considered. That does
    not mean that the best interests of  the  qualifying  child  should  be
    compromised in any way as the circumstances of the  whole  family  will
    inform his best interests. I do not except the argument that any  child
    who has been in this country for  seven  years  must  automatically  be
    granted leave to remain with his parents and other siblings.

11. The Judge applied the that the correct test that the best of  interests
    of a qualifying child has to be determined taking into account all  the
    likely circumstances of the qualifying child if returned  as  a  family
    unit to Pakistan. The Judge applied the right test when  he  said  that
    the best interests of the children in  any  assessment  are  a  primary
    consideration and although they will not always determine  the  outcome
    of an immigration decision,  no  other  factor  should  be  given  more
    weight.

12. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  in  his  decision  considered  all  the
    evidence in the appeal and found that the appellants  could  return  to
    Pakistan, which for, and continue their private and family life in that
    country, as a family unit. The  Judge  stated  that  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable to expect the qualifying child to return to Pakistan  with
    his parents and siblings. The Judge was entitled to  find  that  moving
    countries entails some upheaval and adjustment but  that  does  not  in
    itself mean it would be unreasonable.

13. The Judge had to take into account all  the  factors  relevant  to  the
    appellant's qualifying child's  well-being  if  returned  to  Pakistan.
    Therefore, the  Judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  all  the
    circumstances of this family and there was no  material  error  because
    the qualifying child's best interests were  carefully  considered  over
    and above all else.

14. The Judge was required  to  make  an  adequate  legally  and  factually
    finding, a proper assessment of the best interests  of  the  qualifying
    child in that it must be based on a careful consideration of the likely
    circumstances of  the  qualified  child  and  the  other  children,  if
    returned as a unit to Pakistan.

15. The Judge found that the  qualifying  child's  grandparents  and  other
    relatives live in Pakistan and can assist the appellants to settle down
    in Pakistan and reintegrate into that society. The Judge found that the
    parents are in contact with their family in Pakistan which demonstrated
    to him that the appellants will have their extensive family  to  assist
    them on return. This informed the Judge's decision as  to  whether  the
    qualifying child and the other children would be granted  all  that  is
    necessary for their  growth  and  to  reach  their  full  potential  in
    Pakistan.

16. There was no suggestion that the parents' will  not  be  able  to  look
    after their children in Pakistan. The  children's  best  interests  are
    served with being provided with all the requirements for their  growth,
    security, education and to be able to reach their full potential. There
    was no evidence before the Judge that the qualified child would not  be
    able to achieve this in Pakistan. The Judge further considered that the
    appellants have no family in the United Kingdom. The best interests  of
    the children also include social interaction with their  relatives  and
    culture of the country of which they are citizens. The Judge considered
    that qualifying child was able  to  speak  Urdu  and  will  have  their
    parents to guide them in integrating. There is  no  material  error  in
    this reasoning.

17. It was asserted that the Judge into  account  the  adverse  immigration
    history of the parents when considering  the  qualifying  child's  best
    interests. It is also clear from the case of MA  Pakistan  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705, that the fact that there is a qualified child  is  a  relevant
    consideration and one that might be said to point to it  being  in  the
    child interest to remain in the United Kingdom, but it is equally clear
    that the assessment of reasonableness must take account of the  conduct
    of the claimant and his wife.

18. I do not accept that the parent's adverse immigration history was taken
    against the qualifying child or is best interests. The  decision  would
    inevitably have been the same on the facts of this appeal. I  say  this
    because it was not material to the issue that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had to decide. The issue for decision was whether  requiring  the
    appellant and his family's return to Pakistan would be in breach of the
    immigration rules or Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

19.  The  ultimate  question  in  this  appeal  was  whether  it  would  be
    unreasonable for the family to leave the United  Kingdom  as  a  family
    unit taking into account the best interests of  the  qualifying  child.
    The Judge was entitled to find that  the  appellants  could  return  to
    Pakistan as a family unit can continue with their  family  and  private
    life in that country and there is no perversity in the conclusions that
    the Judge reached on the evidence before him.

20. I consider some case law below to enforce the Judge's conclusion that a
    child who has just reached the age of nine can  be  returned  with  her
    parents and siblings to the country of his or her nationality.

21. Although R (on the application of Osanwemwenze) v SSHD 2014  EWHC  1563
    was not specifically concerned with section 117B it has some  relevance
    in terms of the reasonableness of a child leaving the UK. In this case,
    the claimant's 14-year-old stepson from Nigeria had been in the  United
    Kingdom for more than 7 years and had leave to remain in his own right.
    It  was  held  that  this  was  an  important  but  not  an  overriding
    consideration and it was reasonable to  expect  the  claimant's  family
    including  the  stepson  to  relocate  to  Nigeria.  The  parents   had
    experienced life there into adulthood and would be able to provide  for
    the children and help them to reintegrate.

22. In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held that when
    the question posed by s117B(6) is the same question posed  in  relation
    to children by paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), it must be posed  and  answered
    in the proper context of whether it was reasonable to expect the  child
    to follow its parents to their country of origin; EV  (Philippines.  It
    is not however a question that  needs  to  be  posed  and  answered  in
    relation to each child more than once.

23. In R (on the application of MA (Pakistan) and Others) v Upper  Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016] EWCA Civ 705 it was
    held that when considering whether it was reasonable to remove a  child
    from the UK under rule  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  a
    court or tribunal should not simply focus on the child but should  have
    regard to the  wider  public  interest  considerations,  including  the
    conduct and immigration history of the parents. It was  also  confirmed
    however that if section 117B(6) applies then "there  can  be  no  doubt
    that section 117B(6) must be read as a self-contained provision in  the
    sense  that  Parliament  has  stipulated  that  where  the   conditions
    specified in the sub-section are satisfied, the  public  interest  will
    not justify removal." It was additionally held, however, that the  fact
    that a child had been in  the  UK  for  seven  years  should  be  given
    significant weight in  the  proportionality  exercise  because  of  its
    relevant to determining the nature and strength  of  the  child's  best
    interests and as it established as a starting point that  leave  should
    be granted unless there were powerful  reasons  to  the  contrary.  The
    Court of Session has approved and followed the  approach  taken  in  MA
    (Pakistan) in the case of SA, SI, SI and TA v SSHD [2017] CSOH 117.

24. In the recent case of MT and ET (child's  best  interests;  ex  tempore
    pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 00088 it was held that a very  young  child,
    who had not started school or who has only recently done so, will  have
    difficulty in establishing that her Article 8 private and  family  life
    has a material element, which lies outside her need to  live  with  her
    parent or parents, wherever  that  may  be.   This  position,  however,
    changes over time, with the result that an assessment of best interests
    must  adopt  a  correspondingly  wider  focus,  examining  the  child's
    position in the wider  world,  of  which  school  will  usually  be  an
    important part.  On the particular facts of a child who had been in the
    UK for ten years from the age of 4, that  her  mother  had  abused  the
    immigration laws by overstaying on a visit visa and then making a false
    asylum claim and at  some  stage  using  a  false  document  to  obtain
    employment was not such a bad immigration history as to constitute  the
    kind of "powerful" reason that would  render  the  child's  removal  to
    Nigeria reasonable.

25. Therefore, the fact that the qualifying child's life from the ages of 4
    to 11 are more significant than the first four years of his life.   The
    qualifying child being at the age of eight, is not at a  pivotal  stage
    of her education and can adapt to life  and  the  education  system  in
    Pakistan. The Judge referred to the case  of  Azimi  Moyed  and  others
    [2013] UKUT 00197 it was stated that  the  children's  connections  the
    United Kingdom become  more  important  from  ages  of  4  to  11.  The
    qualifying child was eight years old and therefore  her  ties  to  this
    country were still tenuous. There is no material error of  law  in  the
    Judge's findings on the evidence.

26. Having considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, in the
    round, I am of the view that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not fall
    into material error both in fact or in law. The appellants appeal is no
    more than a quarrel with the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings which
    he was entitled to make on the evidence. I find  that  the  differently
    constituted Tribunal would not come to  a  different  decision  on  the
    facts of this case considering the facts and the jurisprudence.

27. The upshot is that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  not
    affected by a material error and I find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    did conduct  a  proper  assessment  of  all  the  appellants'  and  the
    qualifying child's rights pursuant to the Immigration Rules and Article
    8. I uphold the decision dismissing the appellants appeals.





Conclusions

28. I therefore find that the appellants appeals must fail pursuant to  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

DECISION

The appellants appeals are dismissed

I make no anonymity orders

The appeal has been dismissed and there can be no fee order


Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana Dated 29th day of November 2018

