
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11679/2016
                                                               HU/11689/2016
                                                               HU/11685/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th March 2018                           |On 10th April 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      Deputy upper tribunal JUDGE Kelly


                                   Between

                                 1) MISS J M
                                  2) MR K M
                                  3) MR A A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Chaudhary, Counsel instructed by Riaz Khan and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizen of Pakistan and appeal against the  decision
    of Judge Caswell, promulgated on the 11th August 2017, to dismiss their
    appeals for entry clearance as the dependent children  of  parents  who
    are present and settled in the United Kingdom.  Their  dates  of  birth
    are, respectively, the 30th July 1998, the 28th June 2009, and the  5th
    May 2001.

 2. The respondent refused the applications solely on the  basis  that  the
    appellants had failed to prove that they were  related  as  claimed  to
    their sponsor in the United Kingdom. However, as Judge Caswell noted at
    paragraph 14 of her decision, the evidence available at the hearing  of
    the appeal proved conclusively that they were in fact related  as  they
    claimed.  Then,  at  paragraph  15,  the  judge  made   the   following
    observation:

         "However, this is a human rights appeal, and Mr Paramor  has  asked
         me to find that it should not succeed. By contrast,  Mr  Raza  [who
         represented the appellants at the hearing below] submits to me that
         refusal of the appeal on Article 8 grounds would be  wrong  because
         the interference with family life is disproportionate."

 3. The core of the judge's reasoning in  deciding  that  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse entry  clearance  did  not  amount  to  an  unlawful
    interference with family life can be  found  at  paragraph  17  of  her
    decision:

         "Applying the test in Razgar, I accept that there  is  family  life
         between the Appellant's and their mother, but cannot find  that  it
         would be interfered with if the appeal were refused, because  there
         is no adequate reason put forward why the parents  could  not  live
         with their children in Pakistan.  Further,  family  life  has  been
         continuing for some years on the basis of phone contact and visits,
         and arguably there would be no significant interference with family
         life if this were to continue - at least for the length of time  it
         would take for a further application. There is no  evidence  before
         me to suggest that the grandmother is unable to care adequately for
         the children, and the eldest is of course now over 19."

 4. The judge concluded, at paragraph 18, by stating that  given  that  the
    relationship  of  the  appellants  to  their  sponsors  had  now   been
    established they would be able to succeed in a fresh  application,  but
    the present appeal could not  succeed  on  human  rights  grounds.  The
    suggestion that a fresh application would be successful was  of  course
    incorrect given that, as the judge herself had noted at the end of  the
    previous paragraph, the first appellant had now attained the age of  19
    years and was thus excluded from the provisions relating  to  dependent
    children under the Immigration Rules.

 5. There was but a single error of law pleaded before me and this was that
    the judge had failed to view the appellants' Article 8  rights  through
    the lens of the Immigration Rules.

 6. The extent to which fulfilment of  the  requirements  of  a  particular
    immigration rule will carry weight in an analysis under Article 8  will
    obviously vary according to the individual circumstances  of  the  case
    and the nature and purpose of the Rule in question. Fulfilment  of  the
    requirements for entry clearance as a family visitor, for  example,  is
    unlikely to carry significant weight under Article 8 save  where  there
    are insurmountable obstacles to a visit  between  two  closely  related
    family members taking place outside the  United  Kingdom.  The  instant
    application, however, was made under Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, and it is clear that this particular body of rules  is  intended
    by the Secretary of State to set out  the  circumstances  in  which  it
    would otherwise be a breach of  Article  8  (and  thus  unlawful  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998) to refuse  leave  to  enter  or
    remain in the United  Kingdom.  Thus,  the  introductory  paragraph  at
    GEN.1.1 makes the following statement of general  principle  concerning
    the provisions of Appendix FM:

         'It sets out  the  requirements  to  be  met  and,  in  considering
         applications under this route, it reflects how, under Article 8  of
         the Human Rights Convention, the balance will be stuck between  the
         right to respect for private and family  life  and  the  legitimate
         aims [in Article 8(2)] and in doing so also reflects  the  relevant
         public interest considerations  as  set  out  in  part  5A  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.' [emphasis added]

 7. Had it been necessary for  the  judge  to  look  beyond  the  terms  of
    Appendix FM, then it would have been impossible to  fault  the  judge's
    analysis of the appellants' claim under Article 8.  As  it  was,  given
    that  she  had  found  that  the  appellants  had  fulfilled  all   the
    requirements of a body of rules whose express purpose is recognition of
    the rights of foreign nationals under Article 8, such an  exercise  was
    otiose and the judge ought simply to have allowed  the  appeal  on  the
    ground that the respondent's decision was unlawful under section  6  of
    the Human Rights Act 1998.

 8. It follows from the above that the  judge  made  an  error  of  law  in
    circumstances where the only decision that was reasonably open  to  her
    was to allow the appeal.

Notice of Decision

 9. The appeal is allowed.

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the  appeal  is  set
    aside and substituted by a decision to allow the appeal.


Judge Kelly                             Date: 9th April 2018

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
