
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11184/2018
                                                               HU/21885/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 March 2019                   |On 02 April 2019                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                                     N A
                                     B N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Gajjar (counsel) instructed by ATM Law,
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    To preserve the anonymity direction made by the  First-tier  Tribunal,
I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellants.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer, promulgated on 09 January  2019
which allowed the Appellants' appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellants are husband and wife. The first appellant was  born  on
01/06/1982. The second appellant was born  on  13/08/1988.  Both  appellants
are Pakistani nationals. The second appellant's application is dependent  on
the first  appellant's  application.  In  April  2017  the  first  appellant
applied for indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis  of  10  years  lawful
residence in the UK. The first appellant arrived in the UK on 17  May  2007.
The appellants have two young children

4.    On  2  May  2018  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellants'
applications for leave to remain in the UK after considering paragraph  276B
of the Immigration Rules.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Freer  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeals  against   the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  and  on  25  February
2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson granted permission to appeal stating

    "The respondent seeks permission to appeal in time against the decision
    of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Freer  promulgated  on  9  January  2019
    allowing the appellants' appeals against the respondent's  refusals  of
    their applications for leave to remain pursuant to paragraph 322(5)  of
    the immigration rules.

    The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier Tribunal has attached too
    much, if not sole weight, to the lack of any penalty  imposed  by  HMRC
    for under declaration of earnings in a previous tax year when  allowing
    the appeal, contrary to  the  findings  on  the  cases  of  R  (on  the
    application of Samant) v Secretary of State  for  the  home  Department
    [2017] UKAIT JR/6546/2016 and  R  (on  the  application  of  Abbasi)  v
    Secretary of State for the home Department (JR/13807/2016).

    All grounds of appeal are arguable.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal arguably treats the lack of penalty  from  HMRC  not  only  as
    indicative that they had investigated and found no  dishonesty  by  the
    application (of which there is no evidence) but  determinative  of  the
    issues under paragraph 322(5) of the immigration rules  -see  paragraph
    55 of the decision in particular. Although not binding  on  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, there is no good reason for not following  the  findings
    in Abbasi and in any event  those  are  consistent  with  the  reported
    decision in Khan. The First-tier Tribunal finds  that  the  appellant's
    position can survive an analysis based on Khan, but it is  arguable  on
    the facts available that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    inconsistent with the findings and guidance in  Khan  in  a  number  of
    significant respects.

    The First-tier Tribunal's decision does contain an  arguable  error  of
    law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal  and  permission  to
    appeal is therefore granted."

The Hearing

6.    For the respondent, Ms Everett that moved the grounds of  appeal.  She
told me that the Judge found at [59] of the decision that the HMRC  decision
not to impose a penalty was determinative of this case.  She  told  me  that
HMRC did not deal  with  the  question  of  whether  or  not  deception  was
employed in an application for leave to remain in the UK. She told  me  that
the HMRC decision cannot be determinative  of  the  appeal,  yet  the  Judge
treated it as so. She referred me specifically to  [59(v)  &  (vi)]  of  the
decision and told me that the error of law lies there, because it  is  there
that the Judge relies entirely on the HMRC's treatment  of  the  appellant's
tax affairs. She urged me to allow the appeal and set the decision aside.

7.    For the  appellants,  Mr  Gajjar  relied  on  the  detailed  rules  24
response. He told me that at  [71]  and  [81]  of  the  decision  the  Judge
clearly acknowledged the discretion  created  by  paragraph  322(5)  of  the
Immigration Rules. He told  me  that  there  is  no  attack  on  the  Judges
findings at [71] and [81], and argued that the  respondent's  appeal  cannot
therefore succeed. He told me that the Judge applied  the  correct  test  in
law. He took me to [45], [49] and [51] to [64] of the decision. He  told  me
that the decision is properly reasoned and does  not  contain  an  error  of
law, and that the Judge correctly took guidance from Khan. He  urged  me  to
dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

8.    R (on the application of Khan) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department (Dishonesty, tax return,  paragraph  322(5))  [2018]  UKUT  00384
(IAC) held that (1) Where there has been a  significant  difference  between
the income claimed in a previous application for leave  to  remain  and  the
income declared to HMRC, the Secretary of  State  is  entitled  to  draw  an
inference that the Applicant has been deceitful or dishonest  and  therefore
he should be refused ILR within paragraph 322(5) of the  Immigration  Rules.
Such an inference could be expected where there is no plausible  explanation
for the discrepancy; (2) Where an Applicant has presented evidence  to  show
that, despite the prima facie inference, he was not in  fact  dishonest  but
only  careless,  then  the  Secretary  of  State  must  decide  whether  the
explanation and evidence is sufficient, in her view, to displace  the  prima
facie inference of deceit/dishonesty; (3) In approaching  that  fact-finding
task, the Secretary of  State  should  remind  herself  that,  although  the
standard of proof is the "balance of probability", a finding that  a  person
has been deceitful and dishonest in relation to his  tax  affairs  with  the
consequence that he is denied settlement in this country is a  very  serious
finding with serious consequences; (4) For an Applicant simply to blame  his
or her accountant for an "error" in relation to the  historical  tax  return
will not be the end of the matter, given that the accountant will or  should
have asked the tax payer to confirm that the  return  was  accurate  and  to
have signed the tax return. Furthermore, the Applicant will  have  known  of
his or her earnings and will have expected  to  pay  tax  thereon.   If  the
Applicant does not take  steps  within  a  reasonable  time  to  remedy  the
situation, the Secretary of State may be  entitled  to  conclude  that  this
failure justifies a conclusion that there has  been  deceit  or  dishonesty;
(5) When considering whether or not the Applicant  is  dishonest  or  merely
careless the Secretary of  State  should  consider  the  following  matters,
inter alia, as well as the extent to which they are  evidenced  (as  opposed
to asserted):

    (i)    Whether the explanation for  the  error  by  the  accountant  is
    plausible;

    (ii)   Whether the documentation which can be  assumed  to  exist  (for
    example, correspondence between the Applicant and his accountant at the
    time of the tax return) has been disclosed  or  there  is  a  plausible
    explanation for why it is missing;

    (iii)  Why the Applicant did not realise that an error  had  been  made
    because his liability to pay tax was less than he should have expected;

    (iv)   Whether, at any stage, the Applicant has taken steps  to  remedy
    the situation  and,  if  so,  when  those  steps  were  taken  and  the
    explanation for any significant delay.

9.    The Judge combines his credibility findings with his findings of  fact
between [45] and [70] of the decision. In reaching his findings,  the  Judge
carefully weighed the evidence for and against the appellant.  At  [52]  the
Judge finds that the appellant confesses  to  carelessness  and  blames  his
accountant. At [53]  the  Judge  finds  that  it  is  the  taxpayer  who  is
responsible for an accountant's mistake and reminds himself at between  [53]
and [58] of the guidance given in Khan

10.   At [56] the Judge summarises the appellant's reasons for  blaming  his
accountant. At [57] and [58] the Judge analyses the appellant's  version  of
events, and at [59] the Judge sets out the  factors  which  weighed  against
the respondent's position. The respondent's submissions before me  focus  on
[59(v)] and [59(vi)],  but  [59]  of  the  decision  must  be  read  in  its
entirety.

11.   At [61] the  Judge  finds  that  the  first  appellant  has  not  been
dishonest. At [63] the Judge finds that the respondent  does  not  discharge
the burden of proving dishonesty and at [64] the Judge  finds  the  evidence
produced answers the questions set out in the guidance in Khan.

12.   At [60] the Judge finds that the appellant had a high-income  in  2011
and did not overstate his income to the respondent. That finding strikes  at
the heart of this appeal. Having made that finding, the  Judge  follows  the
guidance given in Khan.

13.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

14.   A careful reading of the decision demonstrates that the Judge  applied
the correct test in law. The Judge carried out a holistic assessment of  all
of the evidence. There  is  nothing  wrong  with  the  Judge's  fact-finding
exercise. The respondent might  not  like  the  conclusion  that  the  Judge
arrived at, but that conclusion is  the  result  of  the  correctly  applied
legal equation. The correct test in law has been applied. The decision  does
not contain a material error of law.

15.   The decision does not contain a material error  of  law.  The  Judge's
decision stands.

DECISION

16.   The appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
promulgated on 9 January 2019, stands.

Signed      Date 28 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

