
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/11022/2016
                                                               HU/11024/2016
                                                               HU/11025/2016
                                                               HU/11030/2016
                                                               HU/11033/2016
                                                               HU/11036/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |            Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 9th January 2018                      |            On 25th January 2018    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                            ROA (FIRST appellant)
                            OD (SECOND appellant)
                            SIA (THIRD appellant)
                           SETA (FOURTH appellant)
                            AOA (FIFTH appellant)
                            AAA (SIXTH appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Allison of Counsel instructed by Refugee &
                    Migrant Forum of Essex and London
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a decision of Judge Rastogi of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 22nd September 2017.

 2. The Appellants are Nigerian  citizens.   The  first  Appellant  is  the
    father of the third, fourth, fifth and sixth Appellants and the  second
    Appellant is their mother.  At the date of the FtT  hearing,  the  four
    minor Appellants were aged 10, 8, 5 and 1.

 3. The Appellants applied for leave to remain in the UK,  the  application
    being based on their family and private  lives.   The  application  was
    refused on 8th April 2016, and the Appellants appealed to the FtT.

 4. The FtT found that at the date of application the third  Appellant  had
    resided continuously in the UK for a period in excess of  seven  years,
    and by the time of the FtT hearing, so had the fourth  Appellant.   The
    FtT noted that there had been a previous appeal hearing  which  related
    only to the second Appellant, which had been dismissed.   The  FtT  was
    provided with a copy of the previous appeal decision.

 5. The FtT found at paragraph 37 that it was "conceded that  the  real  if
    not only issue in this appeal is the reasonableness of  the  third  and
    fourth Appellant leaving the United Kingdom".

 6. The FtT found at paragraph 56 that the best interests of  the  children
    would be served by remaining in the United Kingdom as  a  family  unit.
    However the FtT recognised that  it  must  then  go  on  and  consider,
    bearing in mind the  length  of  residence  of  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants, whether it would be reasonable for them to leave the United
    Kingdom.

 7. The FtT in considering reasonableness, took into account the  behaviour
    of the first and second Appellants, as the parents of the children, and
    found that it would not  be  unreasonable  for  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants  to  return  to  Nigeria  with  their  parents  and  younger
    siblings.  Therefore the FtT found that the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse  the  Appellants'  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK,  was  not   a
    disproportionate interference with their right  to  respect  for  their
    private lives, and was not unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights
    Act 1998.  The appeals were therefore dismissed.

 8. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    Grounds, settled by Counsel, are lengthy running to 29  paragraphs  and
    sixteen pages.  It is not necessary to set them out in full  here.   In
    very brief summary, three Grounds of Appeal were relied upon.

 9. Firstly it was contended that the FtT had erred in purporting to follow
    the Court of Appeal judgment in MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705.
    This was because the Supreme Court has granted permission to appeal  in
    MA (Pakistan) and therefore the  hearing  should  have  been  adjourned
    until the Supreme Court had considered MA (Pakistan) and published  its
    decision.

10. Secondly it was contended that the FtT failed  to  properly  apply  the
    correct legal principles in MA (Pakistan).  In brief, it was  contended
    that the FtT had followed the  principles  in  Treebhawon  [2017]  UKUT
    00013 (IAC) rather than the principles in MA (Pakistan).

11. Thirdly it was contended that the FtT had erred by failing  to  make  a
    material finding of fact, by failing to make a finding not only  as  to
    the relative quality of education that the children  would  receive  in
    Nigeria, but whether they would receive any education at all.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge P J M Hollingworth of the FtT
    who found the grounds arguable and also of his own  volition  found  it
    arguable that the FtT erred by failing to "have actively sought further
    evidence in this context given the duty  in  applying  section  55"  in
    relation to considering the best interests of the children.   Following
    the grant of permission to appeal  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary  it  was  contended  that  the  FtT  directed  itself
    appropriately.  It was noted  that  the  Appellants  had  been  legally
    represented at the hearing, and it was  contended  that  there  was  no
    basis for the FtT to consider that the  evidence  had  not  been  fully
    presented.  The Respondent's view was that the FtT had  given  adequate
    reasons for the conclusions reached and had not erred in law.

13. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

14. Mr Allison had lodged prior to the hearing a  skeleton  argument  dated
    5th January 2018, and at the  commencement  of  the  hearing  lodged  a
    supplemental skeleton argument dated 9th January 2018.  Also  submitted
    by Mr Allison at the hearing was case law, indexed 1-4.

15. Mr Allison made an  application  to  introduce  fresh  evidence  to  be
    considered at the error of law  hearing,  the  application  being  made
    pursuant to rule 15(2A) of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  I was asked to admit evidence that had not been before the
    FtT,  in  relation  to  education  in  Nigeria.   Mr  Kotas   objected,
    submitting that no good reason had been given as to  why  any  relevant
    evidence had not been presented to the FtT.

16. I declined to admit fresh evidence in relation to education in Nigeria,
    which had not been before the FtT.   No  satisfactory  explanation  was
    given as to why this evidence had not been produced before the FtT, and
    I was satisfied that it was appropriate to consider whether the FtT had
    erred in law, based upon the evidence that had  been  produced  to  the
    FtT.

17. I then heard submissions from Mr Allison who relied upon the Grounds of
    Appeal, as amended. Reliance was no longer placed on  paragraphs  14-17
    of those grounds for the reasons given  in  the  supplemental  skeleton
    argument.  Reliance was also placed upon the  skeleton  argument  dated
    5th January 2018, and the grant of permission to appeal.

18. Mr Allison expanded at length  upon  the  grounds,  and  asked  that  I
    firstly consider whether an error of law was disclosed by Grounds 2 and
    3, and only if I did not find an error of law, was I asked to  consider
    Ground 1, and adjourning the hearing until the Supreme Court had  ruled
    on MA (Pakistan).

19. With reference to Ground 2, Mr  Allison  submitted  that  the  FtT  had
    relied significantly on Treebhawon which was not a case concerning  the
    reasonableness of a child with seven years' residence in the UK  having
    to leave this country.   Therefore  the  test  in  Treebhawon  was  not
    appropriate and by considering this test, the findings of the FtT  were
    infected by legal error.

20. With reference to Ground 3, it was contended that the FtT had failed to
    make conclusive findings in relation  to  the  education  available  in
    Nigeria which amounted to a material error of law.  Mr Allison made  it
    clear that he was not submitting that the level of education in Nigeria
    was so poor that any child removed there would have a valid  Article  8
    claim, but it was contended that the FtT should have made  findings  as
    to whether the children in this case, would receive an education.

21. Mr Allison also relied upon the point made in the grant  of  permission
    that if the FtT was not satisfied in relation to the evidence given  on
    behalf of the Appellants, then the FtT should proactively  have  sought
    to obtain further evidence.

22. Mr Kotas relied upon the rule 24 response.  In brief, it was  contended
    that the FtT had followed the principles in MA (Pakistan) and  had  not
    misdirected itself in law.  With reference to education,  the  FtT  had
    dealt with this more than  adequately  and  made  findings  which  were
    supported by sustainable reasons.

23. In response Mr Allison submitted that although the FtT had set  out  in
    its decision, a summary of the principles in MA (Pakistan)  it  had  in
    fact relied upon the test in Treebhawon which amounted  to  a  material
    error of law.

24. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.



My Conclusion and Reasons

25. I will deal with the grounds in the order that they were  presented  at
    the hearing.

26. Dealing with Ground 2 I find no error of law, as I find  that  the  FtT
    correctly applied the principles in MA (Pakistan).  At paragraph 56 the
    FtT found that the best interests of the children would be to remain in
    the UK.  The best interests  of  the  children  were  considered  as  a
    primary consideration, and the FtT explained at paragraph 42 that  "the
    assessment of what is in the children's best interests  is  not  to  be
    conflated with any other considerations such as the immigration history
    of the parents, albeit that is a relevant consideration later on in the
    analysis".  It is not contended the FtT erred in considering  the  best
    interests of the children.

27. The FtT recognised that the third and fourth Appellants had resided  in
    the UK in excess of seven years.  I  find  at  paragraph  39,  the  FtT
    correctly  summarised  the  legal  principles  in  MA  (Pakistan),  and
    paragraph 39 is reproduced below;

         39.  Paragraph [45]  of  MA  confirms  that  when  considering  the
             question of whether it is reasonable for a qualifying child to
             leave the United Kingdom pursuant to section 117B(6), a  Court
             should have regard to the conduct of the  applicant  (in  this
             case the main Appellants) and that, of course  includes  their
             immigration history [114].  The CA continued that  'where  the
             seven year rule is satisfied, it is a factor  of  some  weight
             leaning in favour of leave to remain  being  granted'  and  at
             [46] that it should be given significant weight.  At [49]  the
             CA explained the reason for that as twofold: 'first because of
             its relevance to determining the nature and  strength  of  the
             child's best interests, and second, because it establishes  as
             a starting point that leave should be granted unless there are
             powerful reasons to the contrary'.  At [46]  after  discussing
             the significance of the Respondent's IDI, the  CA  stated  'in
             these cases there must be a very strong expectation  that  the
             child's best interests will be to remain in the  UK  with  his
             parents as part of a family unit, and  that  must  rank  as  a
             primary  consideration  in  the  proportionality  assessment'.
             However at [47] the CA said that 'even where the child's  best
             interests are to stay, it may still  be  not  unreasonable  to
             require the child to leave.  That will  depend  on  a  careful
             analysis of the nature and extent of the links in the  UK  and
             in the country where it is  proposed  he  should  return.   At
             [102] the CA observed  that  qualifying  children  in  the  UK
             include both UK citizens and those with seven  year  residence
             and therefore they may be treated in a similar way.  At  [103]
             the Court recognised that the conduct of  the  parents  should
             only be considered as part  of  the  proportionality  exercise
             after due weight has been given to  the  fact  of  seven  year
             residence which is a significant  factor  pointing  away  from
             removal.

28. The above paragraph discloses no error of law, and I am satisfied  that
    the principles summarised above were applied by the FtT.  I do not find
    that the reference by the FtT to  Treebhawon  infects  the  conclusions
    made by the FtT, in relation to reasonableness of return to Nigeria, in
    relation to the third and fourth Appellants.  In fact, it may not  have
    been necessary to refer to Treebhawon, but the references do not amount
    to a material error of law.

29. The FtT considered reasonableness in relation to the third  and  fourth
    Appellants at paragraphs 58-64.  The fact that the FtT had in mind  the
    correct test is confirmed by paragraph 58 which is set out below;

         58.  I will now move on to consider whether,  bearing  in  mind  my
             decision  as  to  the  third  and  fourth   Appellants'   best
             interests, it is nevertheless reasonable for them to leave the
             United Kingdom.  For this part of my  deliberation,  I  remind
             myself that I should take into account other factors  such  as
             the  conduct  of  their  parents  after   having   apportioned
             significant weight to the length of the  children's  residence
             and that this points away from removal.

30.  In  considering  reasonableness  the  FtT  makes  two  references   to
    Treebhawon, the first at paragraph 61 which is set out below;

         61.  The main Appellants may not have entered  the  United  Kingdom
             with unlawful intentions.  However, that does not  change  the
             fact that they made  the  positive  decision  to  remain  here
             unlawfully.  They did not make any attempt to regularise their
             status before the second Appellant was encountered in 2008  or
             indeed for the next three years.  At this stage, on their  own
             evidence, the second Appellant was working for cash  and  they
             could have either decided to leave or paid for an  application
             to stay.  They stayed anyway and  continued  to  expand  their
             family.  As noted in Treebhawon [51] in  the  context  of  the
             present immigration law, these are factors  to  which  I  must
             attach significant weight.

31. The FtT was entitled to take into account the fact that the parents had
    made a positive decision to remain in the UK  unlawfully  and  made  no
    attempt to regularise their status until 2011.  Reference to Treebhawon
    in paragraph 61 is not an error of law and does not  indicate  that  an
    incorrect test was applied by the FtT.

32. The second reference to Treebhawon in relation to reasonableness is  at
    paragraph 63 which is set out below;

         63.  I recognise that for children who have never been to  Nigeria,
             or who were very young when they left, relocating there  would
             be difficult and there would of course be a significant period
             of adjustment.  I remind myself of the finding of  the  UT  in
             Treebhawon (see [40] above).  However,  they  would  have  the
             support not only of their parents but  also  of  other  family
             members.  The culture is not one which would be unfamiliar  to
             them as they have been raised in a Nigerian household and  the
             language is familiar to them.  Their aptitude for learning, as
             clearly evidenced, could be used  to  improve  their  language
             skills.   In  any  event,  at  school,  English  is  the  main
             language.  They have intelligent and resourceful  parents  who
             would no doubt support their learning.

33. Reference to Treebhawon in paragraph 63  relates  to  integration  back
    into Nigeria.  This does not indicate that an incorrect legal test  has
    been applied when considering whether it would be  reasonable  for  the
    children to return.

34. The FtT, in my view, recognised, as set out in paragraph 39, that if  a
    child had seven years' residence, leave should be granted unless  there
    are powerful reasons to the contrary.  The FtT set out  those  powerful
    reasons.  They include the behaviour of the parents in overstaying, and
    making a deliberate decision to  remain  in  the  UK  unlawfully.   The
    parents made no attempt to regularise  their  status  until  2011,  the
    second Appellant having been  in  the  UK  since  2007  and  the  third
    Appellant since 2008.  The family have been housed at  public  expense,
    and a debt to the NHS of �23,000 incurred.  The  second  Appellant  had
    been working without permission.

35. At paragraph  62  the  FtT  acknowledged  that  the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants had ties in the UK in the form of  friends  and  neighbours,
    and noted the family ties that they would have in Nigeria.

36. In conclusion, I find that Ground 2 discloses no material error of law,
    and in my  view   the  FtT  correctly  applied  the  principles  in  MA
    (Pakistan).

37. I next consider Ground 3 and the contention that the FtT did not make a
    material finding of fact in relation to whether the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants would be deprived  of  education  in  Nigeria.   I  find  no
    material error of law.  In my view  the  FtT  considered  education  in
    relation to all the children.  The FtT found at paragraph 56, the  best
    interests of the children would be to remain in the UK, commenting that
    the education they would receive in the UK is likely to be superior  to
    the one they would receive in Nigeria.

38. The FtT found that the children were not at a critical stage  in  their
    education, and this is certainly a finding that was open to the FtT  to
    make, and discloses no error of  law.   The  FtT  considered  the  only
    objective evidence submitted on behalf of the Appellants in relation to
    education, that being a document printed from the Unicef website  which
    is initially referred to at paragraph 13 of the FtT decision.

39. At paragraph 34 the FtT finds that  weight  can  be  attached  to  that
    document, which confirms that there is free education  in  Nigeria  for
    children between 6 and 14 years of age, although the FtT comments  that
    provision of that service to all children is inadequate for a number of
    disparate reasons, and many children in Nigeria  do  not  benefit  from
    education, and financial constraints is one of the obstacles.

40. Further, the FtT goes on to note at paragraph 35 that both of the  main
    Appellants were educated to at least year 9, and the first  Appellant's
    family were able to afford to send her and her brother  to  university,
    and her brother was educated  to  Masters  degree  level.   The  second
    Appellant's parents had sufficient funds to maintain their own home.

41. I find the FtT does in fact make a finding that the children  would  be
    educated in Nigeria.  At paragraph 36 the FtT makes a finding  that  on
    the evidence presented, the Appellants have not proved  the  collective
    means of the family in Nigeria are such that they could not support the
    children with any of the costs associated with education.

42. I conclude that the FtT  makes  appropriate  findings  in  relation  to
    education, and did not fail to make a material finding of fact.

43. With reference to the issue raised by the  judge  granting  permission,
    which appears to suggest the FtT should have adjourned the  hearing  to
    obtain further evidence, I find no error of law.  This was not a  point
    raised on behalf of  the  Appellants  in  the  very  comprehensive  and
    detailed Grounds of Appeal.  The Appellants were legally represented at
    the hearing by experienced Counsel.  There was no  application  for  an
    adjournment.  If it was felt that insufficient evidence was  available,
    then there would have been an application for an adjournment.  The  FtT
    was entitled to consider that in the absence of any application for  an
    adjournment, the Appellants had presented what evidence  was  available
    to discharge the burden of proof.  The FtT did not err  in  failing  to
    adjourn the hearing of its own volition.

44. Finally dealing with Ground 1, I find  no  error  of  law  in  the  FtT
    proceeding to hear the case relying upon MA  (Pakistan)  and  following
    the Court of Appeal authority.  I note  there  was  no  application  to
    adjourn the hearing, and it has not been  made  clear  to  me,  whether
    permission to appeal to the Supreme Court in MA (Pakistan) was actually
    granted when the FtT hearing took place.  This ground has no merit.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT does not disclose a material error of law such  that
the decision must be set aside.  I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.   The
appeals are dismissed.

Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them.  This direction applies to the Appellants  and  to
the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.  This direction is made because  this  appeal
involves consideration of the  best  interests  of  children,  and  is  made
pursuant to rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed                              Date         9th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals are dismissed.  There are no fee awards.






Signed                              Date         9th January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
