
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11451/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 October 2020                    |On 07 October 2020                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                              akmal hassan raja
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    to refuse him leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  human  rights
    grounds.  The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.

Background

 2. The appellant is 48 years old.  He came to the United  Kingdom  in  May
    2004 when he was 32 years old, on a 6-month visit visa  but  failed  to
    embark when it expired  on  24  September  2004.   He  made  an  asylum
    application in 2005  which  was  unsuccessful:  he  was  appeal  rights
    exhausted on that appeal on 1 December 2005.

 3. The appellant then made further submissions in June 2010 and a-r  2012,
    neither of which the respondent  accepted  as  a  paragraph  353  fresh
    claim.  On 5 July 2012, the  appellant  applied  for  leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules, which was refused with  no  right  of  appeal.   The
    appellant did not embark but remained unlawfully in the United Kingdom.
     He has not had valid leave since his visit visa expired  in  September
    2004.

 4. The claim the subject of the present appeal was made on 20  June  2018,
    initially with only an out of country right  of  appeal.   On  21  June
    2019, the respondent issued a refusal letter with an  in-country  right
    of appeal.  This is the appeal against that decision.

 5. The appellant's case, set out in his witness statement of 11  September
    2019, is that his relationship with his wife  in  Pakistan  has  broken
    down and that he assumes, but cannot prove, that  she  has  obtained  a
    khula, a divorce based on his abandonment of her  and  his  failure  to
    send her any money in the 16 years he  has  now  spent  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Secretary of State refused his application for  leave  to
    remain under the Rules because he is an overstayer and  has  never  had
    leave to remain.

 6. The appellant relies on his relationship with a partner in  the  United
    Kingdom; the respondent accepts that this newer relationship is genuine
    and subsisting.   She is a divorcee, now 69 years old, who  has  a  92-
    year-old mother for whom she cooks every day.  The appellant's  partner
    has arthritis, multi nodular goitre and cataracts (although the  latter
    have been successfully  treated).    The  appellant  accepts  that  the
    arthritis and goitre, which still require medical treatment,  could  be
    treated in Pakistan.    However,  he  relies  on  his  partner's  close
    relationship with her mother: his partner is retired and spends most of
    each day with her mother in Leicester.  The appellant's partner  has  a
    brother in Canada, who would be willing to have their mother join  him,
    but the mother is unwilling to go to Canada.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 7. The First-tier Tribunal found the judge's decision to be proportionate,
    having regard to the facts and matters set out  above  and  to  section
    117B(4)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended).

 8. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal, arguing that  the  First-
    tier Judge had applied in error  an  'impossibility'  test,  failed  to
    consider Kugathas dependency, and failed to explain  his  understanding
    of  why  socsvss  support  would  be  insufficient.     The   appellant
    considered   that   there   were   compassionate   and/or    compelling
    circumstances for which leave to remain should be granted.

Permission to appeal

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

Rule 24 Reply

10. There was no Rule 24 reply on behalf of the respondent.




Further directions

11. On 6 July 2020, the Upper Tribunal sent out triage directions  made  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek in the light of the  COVID-19  pandemic.
    The appellant was invited, if so advised, to submit further submissions
    on the error of law issue, with a right for the respondent to reply, if
    triage submissions were made, and a further  right  of  reply  for  the
    appellant thereafter.

12. Both parties were directed  to  say  whether  they  considered  that  a
    further hearing, oral or remote, was required.  In default, the  appeal
    would be considered on the papers and triage submissions, if any.

Submissions received

13. Neither party has responded to the triage directions and accordingly, I
    proceed on the basis that both  are  content  for  the  question  of  a
    material error of law to be considered on the documents and submissions
    before the Tribunal.

14. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Analysis

15. I am satisfied that it is appropriate to make a decision on whether the
    First-tier Tribunal decision contains a material error of  law  on  the
    basis of the decision and documents in the file.

16. The First-tier Judge's approach to the facts  of  this  appeal  is  not
    erroneous.  Section  117B(1)  requires  the  Tribunal  to  approach  an
    Article 8 ECHR appeal on the basis that the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls is in the  public  interest.   Section  117B(4)(b)
    requires the judge to give little  weight  to  a  private  life,  or  a
    relationship formed with a qualifying  partner,  established  when  the
    person was in the United Kingdom  unlawfully.   That  is  the  position
    here.

17. The appellant cannot bring himself within the Rules and  little  weight
    can be given to  his  relationship  with  his  partner  in  the  United
    Kingdom, to whom he is not married.  I note that there is  no  reliable
    evidence that he is not still the  spouse  of  his  wife  in  Pakistan,
    albeit  estranged.   The  appellant's  partner  has  no  children,  and
    although he occasionally accompanies her to see her mother, there is no
    Kugathas dependency between this appellant and his partner's mother.

18. The First-tier Judge's decision that  it  is  not  disproportionate  to
    refuse this appellant leave to remain on human rights  grounds  on  the
    basis of the very limited case advanced on  his  behalf  is  unarguably
    correct.  The grounds of appeal  disclose  no  material  error  of  law
    therein.

DECISION

19. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     4 October
2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



