
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/11986/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                    |      Decision and Reasons          |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On:  15th January 2018                   |      On: 22nd February 2018        |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, CHENNAI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             SELVA ALAGASUNDARAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Jegarajah, Counsel instructed by Jacobs & Co
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Mrs Alagasundaram is a national of Sri Lanka date  of  birth  30th  May
    1946. On the 21st  April  2017  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  her
    appeal, on human rights grounds, against a  decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance. The Entry Clearance Officer now  has  permission  to  appeal
    against that decision, on the grounds that  the  Tribunal  applied  the
    wrong legal framework and gives no intelligible reason for  the  appeal
    being allowed. The Judge in the First-tier Tribunal was Dr Majid.


 2. Mrs Alagasundaram had applied for  entry  clearance  as  the  dependent
    adult relative of her British daughter. The ECO had  refused  to  grant
    entry on the basis that Mrs Alagasundaram had not demonstrated that she
    met the requirements of the relevant section of Appendix  FM.  Nor  had
    she shown that the decision to refuse entry clearance was  otherwise  a
    disproportionate lack of respect for her family  life.   In  particular
    the  ECO  concluded  that  Mrs  Alagasundaram  could   not   meet   the
    requirements of:


                 a) E-ECDR.2.4


                 "You require, due to either age,  illness  or  incapacity,
    long-term
                 personal care to perform everyday tasks"


                 b) E-ECDR.2.5

                 "You must be unable, even with the practical and financial
                 help of the sponsor, to obtain the required level of care
                 in the country where they are living, because (a) it is not
                 available and there is no person in that country who can
                 reasonably provide it; or (b) it is not affordable".

 3. These then were the central issues before the First-tier Tribunal.


 4. The First-tier Tribunal found the 'dispositive factors' in  the  appeal
    to be:

           a) the fact that there would be no recourse to public funds
           b) the sponsor could provide accommodation in her five-bedroomed
              house
           c) the family were paying for private medical treatment
           d) the Sponsor wanted her mother to be comfortable

Having identified those factors the determination goes on to make reference
to a number of cases and political issues before concluding that the appeal
should be allowed.

 5. The ECO now appeals on the grounds that  the  Tribunal  has  failed  to
    address either of the tests contained in Appendix FM  and  set  out  at
    paragraph 2 above.


 6. I am quite satisfied that the ECO has demonstrated that  this  decision
    must be set aside for error of law. The determination does not refer to
    any of the applicable law.  With no explanation it refers to HC395  and
    the Immigration Acts 2014 and 2016 and goes on, over the following  20+
    paragraphs to make  reference  to  various  cases,  all  of  which  are
    irrelevant. It also devotes several paragraphs  to  discussion  of  the
    Conservative Party's antipathy towards the European Convention on Human
    Rights. Nowhere does it address the  two  reasons  given  for  refusing
    leave to enter.

 7. Mrs Alagasundaram must be given a fair hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with the issues in her case properly  addressed.  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate that the matter be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. I would note that the case so far appears to  have  proceeded
    on the basis that Mrs Alagasundaram is resident in India: on the papers
    before me that is not quite correct. She made her application  via  the
    Chennai post, whilst in India on a visitors visa.  She  remains  a  Sri
    Lankan national.   Any evidence submitted by the  parties  on  remittal
    should therefore take that into account.



    Decisions and Directions

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  errors  of  law  such
    that the decision must be set aside. The decision in the appeal  is  to
    be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.


 9. There is no order for anonymity.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           15th January 2017


