
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: HU/11844/2019 (V)
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC          |Decision & Reasons         |
|                                          |Promulgated                |
|On 01 December 2020                       |On 09 December 2020        |
|                                          |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                              MUHAMMAD ZEESHAN

                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

For the appellant: Mr S Vokes, instructed by Mamoon Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a national of Pakistan with date of birth given  as
   17.12.91, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 6.11.19  (Judge  Parker),
   dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of  State,
   dated 28.6.19, to refuse his application made on  18.1.19  for  leave  to
   remain in the UK on human rights (private life only) grounds.

2. The appellant has been in the UK since 2012, with valid  Tier  4  student
   leave extended through to 18.1.19, the date of his application for  leave
   to remain, the refusal of which is the subject of this appeal. He  sought
   more time to complete education in the UK, relied on health  issues,  and
   claimed to fear for his life and safety if returned to Pakistan,  on  the
   basis that his father obtained a loan to finance his studies  in  the  UK
   but was not in a position to repay the loan, so that the  creditors  will
   humiliate and cause harm to his family and himself.

3. The appellant could not meet the requirements of the  Rules  for  further
   student leave. The  respondent  considered  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  but
   concluded  that  there  were  not  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
   integration in Pakistan. Neither were there any exceptional circumstances
   within or without the Rules.  The  application  was  also  refused  under
   paragraph 322(1), as leave to remain was sought for a purpose not covered
   by the Rules. In relation to the  claimed  fear  for  his  life,  he  was
   invited to make a claim for international protection but declined  to  do
   so. The  respondent  considered  that  his  health  issues,  including  a
   diagnosis of epilepsy  as  well  as  mental  health  issues  of  anxiety,
   depression, and suicidal ideation, could not meet the very high threshold
   of article 3 ECHR  and  he  would,  in  any  event,  be  able  to  access
   appropriate treatment in Pakistan.

4. The First-tier Tribunal considered the appellant's  circumstances  within
   the Rules, under paragraph 276ADE, and  outside  the  Rules,  applying  R
   (Razgar) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2004]  UKHKL  27,
   and consideration of section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
   Asylum Act 2002. Article 3 medical grounds were  not  relied  on  at  the
   appeal hearing. Ultimately, for the reasons set out in the decision,  the
   judge concluded that the respondent's decision was proportionate  to  the
   appellant's article 8 rights and, therefore, dismissed the appeal.

5. The grounds of application for permission to  appeal  first  assert  that
   the judge erred in assessing compelling compassionate circumstances.  The
   grounds refer to the appellant's epilepsy and that in consequence  he  is
   not  fit  to  travel.  It  is  also  argued  that  the  judge  erred   in
   consideration of section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
   Act 2002 in failing to give credit for the ability to speak  English  and
   lawful residence, and that in considering that the appellant was a burden
   on public funds, the judge ignored that under the terms  of  his  student
   leave he was permitted to access NHS treatment.

6. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal  on  1.4.20.
   However, when the application was renewed to the  Upper  Tribunal,  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Allen granted permission on 7.6.20,  stating  simply  that
   the "grounds  identify  arguable  points  of  challenge  to  the  judge's
   decision."

7. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the light of the submissions made to me at the  remote  hearing  and  the
   grounds of application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

8. At the outset, I have to agree  that  the  impugned  decision  is  poorly
   drafted and difficult to follow. It reads as though it is  a  combination
   of a cut-and-paste exercise and a  dictation  of  the  remainder  without
   checking of the resulting decision.  For  example,  the  judge  deals  at
   length with article 3 when it was made clear at the outset of the hearing
   that article 3 was not relied on. Similarly, in consideration of  article
   8 the judge makes reference to family life when  it  is  clear  that  the
   appellant had no family life and relied only on  private  life.  Further,
   the order in which issues are addressed is peculiar with evidence and the
   self-direction on the law summarised at different points.  Article  8  is
   addressed before paragraph 276ADE.

9. In arguing that had the judge considered  the  appellant's  inability  to
   travel to Pakistan the outcome of the appeal would have  been  different,
   the grounds are in the main a  disagreement  with  the  decision  and  an
   attempt to reargue the appeal. This was not  a  point  pursued  with  any
   vigour by Mr Vokes, who stated that in essence the appeal  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal was a reasons challenge, alleging irrationality. He went  on  to
   make a paragraph-by-paragraph critique of the decision, pointing  to  the
   peculiar layout of the decision and a number of apparent inconsistencies.
   For example, at [25] of the decision the judge suggested that  article  8
   was not engaged at all. However, the rest of  the  decision  goes  on  to
   consider article 8. At [33] of the decision the judge was satisfied  that
   the appellant had been in the UK lawfully for the "majority of time"  but
   accepting at [37] the submission that he had always been  here  lawfully.
   Whilst these may be matters of valid concern, they are criticisms of form
   rather than substance. In VW (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA Civ 522 at [12],  LJ
   McCombe  stated,  "Regrettably,  there  is  an  increasing  tendency   in
   immigration cases, when a First-tier Tribunal Judge has given a  judgment
   explaining why he has reached a particular decision, of seeking to burrow
   out industriously areas of evidence that have been less fully dealt  with
   than others and then to use this  as  a  basis  for  saying  the  judge's
   decision is legally flawed because it did  not  deal  with  a  particular
   matter more fully. In my judgment, with respect,  that  is  no  basis  on
   which to sustain a proper challenge to a judge's finding of  fact."  This
   is such a case. I am satisfied that read as a whole, one can discern  the
   relevant findings and reasoning in what is essentially a simple case.

10.  Contrary  to  the  assertion  in  the  grounds,  the  judge  did   give
   consideration to the inability to travel. At [44]  the  judge  noted  the
   competing arguments on this issue and at [45] that  the  medical  opinion
   recommended no travel. The judge noted  the  relatively  minor  level  of
   effect on the appellant, that he  experiences  short  night-time  attacks
   which cause jerking of the left arm and leg, and which do not  cause  him
   to lose consciousness, and only occasional day-time attacks of a  similar
   nature and duration. At [46] of the decision, whilst the  judge  accepted
   that epilepsy and its effects on the appellant are relevant to the  issue
   of obstacles to integration in Pakistan on return, it was concluded  that
   the alleged inability to return is not in itself a reason to grant  leave
   to remain.

11. The grounds argue, as did Ms Patel at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal
   hearing, that the inability  to  travel  to  Pakistan  should  have  been
   considered as part of the appellant's  circumstances  in  the  article  8
   consideration. When I questioned Mr Vokes on this particular  aspect,  he
   suggested only that the epilepsy, together with anxiety  and  depression,
   could amount to compelling compassionate  or  exceptional  circumstances.
   However, the judge did consider that matter giving  reasons  for  finding
   the circumstances not compelling  or  exceptional.  Whilst  all  relevant
   matters are to be taken into account, if the  appellant  is  not  fit  to
   travel at the present time, it does not necessarily follow that he should
   be permitted to remain in the UK. The  ability  to  travel  is  a  matter
   relevant to the mechanism of return; it is not a factor in his favour  in
   the proportionality assessment outside the Rules or the basis on which he
   has an article 8 entitlement to remain on private life grounds. The judge
   rightly criticised the paucity of the  evidence  of  fitness  to  travel,
   which comprised only one line in each of two brief reports in the medical
   evidence, with the consultant only  'recommending'  that  he  should  not
   travel.

12. In his submissions, Mr McVeety pointed  out  that  the  grounds  do  not
   challenge the judge's conclusion on paragraph  276ADE,  finding  no  very
   significant  obstacles  to  his   integration   in   Pakistan.   In   the
   circumstances, it is difficult to see on  what  basis  the  appeal  could
   succeed on article 8 grounds on the basis of an inability to  travel.  In
   the premises, I find no error of law in this aspect of the decision.

13. Contrary to the implied assertion  in  the  grounds,  the  appellant  is
   deserving of no  particular  credit  for  being  able  to  speak  English
   (s117B(2). However, the judge did take into account that the  appellant's
   private life in the UK was developed at  a  time  when  he  was  lawfully
   present (s117B(4)), as he has always been lawfully present with leave  as
   a student until 2019 and his leave is extended under s3C by  his  appeal.
   However, s117B(5) provides that little weight is  to  be  accorded  to  a
   private life developed in  the  UK  whilst  his  immigration  status  was
   precarious, as it always was. It follows that  little  weight  should  be
   accorded to the  appellant's  private  life,  though  a  reading  of  the
   decision reveals that the judge has fully taken the extent of his private
   life and lengthy lawful residence in the UK into account.

14. As Mr McVeety pointed out,  very  little  evidence  of  the  appellant's
   private life was put before the First-tier Tribunal. He lives in his  own
   room in shared accommodation but there are no statements from any friends
   or others in support of his application for leave to remain.  Apart  from
   length of residence and the fact of his studies in the UK, there  was  no
   evidence of any private life in the UK, no evidence of social or cultural
   integration or any involvement of any  kind  in  the  community.  In  the
   circumstances, it is difficult to see how the  appeal  could  succeed  on
   private life grounds.

15. In relation to s117B(3), Ms Patel  argued  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   appeal hearing that use of the NHS  by  the  appellant,  which  has  been
   extensive given his various ailments, does  not  constitute  the  use  of
   public funds. The judge  accepted  at  [32]  of  the  decision  that  the
   definition of public funds in paragraph 6 of the Rules does not expressly
   include use of the NHS.  However,  s117B  relates  to  the  wider  public
   interest in the article 8 consideration outside the Rules. The judge  was
   required to take into account in that article  8  assessment  the  public
   interest consideration that it is in the interests of the economic  well-
   being of the UK that persons who seek to enter or remain in  the  UK  are
   financially independent, because such persons are not  a  burden  on  the
   taxpayer and are better able to integrate into society. Mr Vokes accepted
   that even with an entitlement, the appellant's use of the NHS  represents
   a drain on public funds. More significantly, the wording in s117B(3) does
   not include  the  phrase  'public  funds'  but  addresses  the  issue  of
   financial independence which avoids a burden  falling  on  the  taxpayer.
   Clearly, the appellant is not financially independent. Even though, as  a
   student he was entitled to NHS treatment, having paid the NHS  Surcharge,
   he is no longer a student and if he is permitted  to  remain  in  the  UK
   outside the Rules on article 8 private life  grounds,  the  cost  of  his
   continuing NHS treatment will necessarily  amount  to  a  burden  on  the
   taxpayer. In the premises, the judge was  entirely  correct  to  consider
   this  matter  a  relevant   consideration   in   the   article   8   ECHR
   proportionality assessment. It is worth noting, however, that at the  end
   of [32] the judge accepted that this consideration was not  determinative
   of the appeal. In other words, it was but one factor to be considered  in
   the proportionality balancing exercise. No error of law is  disclosed  in
   this regard.

16. Considering the decision as a whole, I am satisfied that the  judge  was
   entitled to conclude for the reasons set out in  the  decision  that  the
   appellant's circumstances were neither exceptional, nor  compelling,  nor
   sufficiently compassionate to justify granting leave  to  remain  outside
   the Rules on the basis that otherwise the decision would be unjustifiably
   harsh. He could not meet the requirements  of  the  Rules  for  leave  to
   remain, which fact is highly relevant to the  article  8  proportionality
   balancing exercise. At [52] the judge accepted that a  'broad  evaluative
   judgement' was required and after providing cogent reasoning at [53]  for
   why the requirement for very significant obstacles under paragraph 276ADE
   was not met, at [55] onwards of the  decision,  the  judge  set  out  the
   recommended balance-sheet approach of the 'pros' and 'cons' in  assessing
   factors for and against the appellant. It is clear that  the  judge  took
   into account all relevant factors  and  made  a  careful  and  considered
   assessment.

17. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  despite  the
   various concerns about the way in which  the  decision  was  drafted  and
   issues addressed, I find no material error of law in the decision of  the
   First-tier Tribunal. With minor medical conditions, no article  3  claim,
   no challenge to the finding that there are no very significant  obstacles
   to integration in  Pakistan,  no  family  life,  and  only  very  limited
   evidence of any private life, there was no basis upon  which  a  properly
   directed  judge  could  have  concluded  that   there   were   compelling
   circumstances sufficient, exceptionally, to  justify  granting  leave  to
   remain on the basis that the decision would  otherwise  be  unjustifiably
   harsh. On its facts, the appeal based on private life was bound to fail.

Decision

      The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands, and the  human  rights
      appeal remains dismissed.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       1 December 2020




