
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11443/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 February 2019                            |On 4 March 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   ms o a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms U Dirie, Counsel instructed by G Singh solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer to as the Claimant, is a national
    of Nigeria born on [~] 1966.  Although this is not an  asylum  claim  I
    will be making an anonymity order  due  to  her  personal  history  and
    circumstances. The Claimant arrived in the UK in March 2005 with  entry
    clearance as a visitor.  She  thereafter  overstayed  and  applied  for
    leave to remain under the private and family life ten year route on  30
    April  2015,  which  application  was  ruled  invalid.  After   further
    applications and  a  pre-action  protocol  letter  being  sent  to  the
    Secretary of State, the Claimant made an  application  on  19  December
    2017 for leave to remain on  the  basis  of  her  private  life,  which
    application was refused on 10 May 2018.

 2. The primary basis of that claim was that  the  Claimant  was  suffering
    from serious mental health problems as a result of being  a  victim  of
    domestic violence from her former husband in Nigeria,  which  had  been
    exacerbated by a period in immigration detention in the  UK.   Reliance
    was placed upon a psychiatric report from Dr Singh  dated  14  December
    2017, the contents of which the Secretary of State apparently accepted,
    but he refused to grant the application  for  leave  to  remain  either
    within  the  Rules,  or  on  the  basis  that  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances justifying the grant of leave outside the Rules.

 3. The Claimant appealed and her appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Freer for hearing on 1 October 2018.  In a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 11 October 2018 the  judge  allowed  the  appeal
    with  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Rules  and  the
    Claimant's human rights.

 4. The Secretary of State has sought permission to appeal in time  to  the
    Upper Tribunal on the basis of five grounds.

      1) That the judge's approach  to  the  Claimant's  medical  claim  was
         fundamentally flawed in that he failed to consider Article 3  first
         and thus his assessment of Article 8 was flawed.

      2) The judge failed to apply the proper stringent test set  out  in  J
         [2005] EWCA Civ 629.

      3) The judge failed to have regard to the judgment in KH (Afghanistan)
         [2009] EWCA Civ 1354 at [32] and [33] as to the lack of family ties
         in Nigeria and the judge failed to give adequate reasons as to  why
         measures could not be  put  in  place  in  Nigeria  to  assist  the
         Claimant  in  respect  of  adherence  in  taking   medication   and
         accommodation.

      4) In assessing paragraph 276ADE of the Rules,  the  judge  failed  to
         consider relevant matters, for example  whether  the  cost  of  any
         medical treatment could be met by family and friends in the UK  and
         he made a material error of fact in finding there is only  one  NGO
         that would be available to support the Claimant, which was based on
         a misreading of the  Secretary  of  State's  refusal  letter  which
         provides  "Project  Alert  is  a  non-governmental  women's  rights
         organisation set up in January 1999 which offers a support  service
         programme in relation to counselling,  legal  aid  and  shelter  in
         Nigeria which may be of use to you at page 5 of 8 refusal decision"
         and the judge failed to take account of the fact that the  Claimant
         had previously obtained  medical  assistance  in  relation  to  her
         health whilst in Nigeria.

      5) The judge erred at [56] in finding that section 117B(6) of the NIAA
         2002 was applicable to the Claimant in the light of the fact  there
         was nothing to suggest the Claimant  has  a  parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child in the UK.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson on  31
    December 2018 on the basis,

         "Although the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  discloses  some
         consideration of the tests in J and refers to the Appellant's  case
         on a narrow view not fitting the requirements of Section 117B(6) of
         the NIAA 2002, it is arguable that the consideration of the factors
         in J is insufficient and inadequately reasoned and the  factors  in
         Section 117B not properly applied in the balancing exercise.  There
         is arguably a  lack  of  consideration  of  the  medical  treatment
         previously obtained in Nigeria by the Appellant and that  available
         on return  in  addition  to  the  question  of  whether  she  could
         realistically access this for cost or practical reasons."

    Hearing

 6. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Lindsay on behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State sought to rely on the grounds of  appeal,  which  he
    submitted could be crystallised into  two  points:  firstly,  that  the
    Claimant previously received medical treatment in Nigeria but then  the
    judge did not go on to make any relevant findings as to what  treatment
    had been received and whether it could reasonably be resumed in Nigeria
    and if not what very significant  obstacles  she  would  encounter.  He
    submitted that Dr Singh makes no mention of the facilities for  medical
    care in Nigeria as the judge noted at  [24]  and  the  judge  erred  in
    allowing the appeal on this basis.

 7. Mr Lindsay submitted that the key dispositive finding is at [46]  where
    the Judge found that the Claimant's  mental  state  is  such  that  she
    cannot be relied upon to access the limited help offered by the NGO and
    given the absence of evidence, it is  unclear  to  what  the  judge  is
    referring; his finding is unsupported by reasons and does not appear to
    be tied to any of the evidence referred  to.   He  submitted  that  the
    finding "that there was no other possible support  in  Nigeria"  was  a
    very problematic finding and was  a  result  of  a  misreading  of  the
    refusal letter. The fact that the Secretary of State  has  referred  to
    one NGO does not mean that there is only one NGO.  He submitted this is
    an error and was clearly material to the outcome  of  the  appeal.   In
    respect of the judge's finding at [48] it was not certain the  Claimant
    could not afford medication on return. Mr Lindsay  submitted  that  the
    judge had failed to make a finding on a  material  matter  in  that  he
    failed to consider whether the Claimant could be supported and assisted
    by family and friends in the UK.

 8. In respect of ground 5 and the  judge's  finding  at  [56]  Mr  Lindsay
    submitted that the Claimant's son in the UK was an adult and  thus  she
    had no qualifying child that would bring her within the parameters  for
    consideration under Section 117B(6).  Mr Lindsay submitted that he  was
    bound to accept that if the Claimant cannot  be  relied  upon,  as  the
    judge found at [46] to access help on  return,  then  the  appeal  must
    succeed.  However, the concern of the Secretary of State  is  that  the
    judge had not given reasons for his finding and had not  tied  this  to
    any of the evidence on appeal.

 9. He submitted that Dr Singh's evidence does not deal  at  all  with  the
    facility the Claimant would need  on  return  to  Nigeria,  which  goes
    directly to the  judge's  consideration  of  the  Rules  in  the  first
    instance and thus fatally undermines his consideration of Article 3 and
    8 of the ECHR.  Mr Lindsay again accepted where proper regard  was  had
    to all the evidence the appeal was clearly capable of  succeeding,  but
    given the carefully drafted refusal letter it was also an  appeal  that
    was capable of being dismissed.  The  judge's  failures  undermine  his
    findings and a re-hearing was required.

10. In her submissions, Ms Dirie commenced by stating that this was a  case
    where the medical evidence had not been disputed by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  The Claimant had been diagnosed by a consultant psychiatrist as
    having severe depression, anxiety disorder and PTSD, arising  from  her
    experience of being a victim of severe domestic  violence  in  Nigeria,
    which had been exacerbated by spending a period of time in  immigration
    detention in the UK.  In respect of the finding at [46] that there  was
    no support for the Claimant, she drew  my  attention  to  [24]  of  the
    judge's decision where the judge had stated that Dr Singh's report  has
    made no reference to facilities in  Nigeria.   However,  she  submitted
    that this was erroneous in that Dr Singh's  remit  was  to  access  the
    Claimant psychiatrically; Dr Singh is not a country expert so it  would
    not have been appropriate  for  her  to  give  her  opinion  about  the
    availability of facilities in Nigeria.   Ms  Dirie  submitted  what  is
    clear from [46] and the Secretary of State's refusal decision  is  that
    the NGO, Project Alert, is a  women's  organisation  and  there  is  no
    evidence that it could  provide  support  for  the  Appellant's  mental
    health problems.

11. Ms Dirie drew my attention to the fact that three  documents  had  been
    handed up with the Claimant's skeleton argument and  were  appended  to
    it, which do address the issue of mental health  provision  in  Nigeria
    viz (i) a report from the World Health Organisation 2011; (ii) a report
    from the Integrative Journal of Global Health 2017 Volume 1 No 1:5  and
    (iii) a DFAT country information report on Nigeria dated 9 March  2018.
    She submitted that it was this evidence upon which the judge relied  in
    finding there would be limited sources available to the  Claimant.   Ms
    Dirie submitted that [46] was a conclusion the  judge  came  to  having
    considered the medical evidence  and  having  accepted  the  Claimant's
    evidence and those of her witnesses that there was no family support in
    Nigeria.  The judge was clear and had at the forefront of his mind  the
    absence of a support network  and  this  was  clearly  material  to  an
    assessment of whether there were  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
    integration there.

12. In respect of the risk of suicide and the J test, it was  accepted  the
    Claimant had a subjective fear of her ex-husband.   She  submitted  the
    judge's finding that there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Claimant's integration was sustainable.  She submitted that the  points
    raised by the Secretary of State in respect of  section  117B(6)  is  a
    mischaracterisation of the judge's finding at [56] where he  was  quite
    clear that the Claimant does not fall under this paragraph, but  simply
    recognises she has a family life with her grandson and read  with  [57]
    that all her ties are in the UK and not Nigeria.  In  relation  to  the
    test in J, Ms Dirie accepted the judge may not have addressed  all  six
    points but he had dealt with all the material points.  She submitted it
    was a detailed and  careful  decision  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
    challenge amounted to no more than  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's
    findings which were open to him on the evidence.

13. In reply, Mr Lindsay submitted that [46] really was  the  crux  of  the
    issue if the sentence "there is no other possible support  in  Nigeria"
    was not to be found in the determination it may have been sound however
    it could not be said the outcome would have been the same without  that
    sentence.  There might be other NGOs which the Claimant could rely upon
    and access and the judge had made a clear error in finding there was no
    other possible support for the Claimant in Nigeria.

14. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

    Findings and reasons

15. I find there is merit in Ground 2 of the grounds of appeal, in that  it
    is clear from [64] of the  judgment  that  the  Judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for finding that the Claimant meets all six aspects of
    the legal test for suicide  risk,  albeit  he  addressed  some  of  the
    factors at [60]-[63] he failed to engage  with  the  particularly  high
    threshold because it is  a  foreign  case;  that  the  alleged  inhuman
    treatment is not the direct or indirect responsibility  of  the  public
    authorities of the receiving state [the third factor] nor  whether  the
    Claimant's fear of ill-treatment is objectively well-founded [the fifth
    factor].

16. However, the Judge allowed the appeal in the alternative, on the  basis
    that Article 8 was engaged in light of his finding  that  the  Claimant
    met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules.  The  fourth
    ground of appeal challenges the judge's finding in respect of paragraph
    276ADE(vi) of the Rules.  The  Judge  made  inter  alia  the  following
    material findings in this respect:-

         "40. I find on the basis of credible evidence from multiple sources
             that the Appellant is terrified of  her  former  husband,  who
             with the help of his family appears to have been  involved  in
             extremely abusive behaviour ... I find that  she  has  a  very
             strong subjective fear that he may find her and then harm  her
             all over again...

         44.  The Appellant's entire family and her best friend  are  living
             in the UK.  They provide a strong support network  which  does
             not exist in Nigeria.

         45.  The Appellant has a private and family life in the UK ...  Her
             relationships   with   her   best   friend,   her   son,   her
             grandchildren, medical support and therapy staff are  included
             in the scope of her private life.  Due  to  her  vulnerability
             there will be a very serious  interference  with  her  private
             life if removed, I find.

         46.  There would be very serious obstacles to  her  integration  in
             Nigeria.  Her mental state is such that she cannot  be  relied
             upon to access the limited help offered by the NGO.  There  is
             no other possible support in Nigeria.  Her  strong  subjective
             anxiety  and  PTSD  and  depression  would  affect   how   she
             considered her options.  There  is  simply  nobody  there  who
             knows her to stop her from committing suicide.

         47.  I have evaluated the situation in  Nigeria  in  the  light  of
             material supplied including the  2011  WHO  report,  the  2017
             article on Knowledge of and Attitude to  Mental  Illnesses  in
             Nigeria from the Integrative Journal of Global Health and  the
             Australian 2018 DFAT report on Nigeria which confirms the high
             level of stigmatisation.

         48.  If the Appellant was prescribed pills in  Nigeria  it  is  not
             certain she would have the money to buy them or would actually
             take them consistently if she did.  The NGO is  not  itself  a
             dispensing agency.  She would present as  very  depressed  and
             vulnerable at risk of theft or worse.  The treatment in the UK
             has not yet resulted in such an improvement in  her  condition
             that I might reasonably find otherwise.

         49.  I appreciate that a lack of ties is not the  same  concept  as
             obstacles to integration but it does  go  towards  it.   In  a
             person with good mental health  it  would  not  be  a  tipping
             factor but her health is very poor.

         50.  I conclude  that  there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to
             integration and that she  meets  the  threshold  of  paragraph
             276ADE(1)(vi) and should  succeed  on  Article  8  within  the
             Immigration Rules.  Therefore, I find that the Rules have been
             satisfied in full.

17.  The Secretary of State  asserts  that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider
    relevant matters, for example whether the cost of any medical treatment
    could be met by family and friends  in  the  UK  and  that  he  made  a
    material error of fact in finding there is only one NGO that  would  be
    available to support the Claimant, which was based on a  misreading  of
    the Secretary of State's refusal letter which provides  "Project  Alert
    is a non-governmental women's rights organisation  set  up  in  January
    1999  which  offers  a  support  service  programme  in   relation   to
    counselling, legal aid and shelter in Nigeria which may be  of  use  to
    you at page 5 of 8 refusal decision"  and  the  judge  failed  to  take
    account of the fact that the Claimant had previously  obtained  medical
    assistance in relation to her health whilst in Nigeria.

18.  I have concluded that this ground of appeal does not raise  a  material
    error of law in the Judge's decision. I find that the grounds of appeal
    have been drafted on the misapprehension that the case  centred  around
    the potential costs of any medical treatment, whereas it is clear  from
    the psychiatric report, the contents of which the  Secretary  of  State
    accepted, that the Claimant is at a high risk of suicide if removed  to
    Nigeria, due to her subjective fear of  her  husband.  Thus  access  to
    medication in this  respect  is  immaterial  and  the  Judge  expressly
    accepted that at [46].

19.  Whilst it is arguable that the Judge erred in finding  that  there  was
    only one NGO who could assist the Claimant, based on  the  contents  of
    the refusal decision, I find that this is not a material error for  the
    reasons already provided i.e. that the high risk of suicide would arise
    prior to the Claimant being able to access support from any NGO cf. Y &
    Z [2009] EWCA Civ 362 at [61]. Further, the fact that the Claimant  had
    obtained medical assistance previously in Nigeria fails  to  take  into
    account that this was 17 years previously and that  her  mental  health
    has deteriorated since that time, due to the threat of return: [28].

20.  Mr Lindsay emphasised that it had not been open to the  Judge  at  [46]
    to find "there is no other possible support" in Nigeria  because  there
    might be other NGOs to whom she could turn for support.  However,  read
    in the context of the Judge's other findings,  I  find  that  what  the
    Judge was referring to here was the absence of any support network from
    family and friends, having found at [44] that in the UK  they  provided
    "a strong support network  which  does  not  exist  in  Nigeria."  This
    finding was clearly open to him on the evidence that  the  only  family
    members in Nigeria were her ex-husband, with whom she did not  wish  to
    be in contact due to the lengthy history of domestic violence,  indeed,
    his presence there is clearly causative of her very  strong  subjective
    fear of return and a son, from whom she has  been  estranged  for  many
    years.

21.  The relevant test for assessing  whether  there  are  very  significant
    obstacles to integration is set out in SSHD v Kamara  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    813, where the Court of Appeal per Lord Justice Sales held  inter  alia
    at [14]:

         "14. ...the idea of "integration"  calls  for  a  broad  evaluative
         judgment to be made as to  whether the individual will be enough of
         an insider in terms of understanding how life  in  the  society  in
         that other country is carried on and a capacity to  participate  in
         it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to
         be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in  that  society  and  to
         build up within a reasonable time a variety of human  relationships
         to give substance to the individual's private or family life.


22.   I find that the Judge's finding in respect of paragraph 276ADE(vi)  is
    sustainable in light of the aforementioned test and there was no  error
    of law in his decision to allow the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds
    (Article 8), bearing in mind the judgment of the Senior President in TZ
    (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 at [34] that:

         "... where  a  person  satisfies  the  Rules,  whether  or  not  by
         reference to an article 8 informed requirement, then this  will  be
         positively  determinative  of  that  person's  article  8   appeal,
         provided their case engages article 8(1), for the very reason  that
         it would then be disproportionate for that person to be removed."

23.  I have considered the remaining grounds of appeal, but  ground  3  also
    fails for the reasons set out at [18] above.  KH  (Afghanistan)  [2009]
    EWCA Civ 1354 at [32]-[33] was concerned with whether or not  the  high
    threshold for Article 3 in a "medical case" was met, which was not  the
    argument before the Judge in this Claimant's case. I find that Ground 5
    is misconceived in that it is clear from [56] that the  Judge  did  not
    find that section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002 was engaged by virtue of the
    Claimant's relationship with her grandchildren. Ground 1 does not  take
    the matter any further, given that the Judge correctly considered first
    whether the Claimant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and
    concluded that she did and then went on to consider her human rights.

Notice of Decision

The appeal by the Secretary of State is dismissed, with the effect that  the
decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Freer  to  allow  the  appeal  on  the
basis of Article 8 is upheld.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 28 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

If a fee was payable in respect of the application, I make a fee award.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 28 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
