
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU116402016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 May 2017                                |On 12 June 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           quirico s majaducon jr
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     David Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge D Taylor) allowing the respondent's appeal under Art  8
    of the ECHR.

 2. The respondent is a citizen of the  Philippines  who  was  born  on  14
    February 1973.  On 15 September 2007, the respondent married a  British
    national, Marie Grace  Majaducon  in  the  Philippines.   They  have  a
    residential house in the Philippines.  The respondent and his wife have
    two children who were born on 16 September 2008 and 8 November 2011  in
    the Philippines.  The respondent's  children  lived  with  him  in  the
    Philippines until he came to the UK on 25 September 2015.   It  appears
    that the respondent's wife had returned to the UK some time earlier  in
    2013.

 3. The respondent entered the UK on a visit  visa  valid  until  25  March
    2016.  On 16 January 2016, the respondent applied for leave  to  remain
    under the Rules and Art 8 of the ECHR.On 15 April 2016,  the  Secretary
    of State refused the respondent's application for leave to remain.

 4.  The  respondent  appealed  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal.    In   his
    determination, Judge Taylor concluded that  the  respondent  could  not
    succeed under Appendix FM of the Rules (see para 24).  In addition,  he
    concluded that the respondent could not establish a  claim  under  para
    276ADE (see para  25).   At  paras  26-42,  the  judge  considered  the
    respondent's claim outside the Rules under Art 8  taking  into  account
    the children's best interests and the factors set out in s.117B of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  At para  41,  the  judge
    accepted that the decision involved a  "significant  interference  with
    the rights to family life of those affected" but went on to  find  that
    the  "interference  is  clearly  not  disproportionate".   The  judge's
    determination thereafter concludes with the following:

         "Notice of Decision

         The appeal is dismissed under the immigration rules

         The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds

         No anonymity direction is made.

         No fee award is made."

 5. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on  the  basis  that
    the judge had clearly intended to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    human rights grounds, namely under Art 8 as was clear from his findings
    in relation to the relevant Rules and that any interference with family
    life was "clearly not disproportionate".

 6. On 27 March 2017, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Dineen)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal on that ground.

 7. At the hearing before me, the respondent  was  not  represented  and  I
    explained to him the basis of the Secretary of State's appeal.

 8. Mr Mills, who represented the Secretary of State relied on the  grounds
    and submitted that prior to the  decision  in  Katsonga  ("Slip  Rule";
    FtT's general powers) [2016] UKUT 228 (IAC)  the  judge's  error  would
    have been corrected under the 'slip' rule but that avenue was  now  not
    open as a result of Katsonga.  Mr Mills invited me to find there was an
    error of law and remake  the  decision,  in  accordance  with  all  the
    judge's  factual  findings,  dismissing  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 9. There has been no challenge to any of the judge's adverse  findings  in
    his determination.  Those findings clearly demonstrate that  the  judge
    was not satisfied that the respondent met the requirements  of  any  of
    the relevant Rules and was satisfied that  any  interference  with  his
    family life was "not disproportionate".  The judge plainly intended  to
    dismiss the respondent's appeal not only under  the  Immigration  Rules
    but also under Art 8.  For reasons  that  are  not  clear,  he  wrongly
    (perhaps inadvertently) stated the  outcome  of  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds in a way plainly inconsistent with his factual findings.



10. Consequently, I am satisfied that the judge erred  in  law  in  stating
    that the respondent's appeal was allowed on human  rights  grounds.   I
    set aside the judge's decision.

11. I remake the decision dismissing the appeal under the Immigration Rules
    and on human rights grounds.


                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Dated  9 June 2017


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is dismissed, no fee award is made.



                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Dated  9 June 2017
