
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11335/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd March 2018                           |On 17th April 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                               MRS AC (gHANA)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 - Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him  or  any
    member of their family.  This direction applies both to  the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana whose date of birth is recorded  as
    [ ] 1971.  She made application for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom which on 14th April 2016 was refused.  She appealed.   On  20th
    September 2017 the matter was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Black sitting at Taylor House.  The Secretary of State had contended in
    her considerations that the Appellant had used fraud in a test (English
    language test). However, at the hearing of the appeal in the First-tier
    Tribunal she failed to provide  the  necessary  evidence  to  meet  the
    burden that was upon her and so the judge  was  not  prepared  to  have
    regard to it.  For the avoidance of doubt, therefore, the fraud was not
    made out.

 3.  The  appeal  turned  ultimately  on  whether   or   not   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  continuing  in  Ghana.   The
    Sponsor has a number of medical conditions which are described  in  the
    medical evidence and which was before the judge.

 4. I have had produced to me today,  without  objection,  some  additional
    evidence dated 14th February 2018 and 15th March 2018 which given  what
    is to follow will fall to be considered by the First-tier  Tribunal  in
    due course.

 5. Because the earnings threshold was not met and because the  judge  took
    the view, notwithstanding the medical conditions, that  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  continuing  in  Ghana,  the
    Sponsor himself originally being Ghanaian  and  having  regard  to  the
    wider application of  Article  8  (although  there  appears  to  be  no
    reference to the statutory obligation to consider Section  117B  within
    the decision), that the appeal should be dismissed.

 6. Not content with that decision the Appellant, whom I should say was not
    represented before the First-tier Tribunal, nor before me  today,  made
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis
    of the Sponsor's  medical  conditions  which  it  was  said  could  not
    adequately be met in Ghana.

 7. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Robertson considered  the  application
    on 12th December 2017 and refused  permission.   There  was  a  renewed
    application made on 23rd December 2017 in which  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Coker granted permission on the basis that it  was  arguable  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to consider that  the  Appellant's
    husband is a  British  citizen  and  although  there  may  be  adequate
    treatment for his medical condition in Ghana, as a British  citizen  he
    is entitled to receive such treatment as he requires under the NHS  for
    which there is no charge.  She went on to say, "that the removal of the
    Appellant in those circumstances although she does not provide him  the
    necessary care that would otherwise be unavailable  nevertheless  would
    result in the cessation of family life". That, of course, cannot  be  a
    finding because Judge Coker was concerned only with the  grant  and  on
    that basis whether or not the point was arguable.

 8. When the matter came before me my preliminary view was that the  appeal
    was virtually unarguable but recognising that  the  Appellant  has  not
    been represented at any stage it seems to me that it is right  that  if
    there is any obvious point I should have regard to  it;  especially  if
    the point is "Robinson obvious", being a point,  which  would  put  the
    United Kingdom in breach of its international  obligations.  Dismissing
    an appeal on human rights grounds clearly is  capable  of  putting  the
    United Kingdom in breach of its international obligations.

 9. What concerns me is that the Appellant first entered the United Kingdom
    with leave as a spouse.  It follows that the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    was satisfied at that time that the Immigration Rules  were  met.  What
    concerns me is that if, as in this case, a Sponsor becomes  unwell,  in
    circumstances which but for the illness would ordinarily  have  led  to
    leave being continued, then unless that fact is  properly  put  in  the
    mix, the proportionality assessment is flawed. It seemed to me at least
    arguable  that  a  person  who  enters  the  United  Kingdom  with  the
    expectation  that  they  will  continue  with  their  leave  ought  not
    ordinarily, absent any other significant factors, be required to  leave
    because their partner is ill. I granted permission to the Appellant  to
    broaden the grounds in order to deal with that point.

10. Ms Ahmad for the Secretary of State took exception to me extending  the
    grounds on the basis that (i) the case had never been  argued  on  that
    basis; (ii) the grounds did not take the point and (iii) no  permission
    was granted on that basis. Notwithstanding  her  objections,  Ms  Ahmad
    fairly accepts that the point was not adequately addressed.   That  was
    not the basis upon which she resisted the  expansion  of  the  grounds.
    Her reasons were as I have already said.

11. It seems  to  me  that  the  failure  to  consider  that  point  is  so
    fundamental to this decision taken together with a need to consider the
    Section 117B matters that this decision simply cannot stand and  I  set
    it aside for the error of law that I have  identified,  namely  whether
    this Appellant who entered with leave as a spouse and found herself  in
    circumstances such as the Appellant, can have it said against her  that
    it would be proportionate nevertheless because their Sponsor has become
    unwell that they should now continue that family life  outside  of  the
    United Kingdom.  Because this will be fact sensitive  with  a  need  to
    look to all the circumstances it would  not  be  appropriate  for  this
    matter to remain in the Upper Tribunal.

12. In remitting the case to the First-tier Tribunal which  I  do,  I  make
    plain that no findings of fact are  preserved.   That  means  that  the
    Secretary of State will have the opportunity to deal with  all  points,
    which includes, for the avoidance of doubt, her allegation  that  there
    was deception used in an earlier application. Every aspect of the  case
    must fall to be considered and if there  is  sufficient  evidence,  the
    burden being on the Secretary of State, that fraud was  used,  then  it
    may well be  that  that  will  weigh  sufficiently  in  favour  of  the
    Secretary of State that notwithstanding the medical conditions  of  the
    Sponsor the appeal should be dismissed.  That  will  be  a  matter  for
    another day and for another judge.

Notice of Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set  aside.   The  matter  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard afresh before a judge other than Ms G A Black,  at
    Taylor House, on a date to be fixed.


Signed                              Date: 12 April 2018



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

