
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/11284/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 July 2019                      |On 31 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                         BENEDICTA TEMITOPE ADEGOJU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by DMO Olabamiji,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, having entered the UK as a visitor for  private  medical
    treatment, sought to remain because  of  her  medical  condition.   Her
    husband and children live in Nigeria.

 2. The respondent refused that application under the immigration rules and
    under articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR for reasons stated in a letter dated
    4 May 2018.

 3. The appellant exercised her right to appeal to the FtT on human  rights
    grounds.

 4. Her stated grounds were that her need for ongoing medical treatment  is
    the fault of the NHS; in absence of treatment, the  threshold  in  N  v
    SSHD [2005] 1  AC  296,  untimely  death,  is  met;  treatment  is  not
    available in Nigeria; and the SSHD  should  be  "directed  to  exercise
    discretion in favour  of  the  appellant,  given  that  the  corrective
    treatments she is undergoing is a result of the mistakes of the NHS."

 5. FtT  Judge  Agnew  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 21 August 2018.  The appellant withdrew the ground  that
    the threshold in N was met  (paragraphs  12  and  16).   There  was  no
    evidence to support the proposition that her ongoing difficulties  were
    the fault of the NHS.  No claim  against  the  NHS  was  being  pursued
    (paragraphs 19, 20 & 41).  The evidence and submissions were unclear on
    whether the appellant sought to remain in the UK  for  medical  reasons
    for a further 12 months to  complete  current  treatment,  or  to  meet
    lifelong needs (paragraphs 28 - 36).  There was inadequate evidence  to
    show that the care she required  would  not  be  available  in  Nigeria
    (paragraphs 38 & 49).

 6. The grounds of appeal to the UT are, in summary, as follows:

         "The FtT  failed  to  have  due  regard  to  the  evidence  of  the
         consultant, Head & Neck Maxillofacial  ...  that  the  duration  of
         treatment in the UK is finite ... 12 months ... when the FtT stated
         at paragraph 49, "... if there was a firm  commitment  to  specific
         treatment likely to make a material difference to  the  quality  of
         life, and within a limited timescale, that may assist the appellant
         but such is not the case".

         The FtT failed to take account of or misapplied  ...  Paposhvili  v
         Belgium (41738/10) ... this is material as (i) (paragraphs  136-137
         and 175-183 of Paposhvili are referred to) and (ii) the findings on
         availability and affordability  of  treatment  are  not  adequately
         supported by the evidence ...

         The FtT ... failed to  assess  the  appellant's  article  8  rights
         outside the immigration rules ... the correct question  is  whether
         there is a sufficiently strong case to outweigh immigration control
         - Agyarko [2017] 1 WLR 823 at paragraph 57."

 7. FtT Judge  E  M  Simpson  granted  permission  on  24  September  2018,
    observing at paragraph 2 (vi):

         "... though not appearing to have been raised at the hearing, or by
         the judge in  the  decision,  or  permission  grounds,  by  way  of
         Robinson order of observation of arguable error, there appeared, as
         a matter of fairness,  absence  of  regard  to  a  "pause"  in  the
         proceedings to await the response of Mr Paley  to  Mr  McMahon  and
         thereby enable the parties to have a final opportunity of  response
         ..."

 8. Mr Paley and Mr McMahon were two of the medical witnesses.   The  Judge
    granting permission  appears  to  have  envisaged  that  their  further
    communication might have clarified the appellant's likely  future  care
    needs.

 9. Although the permission to appeal at 2 (vi) was based on grounds  which
    had not been pleaded, and the appellant sought to take up the point, no
    reformulated grounds were tendered.  It was stated in ME (Sri Lanka)  v
    SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1486 that, "It was important in such circumstances
    that reformulated grounds should be  lodged  well  before  a  hearing".
    That applies also in the UT.

10. Notwithstanding the obvious implications of 2  (vi)  of  the  grant  of
    permission, there was before the UT no  application  for  admission  of
    fresh evidence in the event of re-making the decision, as  required  by
    directions and by rule 15(2A) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (UT)  Rules
    2008.

11. Mr Winter said that the grounds disclosed two errors.   The  judge  had
    noted the evidence that there might  be  a  finite  resolution  of  the
    appellant's medical problems, but at paragraph 35, which was  key,  she
    overlooked  that  possibility,  and  did  not  factor   it   into   her
    conclusions.  This linked into the  second  error,  identified  in  the
    grant of permission, of failing to adjourn for clarification.  Finally,
    he submitted that the decision should be  reversed,  or  alternatively,
    adjourned for further decision in the  UT,  giving  the  appellant  the
    opportunity to present further medical evidence.

12. Having heard also the submissions for the  respondent,  I  reserved  my
    decision.

13. I note firstly that the appellant either abandoned or fell a  long  way
    short of establishing any of the grounds which she stated in the FtT.

14. Mr Winter, rightly, did not seek to advance the  grounds  relying  upon
    Paposhvili.  To the limited extent to which that authority  establishes
    a lower threshold for a medical  case,  this  case  fell  significantly
    short of it.

15. Notwithstanding the sympathetic  aspect  of  the  case,  including  the
    remark of the FtT at paragraph 35, there was no evidence before the FtT
    by which the appellant might have had a right to remain in the  UK  for
    health purposes, other than through  compliance  with  the  immigration
    rules.

16. There was no reason to think that further  medical  consultation  might
    disclose evidence reaching the threshold for a medical case.

17. If the appellant had sought an adjournment, it might  conceivably  have
    been granted, in an abundance of caution; but it would be very hard  to
    argue that it was procedurally unfair not to grant it, as matters stood
    at that stage.

18. Several authorities on granting permission on points not in grounds, on
    "obvious points", and on procedural fairness, are properly produced  in
    the bundle of authorities for the appellant.  They are all against her.
     In this case there was no  duty  to  adjourn  in  the  absence  of  an
    application by the appellant, who was legally represented;  no  obvious
    point; no procedural unfairness; and there should not have been a grant
    of permission.

19. Even if there had been any legal merit in the ground introduced by  the
    judge, the appellant did  not  offer  to  show  that  it  had  eventual
    substance, so it could not have altered the outcome.

20.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

21. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]

      23 July 2019
      UT Judge Macleman

