
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/11475/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 February 2019                  |On 08 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                            Noor Mohmed Quraishi
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHEFFIELD
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss P Heidar of AA Immigration Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas of the Specialist Appeals Team


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant, Noor Mohamed Quraishi, is a citizen of Afghanistan  born
    on 26 March 1956. On 28 November 2013 his wife  died  in  Kabul.  On  7
    February 2018 he applied for settlement as an adult dependent  relative
    of his only son,  Fiaz,  who  is  a  naturalised  British  citizen  and
    resident in the United Kingdom. The Appellant has four  daughters,  one
    in the United Kingdom, two in Germany and one in Sweden. He is said  to
    be frail and in need of extensive nursing and personal care.

The Entry Clearance Officer's Decision

2.   On 1 May 2018 the Respondent refused  the  application  for  settlement
    under reference SHEFO/807306 because the Respondent did not accept that
    the Appellant was not in a subsisting relationship with a partner; that
    notwithstanding  medical  evidence,  the  Appellant  did  not   require
    extensive nursing care and that there were no suitable facilities on  a
    long-term basis for such care in Afghanistan. Further,  the  Respondent
    did not accept there were any exceptional  circumstances  justifying  a
    grant of entry clearance by way of reference to the  Appellant's  right
    to respect for his private and family life protected by  Article  8  of
    the European Convention.

3.   On 21 May 2018  the  Appellant  lodged  notice  of  appeal  under  s.82
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as  amended.  The  grounds
    are prolix.  Essentially,  they  amount  to  a  disagreement  with  and
    challenge to the Respondent's decision.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 4. On 10 October 2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  O'  Callaghan
    promulgated his decision dismissing the appeal  because  he  found  the
    Appellant's son was able to afford to continue to pay for care for  the
    Appellant in Afghanistan; that the Appellant  could  undertake  various
    day-to-day tasks for himself  and  is  not  completely  confined  to  a
    wheelchair.  Further,  the  evidence  did  not  disclose  a  degree  of
    dependency sufficient within the ambit described  in  Kugathas  v  SSHD
    [2003]  EWCA  Civ.31  to  make  it  disproportionate  to  exclude   the
    Appellant.

 5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal. The grounds refer to several
    instances  in  which  it  is  asserted  the  Judge  mis-understood  the
    evidence,  challenge  the  Judge's  assessment   of   the   Appellant's
    independence at the date of  the  hearing  and  his  treatment  of  the
    evidence about the Appellant's carer. There was also a  challenge  that
    the Judge had erred in his finding the relevant date for  consideration
    of the evidence to be the date of  the  Respondent's  decision.  On  16
    October 2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mark Davies  refused  the
    Appellant permission to appeal. The permission application was  renewed
    on a similar basis. On 14 January 2019  Upper  Tribunal  Kekic  granted
    permission because it was arguable the Judge had not considered all the
    evidence when reaching his conclusions.

Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

6.   The Appellant's son, his Sponsor, attended  the  hearing.  The  Sponsor
    confirmed his current address and I explained the purpose of  an  error
    of law hearing and the procedure to be adopted. He  did  not  take  any
    active part in the hearing.

7.   I noted the Respondent's response under Procedure Rule 24 in  which  it
    was accepted that the Judge erred in  finding  the  relevant  date  for
    consideration  of  the  evidence  was  the  date  of  the  Respondent's
    decision. The response went on to note that the Judge had in fact taken
    account of evidence of matters subsequent  to  the  decision  and  that
    there was a lack of evidence  of  any  material  deterioration  in  the
    Appellant's condition in the five-month period between the date of  the
    decision and the date of  the  hearing.  Consequently,  the  Respondent
    submitted that the error, such as it might be, was not material.

Submissions for the Applicant

8.   Miss Heidar acknowledged the Appellant did not seek to submit  any  new
    evidence. She relied on the grounds for appeal.  She  referred  to  the
    error in taking the date of the decision as the date for assessment  of
    evidence and submitted that this was a material error  in  relation  to
    paragraphs 55, 59, 65, 66 and 70 of the Judge's decision. The  evidence
    for the Appellant was that there had been a change in the way in  which
    care was provided for  him  and  the  Judge  had  not  considered  this
    development.

9.   The Judge had erred at paragraph 60 of his decision when  stating  that
    the evidence of the Sponsor was that he paid the  Appellant's  carer  a
    monthly sum of $200. This did not accord with what the Sponsor had said
    at paragraph 12 of his statement that he sent the money to his  father.
    I do not propose to take an issue whether the amount of money sent  was
    in dollars or sterling. Whatever the Sponsor may have  averred  in  his
    statement, he is recorded as answering affirmatively at the hearing  at
    page 3 of the Record of Proceedings to the question: "Are you paying Mr
    Ayubi for his (referring to the  Appellant)  care?"  The  Appellant  at
    paragraph 3 of his witness  statement  states  the  Sponsor  "has  been
    financially supporting" him. Miss Heidar who had appeared in the First-
    tier Tribunal did not have her Record of Proceedings with her. The same
    or a similar issue is found in the Judge's treatment of  evidence  from
    the one of the Appellant's daughters in Germany at paragraph 64 of  his
    decision.

10.  She referred me to paragraph 6 of the Appellant's  statement  in  which
    he asserts he had not mentioned to the Sponsor the lack  of  assistance
    for washing and going to the toilet at night. She submitted the Sponsor
    had not known of this abuse until only a few days before  the  hearing.
    There was no evidence before the Upper Tribunal  of  the  circumstances
    when and how the statement had been prepared or precisely when and  how
    the Sponsor had learned of this. She also referred me to paragraph 4 of
    the statement of the Appellant's daughter who had  travelled  with  her
    children to Afghanistan where she remained in order to look  after  the
    Appellant. This was corroborated by paragraph 4 of the statement of  Mr
    Ayubi, the Appellant's carer.

11.  Miss Heidar concluded the Judge had accepted at  paragraph  60  of  his
    decision that the Appellant's daughter resident in the  United  Kingdom
    had travelled  to  look  after  the  Appellant  and  this  finding  was
    inconsistent with his finding that there was sufficient care  otherwise
    available for  the  Appellant  in  Afghanistan.  The  Judge  had  given
    insufficient weight to the medical evidence  at  paragraph  64  of  his
    decision and failed to apply the jurisprudence  about  adult  dependent
    relatives articulated in Ribeli v SSHD [2018]  EWCA  Civ.611.  I  noted
    that the Judge had set out at some length what would appear to  be  the
    crucial test whether care required by a person such  as  the  Appellant
    can be reasonably provided and  to  the  required  level  in  his  home
    country. This is re-produced at paragraph 40 of Ribeli  which  in  fact
    simply quotes what was said at paragraph 59  of  R  (Britcits)  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ.368 and which the Judge in turn set out at paragraph 52
    of his decision and of which the Judge reminded himself, by way of case
    citation, in the penultimate paragraph of his decision.

12.  At paragraph 65 the Judge had accepted  the  Appellant  required  long-
    term-care. At paragraphs 12 and 15 he had noted the independent medical
    evidence as required under Appendix FM-SE but concluded it added little
    weight.

13.  The Judge should have considered  the  post-decision  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's medical condition. The decision was unsafe  and  should  be
    set aside.

Submissions for the Respondent

14.  Mr Kotas submitted the key issue was  whether  the  Appellant  required
    long-term care and if so whether it was available in  Afghanistan.  The
    appeal had been expedited so that there had  been  barely  five  months
    between the date of the decision and  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The Judge had taken into account  post-decision  evidence  of
    the Appellant's medical condition at paragraphs 61,  63,  and  65.  The
    Appellant had failed to show that the Judge had misdirected himself  as
    to fact or had irrationally reached any conclusion.

15.  At paragraph 60 the Judge had explained why he did not accept  all  the
    evidence relating to the claimed abuse inflicted on the  Appellant  and
    why he had not accepted at face value the Sponsor's  claimed  ignorance
    of the abuse.

16.  At paragraph 62 he had explained why he considered the  evidence  given
    by the Appellant and his witnesses to be inconsistent and  reached  the
    sustainable conclusion that Mr Ayubi remains the Appellant's carer  and
    an adverse finding in respect of the claims made that the Appellant had
    been abused.

17.  At paragraph 64 he had rejected  the  parts  of  Mr  Ayubi's  statement
    about him not being able to care for the Appellant and  after  analysis
    of the evidence had concluded there had been  no  real  change  in  the
    Appellant's condition over the previous 12 months.

18.  At paragraphs 63 and 64 the Judge  had  noted  the  evidence  from  the
    Sponsor at paragraph 9 of his statement that  one  of  the  Appellant's
    daughters in Germany "had rented a room for my father in  a  house  and
    arrange the tenant living in that house to assist my  father  until  we
    can bring him in the UK". The  Sponsor  was  funding,  in  one  way  or
    another, the rent. The daughter had visited the property in October  or
    November 2017 and been satisfied it was  suitable.  He  had  considered
    that  in  the  circumstances  a  proper  explanation  of  the   claimed
    deterioration in the Appellant's condition between late  2017  and  May
    2018 so that the property no longer was suitable needed to be given and
    had not.

19.  The Judge's conclusions were rationally open to him and the appeal  was
    simply an attempt by the Appellant to re-argue the case. The  Judge  in
    his decision had taken account of evidence of matters subsequent to the
    Respondent's decision. There was  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

Response for the Appellant

20.  Miss Heidar referred again to paragraph 64 of the Judge's decision.  It
    had never been argued for the Appellant that it  was  not  intended  to
    bring him to the United Kingdom after receipt of the medical reports of
    8 February and 7 September 2018 at pages 31-33 of the Appellant' that s
    bundle. The 8  February  2018  report  was  prepared  subsequent  to  a
    telephone consultation in October 2017 with the Sponsor.  I  noted  the
    application is recorded as having been submitted online on  7  February
    2018. She concluded the decision should be set aside.

Findings and Consideration

21.  I reserved my decision on the error of law question  and  both  parties
    agreed that if I found there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
    decision I might proceed to deal with the  substantive  appeal  in  the
    same decision since there was no further evidence to be considered.

22.  I shall deal first with the ground that  the  Judge  erred  in  law  by
    failing to consider evidence of matters subsequent to the date  of  the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge made extensive reference  to  evidence
    of such subsequent matters at paragraphs  60,  61  and  64-66.  As  was
    conceded in  the  Respondent's  Rule  24  response,  the  Judge  erred,
    particularly at paragraph 66, when he stated he had made his finding of
    fact as at the date of  the  Respondent's  decision.  This  was  not  a
    material error of law in the light of his  extensive  consideration  of
    the post-decision evidence and what the Judge said at paragraph 67.

23.  The standard of proof is the civil standard and the burden  is  on  the
    Appellant. As to the transmission the funds whether to the Appellant or
    to Mr Ayubi, there was  no  documentary  evidence,  for  example  money
    transmission receipts and  no  explanation  for  the  absence  of  such
    evidence. The evidence was inconsistent and the Judge was  entitled  to
    the conclusion he reached. There was no documentary evidence to explain
    precisely on what basis the Appellant occupied the  property  where  he
    lived with Mr Ayubi which no doubt might have  explained  the  apparent
    inconsistency identified paragraph 64. There is no indication that  any
    explanation for the absence of such evidence was proffered.

24.  The Judge had real concerns about the reliability of evidence from  the
    Appellant's family, as explained in the latter parts of  paragraphs  60
    and 64 and for which he gave sustainable reasons. He identified in  the
    middle  of  paragraph  61  and  the  first   half   of   paragraph   62
    inconsistencies in the evidence about the claimed  inadequacy  of  care
    given by Mr Ayubi. In this light he had  sustainable  reasons  for  his
    conclusions at the end of paragraph 65 and at paragraphs 66 and 67.

25.  The Judge was fully aware of the relevant criteria to  be  applied,  as
    noted in the latter part of paragraph 8 above.  Given  the  finding  at
    paragraph 64 that there was a declared intention to bring the Appellant
    to the United Kingdom in October or November 2017, it was incumbent  on
    the Appellant to establish his medical condition with adequate  medical
    evidence, not a  report  of  8  February  2018  based  on  a  telephone
    conversation in October 2017 with the Appellant's son in London and  to
    provide evidence about the Appellant's care arrangements which could be
    found to be credible.

26.  For these reasons,  I  am  satisfied  the  Judge's  decision  does  not
    contain any error of law of sufficient materiality to  justify  setting
    it aside. It shall therefore stand and the appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

    No application for an anonymity direction  has  been  made  and  having
    heard this appeal I find none is warranted.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law
    such that it should be set aside.

    The appeal is dismissed

    No anonymity direction.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 27. iii. 2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

