
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/11958/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Microsoft   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Teams                                |                                     |
|On Thursday 17 June 2021             |On Wednesday 30 June 2021            |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                               MR WALEED AHMAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jaffar, Counsel instructed by Lee Valley
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1.    By a decision dated 23 September 2020 and sent to the  parties  on  28
      September 2020, I found an error of law in the decision of the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Row itself promulgated on 4  November  2019  which
      had dismissed the Appellant's appeal.  I  therefore  set  aside  Judge
      Row's decision and gave directions for a resumed hearing of the appeal
      in this Tribunal.  My error of law decision  is  appended  hereto  for
      ease of reference.

2.    My error of law decision was made on the papers pursuant  to  Rule  34
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  I was conscious  that
      Mr Justice Fordham in Joint Council for the Welfare  of  Immigrants  v
      The President of the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)
      [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin) held that the President's Practice  Direction
      in relation to the making of error of  law  decisions  on  the  papers
      without a hearing was unlawful on the ground that it gave rise to  "an
      overall paper norm" which was procedurally unfair.  That judgment  was
      handed down after my error of law decision.  I therefore checked  with
      both parties at the outset of the hearing  before  me  whether  either
      sought to challenge the error of law decision on that basis or to seek
      a review of it.  Both confirmed that they did not.  The setting  aside
      of Judge Row's decision was to the benefit of the Appellant  since  he
      had sought to challenge it.  The Respondent had the opportunity to put
      her case to me directly for a second time and was  not  prejudiced  by
      any lack of opportunity to argue the error of law  issue  at  an  oral
      hearing.

3.    The facts of this case so far as they were relevant to  the  error  of
      law issue are set out at [2] of my decision  and  I  do  not  need  to
      repeat what is there said. In short summary, the Appellant argued that
      it was highly relevant that Judge Row had found not to be made out the
      Respondent's allegation concerning the use of false bank statements in
      an earlier application in 2015. I will though have to deal with  other
      facts of the Appellant's case as a result of his change of position on
      this issue as I will come to.

4.    By my decision I directed that the  Respondent  should  file  whatever
      evidence she had regarding the false bank  statements  as  that  issue
      appeared to me to be central  to  the  success  or  otherwise  of  the
      Appellant's case.  I directed that the Appellant should file  evidence
      in response (and any other evidence on which he  relied)  and  written
      submissions following the service of  the  Respondent's  evidence.   I
      also indicated that he should say who were to be his witnesses at  the
      hearing.

5.    Under cover of an email dated 20 October 2020, Mr  Tan  on  behalf  of
      the Respondent filed her further evidence  in  relation  to  the  bank
      statements.  I will come to the substance  of  that  evidence  in  due
      course so far as it is now necessary for me to do so.  I note that the
      e-mail    was    clearly    addressed    to    an    e-mail    address
      info@leevalleysolicitors.co.uk  which  was  that  of  the  Appellant's
      solicitors as shown on their headed paper  when  the  appeal  to  this
      Tribunal  was  submitted.   I  note  that  it   was   also   sent   to
      faratasghar@gmail.com which appears to be an email  address  belonging
      to the Appellant's wife.

6.    On 27 November 2020, following a chasing e-mail from the  Tribunal  on
      the previous day, the Appellant's solicitors indicated that  they  had
      not received  anything  from  the  Respondent.   They  said  that,  in
      relation to the  bank  statements,  they  continued  to  rely  on  the
      findings of Judge Row (that the allegation that these were  false  was
      not made out).  They asked that they be given a further opportunity to
      respond if the Respondent was given further time  to  serve  evidence.
      They also indicated that both the Appellant  and  his  wife  would  be
      giving evidence at the hearing but that no interpreter  was  required.
      I note in passing that the  solicitor's  email  came  from  an  e-mail
      address claims@leevalleysolicitors.co.uk.  It is not clear when this e-
      mail came into being but in any event their website address  even  now
      shows the "info" e-mail address as being still current.

7.    Be that as it may, UTJ O'Callaghan reviewed the  file  on  1  February
      2021.  Having set out events to that date as explained at [5] and  [6]
      above, he concluded as follows:

         "... 6.  The Tribunal is satisfied  that  the  respondent  complied
         with direction 1 and served relevant documents upon the appellant's
         legal representatives via their professional email  address  on  20
         October  2020.   The  Tribunal  observes  that  it  is  appropriate
         practice  for  legal  representatives  to  regularly  check   their
         professional  email  accounts  to  identify  as  to  whether  email
         correspondence has inadvertently been placed in a 'junk'  or  other
         folder."

    He went on  to  direct  that  the  Appellant  should  file  within  the
    following 14  days  any  further  evidence  and  submissions  on  which
    reliance was to be placed and, if the Appellant did not have Mr Tan's e-
    mail dated 20 October 2020, they should take steps to obtain it.

8.    In response, on 13 February 2021,  the  Appellant's  solicitors  filed
    further submissions ("the Further  Submissions")  and  documents.   The
    Further Submissions were said to be drafted by  Counsel,  Mr  Anawar  M
    Babul, who was not counsel appearing before  me.   His  name  does  not
    appear at the foot of the Further Submissions.   I  will  come  to  the
    substance of those in due course.  I  will  also  deal  later  in  this
    decision with the further  documents.   The  e-mail  from  Mr  Tan  was
    acknowledged to have been received by the solicitors but it was said to
    have been "overlooked".

9.    I canvassed with Mr Jaffar at the outset of the hearing which  of  the
    witnesses would be giving evidence.  He indicated  that  neither  would
    give  evidence  on  his  understanding.   The  Appellant  was   present
    remotely, but Mr Tan indicated that he did not consider it necessary to
    cross-examine him.  The Appellant's wife did not attend.

10.   In relation to documents, I had those sent with the e-mails  to  which
    I have already referred and a core bundle of documents relevant to  the
    appeal  including  the  Respondent's  bundle.   I  also  had  a  small,
    unpaginated bundle of documents which I had taken to be the Appellant's
    bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.  However, upon investigation, it
    became clear that it was not.  Mr Jaffar indicated that he had a volume
    of documents in a bundle received electronically  which  included  what
    was before Judge Row.  The bundle of documents before Judge Row ran  to
    24 pages and included witness statements which  I  had  not  previously
    seen.  Mr Tan however had that smaller bundle and arranged for it to be
    provided to me electronically.  I refer to  documents  in  that  bundle
    hereafter as [AB/xx].

11.   The hearing before me took place  via  Microsoft  Teams.   As  I  have
    already indicated, it was attended by representatives for both  parties
    and the Appellant himself.  After some  initial  teething  problems  on
    joining, the hearing proceeded without major technical problems.  As  I
    have indicated, I was not asked to hear evidence from the Appellant  or
    his wife and the hearing proceeded by  way  of  submissions  only  with
    reference to the limited documentation produced.

EVIDENCE, FINDINGS AND ASSESSMENT

The Bank Statements and Suitability

12.   As I set out at [13] of my error of  law  decision,  the  Respondent's
    decision  under  appeal  refused   the   Appellant's   application   on
    suitability grounds on the basis that he had produced  bank  statements
    which were "fraudulent".  As I there pointed out,  the  Respondent  did
    not provide any supporting documentation for that allegation  with  the
    decision letter.

13.   Judge Row had  before  him  a  "Domestic  Reference  Form"  indicating
    suspicions about the bank statements.  He said however that he  had  no
    evidence about any final conclusions regarding the bank statements.  He
    therefore concluded that the allegation that they were  fraudulent  was
    not made out.  It is that conclusion on which the Appellant has  relied
    and  indeed  continued  to  rely  in  the  Further  Submissions.    The
    Appellant's position as there stated is as follows:

         "9.      It cannot be disputed that had  the  bank  statement  been
         correctly accepted as genuine, as has been found it  is,  then  the
         appellant would have been granted leave to remain for 30 months  as
         a spouse and not become an overstayer as they did precisely because
         of the this [sic] decision which has now been found  to  have  been
         wrong."

         [my emphasis]

    The Appellant went on in the Further Submissions to point to  case  law
    regarding the need to put him back in the position he should have  been
    in "where the respondent's view turns out to be factually mistaken."

14.   I no longer need to determine the issue whether  the  bank  statements
    were genuine (in the sense of genuinely showing what  they  purport  to
    show) as Mr Jaffar indicated at the outset  of  the  hearing  that  the
    Appellant's position now is that he accepts  that  they  were  not.   I
    expressed some surprise that, in those circumstances,  the  Appellant's
    solicitors  had  filed  the   Further   Submissions   maintaining   the
    Appellant's position that they were genuine.  I  do  not  criticise  Mr
    Jaffar in this regard.  He was not the person who drafted  the  Further
    Submissions.  Nor do I criticise the barrister  said  to  have  drafted
    them as his name did not appear on that document and, in any event,  it
    is for the solicitors to  provide  instructions  to  the  barrister  in
    relation to the stance to be taken.

15.   Mr Jaffar made the point that it was for the Respondent to prove  that
    the statements are false, and the position taken was that  insufficient
    evidence had been provided. The Further Submissions however go further.
     In the sentence I have emphasised  above,  the  Appellant  asserted  a
    positive case that the statements were "correctly accepted as genuine".
     The same positive case appears from  the  grounds  of  appeal  against
    Judge Row's decision.  For example, it is said at [6]  of  the  grounds
    that "had the bank statement been  accepted  as  genuine  (rather  than
    wrongly declared as fraudulent)" (my emphasis) the Appellant would have
    been entitled to a grant of  further  leave.   The  advancing  of  that
    positive case is potentially misleading and therefore contrary  to  the
    solicitor's duty to this Tribunal.

16.   Insofar as  Mr  Jaffar  submitted  that  he  did  not  know  when  the
    solicitors became aware of the Appellant's acceptance of the  position,
    that is no answer since they should  not  have  advanced  his  position
    without taking proper instructions to ensure that it was true.  I  note
    that the witness statements of the Appellant and his wife prepared  for
    the First-tier Tribunal are entirely silent on this  issue  and  it  is
    unclear whether the solicitors took the instructions they  should  have
    taken in order to challenge  the  Respondent's  assertions.  For  those
    reasons, and because of the solicitor's handling of this  case  as  set
    out at [6] to [8] above, I have made a "Hamid" direction at the end  of
    this decision requiring the solicitors to explain their conduct.

17.   Although, as I say, I do not  need  to  determine  the  issue  of  the
    genuineness of the bank statements, I add for completeness that, on the
    basis of the documents produced with Mr  Tan's  e-mail  of  20  October
    2020, I would have accepted that they were fraudulent.  It appears that
    Judge Row may have been given only the  Domestic  Referral  Form  which
    does indeed only refer to the Respondent's concerns about the  original
    documents provided in  terms  of  their  form.   I  have  however  been
    provided with a Barclays Verification Proforma dated 5 May 2016  which,
    with the e-mails also  annexed  to  Mr  Tan's  e-mail,  confirms  that,
    although the bank account name, address, sort code and  account  number
    were verified, the transactions were not.  Barclays confirmed that "the
    transactions listed in the documents provided do  not  match  those  on
    bank records, so yes they are false".   The  Respondent  was  therefore
    entitled to reach the  conclusion  she  did  that  the  documents  were
    fraudulent.  She was thereafter  entitled  to  refuse  the  Appellant's
    current application on suitability grounds for that reason.  Mr  Jaffar
    accepted that this was the position.  I turn  then  to  the  impact  of
    that.

Obstacles to Family Life Continuing in Pakistan

18.   As Judge Row concluded, the Appellant has been an overstayer since  13
    August 2016 when his application of 23 September  2015  which  included
    the false bank statements was refused.  Since the bank  statements  are
    now accepted to have been fraudulent, the Appellant has no  explanation
    to put forward in mitigation of that position.  He has  overstayed  now
    for nearly five years.

19.   As an overstayer, the Appellant could not  meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules  ("the  Rules")  unless  paragraph
    EX.1 of Appendix FM ("Paragraph EX.1") is met.  Paragraph EX.1  is  met
    only if the Appellant can show that there are insurmountable  obstacles
    to family life continuing in his home country.  Paragraph  EX.1  cannot
    apply in this case however because the Appellant fails  on  suitability
    grounds (see R-LTRP.1.1(d) of Appendix  FM).   As  Mr  Jaffar  accepted
    therefore, the Appellant's claim cannot succeed under  the  Rules.   It
    can be considered only outside the Rules.

20.   Mr Jaffar submitted however that  an  analogous  consideration  should
    apply outside the Rules because, if there are insurmountable  obstacles
    to the Appellant's family life continuing in Pakistan, removal  of  the
    Appellant would bring that family life to an end rather than permitting
    it to continue abroad or would lead to a temporary  separation  if  the
    Appellant could re-apply from Pakistan for entry clearance.

21.   I do not need to deal with the latter of those two scenarios since  Mr
    Jaffar accepted that, because of the suitability refusal, it was  quite
    unlikely  that  the  Appellant  could  successfully  apply  for   entry
    clearance to re-join his wife.  In  other  words,  either  family  life
    could continue in Pakistan or  would  be  permanently  severed.   Those
    options are of course highly relevant to the level of interference with
    family life.

22.   There were two general reasons why it was said that the Appellant  and
    his wife  could  not  return  to  Pakistan.   Those  were  the  medical
    conditions of the Appellant and his wife and the risk they  would  face
    there because of the opposition  of  the  Appellant's  in-laws  to  the
    marriage.

Medical Conditions

23.   It is asserted that the Appellant and his wife  could  not  return  to
    Pakistan due to their medical conditions.  I begin  with  the  evidence
    which was before Judge Row.  I have set aside his decision  and  it  is
    not therefore appropriate for me to rely upon his  findings.   However,
    since I did not hear oral evidence, it  is  appropriate  to  take  into
    account the evidence he received.

24.   The only medical condition relied upon before Judge Row was  that  the
    Appellant's wife was receiving fertility treatment in the UK.  The only
    evidence in this regard is the Appellant's  wife's  assertion  to  that
    effect in her statement of 23 September 2019 at [AB/7].  She there also
    asserts that she would  not  be  able  to  complete  her  treatment  in
    Pakistan.

25.   As I pointed out to Mr Jaffar, the  letter  from  the  NHS  Birmingham
    Women's and Children's NHS Foundation Trust dated 8  November  2017  at
    [AB/12] tends to undermine  the  Appellant's  wife's  assertion.   This
    letter indicates that, as the Appellant's wife was at that time aged 47
    years (now over 50 years), she could not be offered treatment.   It  is
    said that there might be an alternative course for  which  there  is  a
    waiting time of two years but there is no evidence that  the  Appellant
    and his wife were subsequently offered  that  treatment  or  that  they
    found treatment elsewhere.  In any event, there  is  no  evidence  that
    such treatment is not available in Pakistan.

26.   The further evidence provided with the  e-mail  from  the  Appellant's
    solicitors contains eleven pages  of  medical  notes  relating  to  the
    Appellant.  There is no statement from  the  Appellant  explaining  his
    medical conditions or the treatment he is currently  receiving.   There
    is no letter from a GP explaining the notes.  Even taking  those  notes
    at face value, they show problems concerned with  diabetes,  Vitamin  D
    deficiency and viral hepatitis B.  Those are  all  said  to  be  active
    although some date back to 2014 and it is not  clear  which  are  still
    causing problems.   The  Appellant  is  said  to  have  presented  with
    "Anxiety with depression" in April 2019 but there is no explanation  of
    the level of depression nor any indication of ongoing treatment for any
    mental health condition such as counselling. It does  appear  that  the
    Appellant is prescribed anti-depressants (Fluoxetine)  but  it  is  not
    clear from the notes from when he was prescribed  those.   There  is  a
    prescription dating to February 2021.  The Appellant is also prescribed
    medication for diabetes and,  it  appears,  cholesterol.   Importantly,
    though, and as Mr Jaffar accepted, even taking what those notes show at
    their highest, there  is  no  evidence  that  such  medication  is  not
    available in Pakistan.

Risk on Return to Pakistan

27.   The evidence in  relation  to  this  part  of  the  Appellant's  claim
    appears in the witness statements of the Appellant and his wife and  in
    the evidence given to Judge Row.  Although Mr Tan  sought  to  rely  on
    Judge  Row's  findings  in  this  regard,  that  is  inappropriate   in
    circumstances where I have set the decision aside,  although  I  accept
    that the Appellant did not  challenge  Judge  Row's  findings  in  this
    regard.  However, since I did not hear oral evidence, it is appropriate
    for me to have regard to the evidence given to Judge Row.

28.   The Appellant's witness statement dated 23 September 2019  ([AB/8-10])
    in this regard reads as follows:

         "5.      I would like to mention that after my marriage, I  had  no
         intention to move to the UK.  I and my wife had various discussions
         about moving to the UK however I was living a comfortable  life  in
         Pakistan and did not want to change it.

         6. After our marriage, we received phone calls in which I was asked
         to leave my wife or face severe consequences.  I and my  wife  were
         threatened at various occasions.  We restricted  our  movement  and
         would not go out unless it was unavoidable.

         7. I would like to mention that  after  receiving  threating  [sic]
         phone calls, my wife and family started to insist  that  I  and  my
         wife should move to the UK.  I became very concerned  about  safety
         of my wife and asked her to move to UK as at most occasion  females
         are killed by their own family members if they  marry  against  the
         wishes of their family.  I later joined her  in  April  2015  after
         grant of visa.

         8. I would like to mention that my family life is  established  for
         considerable period of time.  I would like to mention that it  will
         not be possible for me and my wife to continue our family  life  in
         Pakistan as we will face a constant risk of  severe  harm  from  my
         wife's family.

         9. I would like to mention that I feel much happier  and  safer  in
         United Kingdom.  On the contrary in case of our return to  Pakistan
         I and my wife will not be able to continue  a  stable  life  as  we
         would have no option than to live in hiding and  continue  to  move
         from one city to another in order to avoid danger of being detected
         and harmed by her family."

29.   The Appellant's wife's statement of the same date  appears  at  [AB/3-
    7].  That explains that she had  previously  been  married  for  twenty
    years and was divorced religiously from her ex-husband.   Her  children
    from that marriage lived with their father (who is  now  deceased).   I
    infer from her statement that she was at that time living in the UK  as
    she goes on to say that she decided to travel  to  Pakistan  after  the
    divorce as she had "few family friends" living there.   She  there  met
    the Appellant and married him in a religious ceremony in February 2011.
     She returned to the UK and divorced her previous husband under UK law.
     She registered her marriage to the Appellant legally  under  Pakistani
    and UK law in February 2013.  The couple lived together in Pakistan  at
    the outset of their marriage.  She says that her father and the rest of
    her family were "furious" about the marriage  and  said  that  she  had
    "brought disgrace to the family".  She provides no explanation why that
    should be so.

 30.  The Appellant's wife's statement then goes on to set out  the  threats
    she says they have received as follows:

         "7.      In 2011, when I was living with my husband, I had concerns
         about my safety which  I  reported  to  local  police  station.   I
         informed them that if any harm comes to me, my  husband  or  my  in
         laws, my family was to  blame  for  it  as  they  were  against  my
         marriage.

         8. At one occasion while I  was  in  Pakistan,  my  father  in  law
         received a phone call and was asked to send me back to the UK or my
         husband would be killed.  My father in law panicked due to fear and
         he started to shout with  other  person  on  the  phone.   When  my
         husband heard his father shouting on phone, he took the phone  from
         my father in law and asked the person why he was fighting  with  my
         father in law.  The man said that he should leave  me  or  else  he
         would kill my husband.  My husband asked him who he was and why  he
         was threating [sic] my husband.  That person told that he was  from
         Pakistan and wanted to see my husband alone.  After hearing this, I
         got worried and frightened.  I took the phone from my  husband  and
         asked the person what his problem was.  I then put the phone  down.
         That man called again about 4 to 5 times.  He was  saying  that  my
         husband should meet him alone at a park site.   My  father  in  law
         said to that man that he himself would come to talk to that man and
         that my husband would not come.  The man said that  he  would  only
         talk to my husband.  After arguing and  shouting  over  the  phone,
         that man gave his name as [AJ] from Gujranwala.  He  said  that  he
         had been paid money by my family to get my husband killed.  We were
         shocked to hear this.  Then, I spoke to him and asked why he  would
         kill my husband for money.  He replied that he was sorry as we were
         nice people and the only reason was that he  was  paid  money.   He
         even apologized and said that he was embarrassed for  his  conduct.
         He never called again.

         9. After couple of months, when I was coming back to the UK,  there
         was another phone call and I was warned that I would  be  kidnapped
         on my way to the airport.  That threat made me and my husband  very
         worried  about  my  safety.   At  another  occasion,  we   received
         threatening calls that we will be harmed.

         10.      After coming to the UK,  my  family  remained  against  my
         marriage.  They and my ex-husband were all involved in  threats  to
         my husband and me.  Even in the UK, I  was  followed  and  threated
         [sic].

         11.      My husband wanted to live in Pakistan however I  persuaded
         my husband that we should move to the UK.   My  husband  agreed  to
         come here after receiving all those  threatening  phone  calls  and
         when his family insisted him to move to the UK.   While  living  in
         Pakistan, we were unable to go out and live a normal  life  due  to
         constant threat of harm.

         12.      In April 2015, my husband came to the UK  following  grant
         of leave to remain as my family member.  We are living together  in
         the UK since then.  My siblings and parents are  still  against  my
         marriage.  My ex-husband passed away on 01st January 2019.

         13.      I would like to mention that my family is  still  creating
         trouble for me and my husband.  When I last travelled  to  Pakistan
         this year, my father went to the Police station here and  lodged  a
         complaint that my husband had forcefully  abducted  me  against  my
         wishes.  This was an attempt by my father  to  get  my  husband  in
         trouble here.  My husband was contacted by the Police.  I  informed
         the Police that I was not abducted rather I was in Pakistan with my
         own free will.  My father did not stop here, he continued to create
         troubles for me and my husband.  We have reported the same  to  the
         Police.  Although I attempted to  obtain  records  from  police  by
         email and have  made  various  phone  calls  however,  I  have  not
         received police records.  The log numbers are as follows:

             Log No - 2126: 11/01/2019: My family reported to Police  about
             my abduction

             Log  No  -  1358:  16/01/2019:  Informed   Police   about   my
             whereabouts: PC Charlie

             Log No - 1135: 02/08/2019: Spoke to staff Jayne.

         14.      I would like to mention that I do not have much  faith  in
         Pakistani Police  and  other  law  enforcement  agencies.   Despite
         registering my concerns in local police station there was no follow
         up or offer of protection from the police.

         15.      I would like to mention that  I  am  concerned  about  our
         safety on our return to Pakistan.  There have been cases where  the
         family members were involved in the murder of their  own  daughters
         in Pakistan.  The Pakistani Police has reportedly failed to protect
         the victims and has also colluded with the accused to cover up  the
         crime"

31.   I turn then to the documentary evidence which is produced  in  support
    of the claim.  At [AB/11] is an email from the Appellant's  wife  dated
    22 March 2019 to PC Charlie which refers to the conversation which  she
    says she had with him  on  16  January  2019  as  referred  to  in  her
    statement and asking for a report of the incident.  That does  no  more
    than confirm the evidence given in her statement that  she  spoke  with
    this PC on that date (if indeed it does that as there is no response).

32.   The second document was produced with the e-mail from the  Appellant's
    solicitors although it appears was also before Judge Row (see  [20]  of
    his decision).  The document is unexplained by any statement  from  the
    Appellant or his wife (or indeed the person who wrote the letter who  I
    understand was the Appellant's father).   It  is  a  letter  apparently
    addressed to the police station in Sadar, Faisalabad.   The  letter  is
    dated 12 October 2012.  It reads as follows:

         "It is requested that applicant is residing at [address].   My  son
         got married  with  Mrs  Shamim  Akhar  through  court  marriage  in
         District Court Faisalabad.  But his wife's family (above  mentioned
         accused) threat to my son.  On day they arrived at Faisalabad.   My
         son was present at Jalvi Market Faisalabad to purchaser some  house
         hold things.  When my son feel fear.  A lot of  people  present  in
         market.  Therefore my son runs away.   The  applicant  and  my  son
         [RWA] and his family suffering from fear of life.   If  me  and  my
         family suffered any difficulties  or  bear  any  loss,  then  above
         mentioned accused will be responsible.  Please action against."

    The person accused is the Appellant's father-in-law who is said  to  be
    resident in Gujra.  The letter is said to be "approved" by  the  police
    with the annotation "Parties will present before me".

33.   The incident  described  in  that  letter  is  not  mentioned  in  the
    statements of either the Appellant or his wife.  There is no  statement
    from the Appellant's father about the circumstances in which  that  was
    written nor any  mention  of  what  occurred  thereafter.   The  letter
    appears to indicate that the parties were told to  present  before  the
    police, but it is not said whether they did.  In  the  absence  of  any
    evidence supporting what is said in this letter, I am  unable  to  give
    weight to it.  In any event, it lends support to  the  suggestion  that
    the police in Pakistan would be expected to  offer  protection  (as  to
    which see below).

34.   Turning then to the evidence given to Judge Row,  having  referred  to
    the broad outline of the Appellant's case in this regard and to the two
    documents which I have just dealt with, the Judge goes on to record the
    oral evidence given.  He says that this  was  in  accordance  with  the
    witness statements to which I have already referred.  In addition,  the
    Judge was told that the Appellant's wife goes to Pakistan  every  year.
    She said that she "spends considerable time there every year" ([24]  of
    the decision).  She travels alone to visit the Appellant's mother,  but
    her father also lives in Pakistan.

35.   I was not asked to hear oral  evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  his
    wife.  Mr Tan did not ask to cross-examine them and, as I have  already
    mentioned, the Appellant's wife was not present remotely in any  event.



36.   I am sceptical about the claims made which as Mr Tan points  out  came
    late in the day (only with the application  in  2018).   However,  even
    accepting the claims at face value, I do not accept that they  show  to
    the relevant low  standard  which  applies  (real  risk  or  reasonable
    likelihood) that the Appellant and his wife are at risk  on  return  to
    Pakistan for the reasons which follow.

37.   First, the threats which are  said  to  have  been  made  in  Pakistan
    occurred in 2011 before the Appellant's  wife  came  to  the  UK.   The
    threats which the Appellant's wife  refers to expressly at [8]  of  her
    statement are not mentioned by the Appellant in his  statement  but  it
    must be inferred from what she there says that this was while  she  was
    still living in Pakistan (although I accept  that  she  says  that  she
    continues to visit Pakistan and I assume did so in the  time  when  she
    was living in the UK and the Appellant  remained  in  Pakistan  between
    2011 and 2015).  Importantly, though, the Appellant  himself  makes  no
    mention of specific threats made to him of this nature or threats after
    his wife had come to the UK and before he came here.   I  have  already
    noted the absence of corroboration of the incident referred to  in  the
    October 2012 letter.  If  threats  were  made,  therefore,  whilst  the
    Appellant and his wife were in Pakistan that was many years ago.

38.   Second, the Appellant's wife says that the threats which were made  in
    Pakistan were made to her in-laws (the Appellant's parents) as well  as
    to her and the Appellant.  There is no evidence  from  the  Appellant's
    parents that they have continued to receive threats.

39.   Third, even at the time when the threats were being made  in  Pakistan
    in 2011, those did not lead to any physical  harm.   Even  on  the  one
    occasion when, according to the Appellant's wife, her  father  went  so
    far as to pay someone to kill the Appellant, the Appellant's family was
    (somewhat implausibly it must be said) able to dissuade the prospective
    killer from that course.

40.   Fourth, the Appellant's wife's evidence before Judge Row was that  she
    travels on an annual basis to Pakistan in order to visit  her  in-laws.
    If, as she says, she considered herself and the Appellant to remain  at
    risk as a result of the marriage and given  that,  on  the  Appellant's
    case, his in-laws are aware of and able to contact his own  family,  it
    is not credible that she would continue to make those visits.

41.   Fifth, turning then to the threats said to have been made in  the  UK,
    the  only  express  reference  to  events  in  the  Appellant's  wife's
    statement appear to relate to an incident which occurred in 2019.   If,
    as the Appellant's wife said in evidence to Judge Row, and as the  2012
    letter suggests, her father lives in Pakistan it is not entirely  clear
    why he would be going to a police station in  the  UK.   Leaving  aside
    that inconsistency, that  incident  shows  only  that  the  Appellant's
    father-in-law was, as the Appellant's wife put  it  "creating  trouble"
    for her and the Appellant.   There  is  also  no  explanation  why  the
    Appellant's father-in-law would take this step nearly four years  after
    the Appellant arrived in the UK  to  set  up  home  with  his  wife  in
    circumstances where the Appellant's wife says that she goes to Pakistan
    every year.  There is no evidence of any similar  incidents  before  or
    since.

42.   It appears from the statement of the Appellant's  wife  that  most  of
    her family is in the UK.  She says that her ex-husband is now dead  but
    that the threat subsists from her siblings and parents.  However, there
    is no evidence of any specific threats made to the  Appellant  and  his
    wife since they came to  the  UK.    There  is  no  evidence  from  the
    Appellant's wife that she has reported specific threats to the  police.
    There is no evidence that attempts have been made to harm the Appellant
    and his wife in the six years that they have lived together in  the  UK
    or the four previous years when they were married and  the  Appellant's
    wife was living in the UK, as I understand it, alone.

43.   In any event, even taking the evidence of the threats at its  highest,
    there is a functioning  criminal  enforcement  and  justice  system  in
    Pakistan.  I recognise that the Appellant's wife  says  that  she  does
    "not have much faith" in the system.  However, she says that  she  went
    to the police in 2011 and, taking the letter of 2012  at  its  highest,
    the Appellant's father similarly felt able to report  the  incident  he
    describes to the police, presumably  in  the  expectation  that  action
    would be taken.  I do  not  place  weight  on  the  Appellant's  wife's
    assertion that the system cannot be relied upon because "there  was  no
    follow up or offer of protection".  Her account is only that  she  "had
    concerns" which she reported to the police,  warning  that  her  family
    would be to blame if she was harmed.   It  is  difficult  to  see  what
    action the police could have been expected to take.

44.   The test for a sufficiency of  protection  is  in  any  event  not  an
    absolute one.  As was said by Lord Hope in Horvath v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2000] UKHL 37 "[t]he standard to be applied is
    ... not that which would eliminate all risk and would thus amount to  a
    guarantee of protection in the home state. Rather  it  is  a  practical
    standard, which takes proper account of the duty which the  state  owes
    to all its own nationals."

45.   I accept as shown by the report of two incidents  at  [AB/14-24]  that
    there are reports of honour killings in Pakistan which  go  unpunished.
    Even those reports show that  the  police  take  action,  but  they  do
    suggest that convictions may not follow.  However, in  this  case,  the
    Appellant's family who she says she fears  are  in  the  UK  (with  the
    possible exception of her father).  She has in any event  been  willing
    and able to make annual trips to see her mother-in-law (the Appellant's
    mother) without incident.

46.   That brings me on to the final reason why I do  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant and his wife are at risk on return to Pakistan.  They do  not
    need to return to the area where the  Appellant's  father-in-law  lives
    (if indeed he still lives in Pakistan and not the  UK).   They  do  not
    even need to return to the area where the Appellant's family  lives  if
    they  consider  themselves  at  risk  there  (although  such  would  be
    inconsistent with the annual trips which the Appellant's wife makes  to
    see her mother-in-law).  Pakistan is a sizeable and  populous  country.
    The Appellant and his wife could  relocate  to  another  part  of  that
    country.  There is no evidence that the Appellant's wife's family  have
    any connections which would enable them to trace her and the  Appellant
    on return.

47.   For those reasons, I do not accept that the  Appellant  and  his  wife
    are at risk on return to Pakistan from her  family.   It  follows  that
    this is not an obstacle, let alone an  insurmountable  one,  preventing
    family  life  being  continued  in  Pakistan.   Family  life  could  be
    continued in that country.

Balancing Assessment

48.   I take into account my findings above in relation to family  life.  As
    I have there found, the claimed risk on return and  medical  conditions
    relied upon do not constitute  obstacles  to  return  to  Pakistan  for
    either the Appellant or his wife.

49.   The Appellant's wife is clearly familiar with the culture of  Pakistan
    as her regular visits and willingness to live there at the beginning of
    her marriage to the Appellant demonstrate.  I  accept  that  she  is  a
    British citizen.  I accept that she may prefer to remain in the UK, but
    her citizenship is not of itself a factor which renders removal of  the
    Appellant to be disproportionate (see in that regard Agyarko and  Ikuga
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11  at  [33]).
    Although the Appellant's wife says in her statement that she  was  born
    in the UK, has spent "almost all" of her life here and considers it her
    home, it is notable that, when  her  first  marriage  broke  down,  she
    decided to go to live in Pakistan.  She also visits that country  on  a
    regular, annual basis and spends some time there.  The Appellant's wife
    also says in her statement that she has "a reasonable  regular  income"
    from employment which she says is sufficient to  support  her  and  the
    Appellant but says nothing about the nature of  that  employment.   The
    application leading to the decision under  appeal  indicates  that  she
    earns �21,000.  I also accept that the Appellant's wife has  family  in
    the UK but, of course, her evidence and the Appellant's  case  is  that
    she is estranged  from  that  family.   None  of  those  factors  taken
    individually or cumulatively are such as to lead to a finding that  she
    could not go to live in Pakistan.

50.   The Appellant's wife may not wish to go to live in Pakistan and it  is
    of course her choice whether she accompanies the Appellant.  She cannot
    be obliged to go.  However, it is reasonable to expect her  to  do  so.
    Family life can for those reasons be continued in Pakistan.  There will
    therefore be limited interference with the continuation of family  life
    occasioned by removal (as opposed to that caused by any choice made  by
    the Appellant's wife not to accompany him).

51.   The Appellant has family in Pakistan.  He  says  that  he  is  "deeply
    integrated into British society" but I have  no  evidence  about  that.
    The Appellant is aged thirty-one years.  He  lived  in  Pakistan  until
    2015 and has been in  the  UK  for  only  just  over  six  years.   The
    Appellant will be able to continue his family life  with  his  wife  in
    Pakistan (assuming she decides to accompany him).  There is no detailed
    evidence  before  me  about  the  extent  of  his  private  life  which
    demonstrates any strength of that private life.  The private life which
    he has (on the evidence such as it is before me) can be  replicated  in
    Pakistan.

52.   I am required to  have  regard  to  the  public  interest  factors  in
    Section 117B Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("Section
    117B").  Those potentially relevant to this case are as follows:

         "117BArticle 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases


         (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
         the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)      ...

         (5)      Little weight should be given to a private life
         established by a person at a time when the person's immigration
         status is precarious.

         (6)      ..."

53.   Although I do not have evidence before me that the Appellant's  wife's
    earnings are sufficient to meet the income threshold requirement of the
    Rules (other than the bare assertion  in  the  application  form),  the
    Respondent has not taken issue with this aspect of  the  Rules  in  the
    decision under appeal.  I have no evidence that the Appellant  has  had
    recourse to public funds  (other  than  obtaining  healthcare  which  I
    assume from the reference in the medical records to his NHS number  has
    been provided by the National Health Service).  I am prepared to accept
    for current purposes that he is financially  independent.   Although  I
    did not hear evidence from the Appellant, I was told that  he  and  his
    wife did not require an interpreter to give evidence  and  therefore  I
    also assume for current purposes that he speaks English.  However, both
    factors are neutral.

54.   The Appellant is an overstayer.  Although I accept  that  he  came  to
    the UK lawfully as a spouse (and for that reason Section 117B  (4)  has
    no application to this case), his leave came to an end in 2016  and  he
    has  remained  here  since  unlawfully.   Even  prior  to   2016,   the
    Appellant's status in the UK was precarious.  He may have expected that
    he could remain in the  UK  as  a  spouse  but  that  depended  on  him
    continuing to meet the Rules.   As  a  result  of  his  precarious  and
    unlawful status, I can give little weight to  the  Appellant's  private
    life when balancing the impact of removal.  In any  event,  as  I  have
    already pointed out, I have no detailed evidence on which to assess the
    strength of that private life.

55.   The Appellant has overstayed because he was unable to meet the  Rules.
     He was unable to do so because the Respondent refused leave to  remain
    in 2016 due to the false bank statements.  It is now accepted that  the
    Appellant used statements in support of his application which had  been
    altered in relation to the transactions.  Although I do  not  have  the
    detail of why the alterations had been made, given the  nature  of  the
    application and the requirement which those were provided to support, I
    can only infer  that  the  alterations  were  made  to  show  that  the
    Appellant's  wife  earned  a  sufficient  amount  to  meet  the  income
    threshold requirement of the Rules when she did not in fact do so.

56.   In this case, the Appellant fails to meet the Rules not  only  because
    he has unlawfully overstayed his leave, but also because  he  fails  on
    suitability grounds because he  has  used  documents  which  have  been
    altered in order to try to circumvent the  requirement  of  the  Rules.
    The public interest in his removal based on the  need  to  maintain  an
    effective immigration control system is for that  reason  strengthened.



57.   Balancing the limited interference  which  removal  of  the  Appellant
    will cause to his family and private life, taking into account also the
    impact of that removal on  the  Appellant's  wife  against  the  strong
    public interest in removal, I am firmly persuaded that the interference
    is in this case amply justified and proportionate.   For  that  reason,
    the Appellant's appeal on human rights (Article 8 ECHR) grounds  fails.



CONCLUSION

58.   The Respondent's decision to remove  the  Appellant  does  not  breach
    section 6 Human Rights Act 1998 (Article 8 ECHR).   The  Appellant  did
    not make a protection claim other than in the context of his Article  8
    claim.  Accordingly, there is no  appeal  on  protection  grounds.  The
    appeal is therefore dismissed on human rights grounds.



DECISION

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds



Notice to Show Cause (Lee Valley Solicitors)

Further to the decisions in R (Hamid) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2021], R (Sathivel & Ors) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2018] EWHC 913 and R (Shrestha) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
Home Department [2018] UKUT 00242, Lee Valley  Solicitors  are  directed  to
file a signed, written response to the following points within 28 days  from
the date when this decision is sent:

    1) Lee Valley Solicitors shall identify the caseworker  responsible  for
       the Appellant's case, and if they are not a qualified solicitor,  the
       firm shall  also  identify  the  solicitor  who  is  responsible  for
       supervising the caseworker.

    2) The caseworker or supervising solicitor shall explain  the  following
       matters:

        a) Why the Tribunal  was  informed  that  the  solicitors  had  not
           received the e-mail from the Respondent dated  20  October  2020
           and what checks were made before the Tribunal  was  so  informed
           (see [6] to [8] of the decision above);

        b) Why the Tribunal was informed on several occasions (including in
           the First-tier Tribunal and the  grounds  of  appeal)  that  the
           Appellant's case was that the bank statements were  genuine  and
           correctly held to be so when it was accepted on  behalf  of  the
           Appellant at the resumed hearing that they were accepted  to  be
           fraudulent (see [13] to [16] of the decision above).

Failure to respond to  these  directions  will  lead  to  the  matter  being
referred to the Solicitors Regulation Authority.


Signed           L K Smith                         Dated: 22 June 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/11958/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 without a      |Determination Promulgated            |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On Tuesday 22 September 2020         |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                               MR WALEED AHMAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1.    The Appellant appeals against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Row promulgated on 4 November  2019  ("the  Decision").   By  the
    Decision, the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision dated 25 June  2019  refusing  his  human  rights
    claim, made in the context of an application to remain in the  UK  with
    his spouse.

2.    The Appellant is a national of Pakistan.   He  entered  the  UK  on  5
    April 2015 with entry clearance as the husband of Mrs  Shamien  Asghar.
    He applied within time for further leave but that  was  refused  on  13
    August 2016 on the basis  that  the  Appellant  had  produced  a  false
    document, namely a bank statement said to relate  to  his  wife's  bank
    account.  Thereafter he became an overstayer.  For  that  reason,  when
    the Judge came to consider the Appellant's case within the  Immigration
    Rules ("the Rules"), he had to decide whether there were insurmountable
    obstacles to the Appellant's family life with his  wife  continuing  in
    Pakistan (applying paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM  to  the  Rules).   He
    concluded that there were not.

3.    The Judge also rejected the Appellant's case  outside  the  Rules  and
    took into account in that regard the public interest in the maintenance
    of immigration control.  It is however notable that, in the absence  of
    evidence from the Respondent concerning the bank statement said  to  be
    falsified and relied upon in the Appellant's earlier  application,  the
    Judge found that he "was not satisfied on the evidence before me that a
    forged  bank  statement  had  been  provided  in  connection  with  the
    application".  For that reason, he also concluded that  the  Respondent
    was wrong to refuse the  present  application  on  suitability  grounds
    within the Rules.

4.    As the Appellant points out in his  grounds  of  appeal,  he  was  not
    given a right of appeal against the  refusal  of  his  earlier  in-time
    application because his human rights claim was certified under  section
    94 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  As  such,  the  issue
    whether the bank statement was a  false  document  had  not  previously
    arisen for independent consideration.  The Appellant's very short point
    is that, had the Judge properly factored into account the finding  that
    the bank statement was not false, he would and should have  taken  into
    consideration that, but for the allegation made by  the  Respondent  in
    that  regard,  the  Appellant  would  have  succeeded  in  his  earlier
    application and would not therefore  have  overstayed.   The  Appellant
    says that the Judge  should  have  taken  into  account  the  "historic
    injustice" perpetrated and given weight to that injustice.

5.    Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Saffer
    on 27 February 2020 on the basis that "[t]he grounds have no  merit  as
    the Appellant became an overstayer, not by virtue of the document  that
    the Judge found had not been established as being  fraudulent,  but  as
    his leave had expired."

6.    Permission to appeal was granted on limited grounds by Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Coker on 15 April 2020 in the following terms:

         "1.      The grounds of appeal that the judge failed to consider an
         historic  injustice  is  without  merit.   The  respondent  took  a
         decision and, on the basis of that decision refused the appellant's
         human rights application.  There is no arguable historic injustice.
          Permission to appeal on that ground is refused.

         2. It is arguable that the FtT judge erred in his assessment of the
         proportionality of the decision, the decision the  subject  of  the
         appeal having been based upon  a  false  premise  namely  that  the
         appellant had submitted a false bank  statement.   It  is  arguable
         that the refusal of the original application which had led  to  the
         present appealable decision being  made  following  an  application
         being made when the appellant was an overstayer was a  matter  that
         should have been factored into the FtT decision on proportionality.
          It is not apparent from the FtT decision that the  judge  factored
         into his decision-making process the accurate history of the  human
         rights claim.

         3. Permission is granted on limited grounds only."

7.    When issuing her decision granting permission to appeal,  Judge  Coker
    gave directions indicating  her  provisional  view  that  it  would  be
    appropriate to determine without a hearing (pursuant to Rule 34 of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 - "the Procedure Rules")
    the following questions:

         (a)      whether the making of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
             involved the making of an error of law and, if so

         (b)      whether that decision should be set aside.

    Directions were given for the parties to make submissions in writing on
    the appropriateness of that course and further submissions in  relation
    to the error of law. The reasons for the Note and  Directions  was  the
    "present need to take precautions against the spread of  Covid-19,  and
    the overriding objective expressed in the Procedure Rules".

8.    Neither  party  has  made  any  submissions  either  expanding  on  or
    responding to the grounds of appeal or as to the appropriate  means  of
    determining the error of law issue.

9.    The Tribunal has the power to make a decision without a hearing  under
    rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.  Rule 34(2) requires me to have  regard
    to the views of the parties.  In this case, neither  party  objects  to
    this  course.   The  exercise  of  my  discretion  is  subject  to  the
    overriding objective in rule 2 to enable  the  Tribunal  to  deal  with
    cases fairly and justly.

10.   The issue is, as I  have  explained,  a  short  one  and  the  grounds
    challenging the Decision are similarly narrow.   Permission  to  appeal
    has been granted only on one limited issue.  It is therefore  difficult
    to see what more could be said about that, certainly at  the  error  of
    law stage.  I have all the necessary documents to determine that issue,
    namely the terms of the Respondent's refusal of the Appellant's in-time
    application and the terms of the refusal decision under appeal.

11.   Although it is possible for the Tribunal to hold remote  hearings  and
    even limited face-to-face hearings at the present time, its capacity to
    do so is reduced from what would normally be available.  The  convening
    of an oral hearing is accordingly likely to lead to some delay  in  the
    determination of this appeal.  I have therefore reached the  view  that
    it is appropriate to deal with the error of law issue on the papers and
    without an oral hearing.

12.   At this stage, the issue for me is whether the  Decision  contains  an
    error of law.  If I conclude it does, I  need  to  consider  whether  I
    should set aside the Decision based on that error.  If I decide  to  do
    so, I would either re-make the decision or  remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to do so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

13.   The Appellant's in-time application for further leave to remain  as  a
    spouse was refused on 24 June 2016.  In relation to the bank statement,
    the Respondent said this:

         "To meet the financial  requirements  you  provided  Barclays  bank
         statements for your partner.  Internal checks by  the  Home  Office
         with the issuing body  state  that  the  documents  are  fraudulent
         therefore you fail the above requirement."

    No supporting documentation was provided with that decision letter.  As
    the Appellant rightly points out, there was no right of appeal  against
    that decision because the claim was certified.  There is no  indication
    that the Appellant sought to challenge the decision by judicial  review
    or that otherwise the Respondent produced any documents to support what
    is there said.

14.   As a result of the allegation of fraud,  the  Respondent  refused  the
    application  on  grounds  of  suitability.   She  also   rejected   the
    application on grounds of eligibility as the false statement could  not
    be used to evidence the claimed income of  the  Appellant's  spouse  in
    order to meet the income threshold under the  Rules.    The  Respondent
    went on to consider whether there were insurmountable obstacles to  the
    couple continuing family life in Pakistan (although strictly that  does
    not apply where an application is refused on suitability grounds).  The
    Respondent  concluded  that  there  were  no   such   obstacles.    The
    application was considered on the basis of the Appellant's private life
    and outside the Rules but refused also in that regard.   Significantly,
    it is not suggested that the Appellant's relationship with his wife was
    other than genuine and subsisting and it was  not  suggested  that  the
    Appellant did not meet the provisions of the Rules for leave to  remain
    other than in relation to suitability and income.  Of  course,  if  the
    bank statement were genuine and accepted,  it  may  well  be  that  the
    Appellant could have established his wife's earnings and  been  granted
    leave to remain (depending what the statements showed).

15.   In relation to the application leading to the decision  under  appeal,
    the Respondent once again refused on suitability grounds.  She also now
    added the failure to meet  the  eligibility  requirements  due  to  the
    Appellant's overstaying.  As Judge Saffer rightly  pointed  out,  as  a
    matter of fact, the Respondent was correct that the  Appellant  was  by
    this stage an overstayer.  However, as Judge  Coker  pointed  out,  the
    Judge having found that the bank statement was not in fact  false  (due
    to lack of evidence from the Respondent who was represented), an  issue
    arises as to why the Appellant was an overstayer.

16.   Although I consider that Judge Coker is right to say  that  this  case
    does not involve historic  injustice  in  the  way  in  which  that  is
    asserted in the grounds, it is nonetheless the case that when the Judge
    came to consider the appeal outside the Rules, he needed to  take  into
    account the factual basis of the  case.   The  Judge's  conclusions  in
    relation to public interest are as follows:

         "38.     The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
         the public interest.  Reasonable provisions are  contained  in  the
         Immigration Rules to enable the appellant to  live  in  the  United
         Kingdom with the sponsor.  He does not meet those requirements.  He
         has remained in the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully  after  his  leave
         expired.   This   weighs   heavily   against   him   in   assessing
         proportionality.

         39.      Taking all these matters into  account  I  find  that  the
         public interest in  removing  the  appellant  from  United  Kingdom
         greatly exceeds any interference with his family or  private  life.
         Whilst I accept that the appellant has a family and private life in
         the United Kingdom which are interfered with by the decision  under
         appeal I find that the interference is lawful.  I further find such
         interference is necessary in a  democratic  society  both  for  the
         economic well-being of the country and for the  protection  of  the
         rights  and  freedoms  of  others  and  that  the  interference  is
         proportionate to these legitimate public ends on the facts of  this
         appeal."

17.   The Judge was right to say that the Appellant was, at the time of  his
    application on this occasion, in the UK  unlawfully.   However,  having
    found that there was no evidence to show that the bank statement relied
    upon to support the earlier refusal  was  in  fact  forged,  the  Judge
    failed to factor into the equation that, but for that  allegation,  the
    Appellant would likely have succeeded.  In other words,  he  failed  to
    take account of the factual basis of the case and the  reason  why  the
    Appellant was, at the time of this application, in the  UK  unlawfully.
    The Appellant had sought to regularise his stay within time.  There  is
    no recognition of that fact nor the finding that the reasons given  for
    refusal  on  that  earlier  occasion  were   unsubstantiated   by   the
    Respondent.  Those considerations were relevant to the public interest.

18.   For those reasons, I find an error of law in the Decision.   Once  the
    Judge had reached the finding he did about the bank statements, it  was
    incumbent on him to take that finding into account when determining the
    appeal, particularly when considering the public interest and assessing
    the proportionality of removal.  That error is one which is capable  of
    affecting the outcome.  It does not however automatically mean that the
    Appellant will succeed.  I therefore set aside the Decision, but I have
    given directions below for the appeal decision to be re-made.   It  can
    be re-made in this Tribunal as the issues and factual findings required
    are narrow.

19.   The Respondent may wish to consider this case on  its  facts  and,  in
    particular, to review  whatever  evidence  there  was  about  the  bank
    statements in  2015/2016.   If  that  were  the  only  reason  why  the
    application failed on that occasion (as appears to be the position from
    the refusal letter) and if  there  is  no  cogent  evidence  about  the
    falsity of the bank statements, the Respondent  may  wish  to  consider
    whether the appeal should continue to be resisted.  I have though given
    a direction for the Respondent to produce the bank statements  and  the
    remainder of that application and supporting evidence if she  continues
    to wish to defend this appeal so that the proportionality issue can  be
    reconsidered on a correct factual basis.

CONCLUSION

20.   For the above reasons,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  grounds  disclose
    errors of law in the Decision. I therefore set aside the  Decision.   I
    give directions below for a resumed hearing in this Tribunal.



DECISION

I am satisfied that the Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of law. The Decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Row  promulgated
on 4 November 2019 is set aside.  I give directions for  a  resumed  hearing
below.



DIRECTIONS

      1. Within 28 days from the date when this decision is promulgated, the
         Respondent shall file with the Tribunal and serve on the  Appellant
         any evidence on which she relies in support of the allegation  that
         the  bank  statements  submitted  with  the  2015  application  and
         concluded to be fraudulent were in fact false.  At the  same  time,
         she shall file with the Tribunal and serve on the Appellant a  full
         copy of the application made by the Appellant on 23 September  2015
         which led to the refusal decision dated 24 June 2016 along with all
         supporting documents together with any  written  submissions  which
         she wishes to make in relation to this  appeal.  Those  submissions
         should also include joining details for Skype for  Business  and  a
         contact telephone number for the  Respondent's  representative  for
         the hearing and the Respondent's submissions as to the way in which
         the hearing should be conducted (via remote means or face-to-face).



      2. Within 28 days from the date when the  material  in  [1]  above  is
         filed and served, the Appellant shall file with  the  Tribunal  and
         serve on the Respondent any further evidence on which he wishes  to
         rely and any  written  submissions  which  he  wishes  to  make  in
         relation to this appeal. Those submissions should also identify the
         witnesses who are to be called to give evidence, indicating whether
         any of those witnesses require an interpreter and setting  out  the
         Appellant's position as to the way in which that hearing should  be
         conducted (via remote means or face-to-face).   The Appellant shall
         also include joining details for Skype for Business and  a  contact
         telephone number for those who it is  intended  should  attend  the
         resumed hearing to permit the resumed hearing to be listed remotely
         should that be the Tribunal's decision.

      3. The Tribunal will then give notice  as  to  the  form  of  the  re-
         hearing.  The re-hearing will not be listed until after 30 November
         2020.

      4. Documents or submissions filed in response to these directions  may
         be sent  by,  or  attached  to,  an  email  to  [email]  using  the
         Tribunal's reference number (found at the top of these  directions)
         as the subject line.  Attachments must  not  exceed  15  MB.   This
         address is not generally available  for  the  filing  of  documents
         which should continue to be sent by post.

      5. Service on the Secretary of State may be  to  [email]  and  on  the
         Appellant, in the absence of any contrary instruction,  by  use  of
         any address apparent from the service of these directions.

      6. The parties have liberty to  apply  to  the  Tribunal  for  further
         directions or variation of the above directions, giving reasons  if
         they face significant difficulties in complying.


Signed           L K Smith                         Dated: 23 September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

