
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/11121/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 October 2017                         |On 20 October 2017               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                              Mr Muhammad Ijaz
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THWE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Yong, Counsel, instructed by Wimbledon
                    Solicitors (Merton Rd)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan  born  on  3  March  1963.   He
    claimed to have  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  8  April  1994  and
    thereafter overstayed.  On 28 April 2015 he  made  an  application  for
    leave to remain on the basis of his private life.  This application was
    refused on 3 November 2015  with  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE  and
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The Appellant appealed.  His appeal was heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Amin on 9 January 2017 and in a Decision and Reasons  promulgated
    on 3 February 2017 the judge dismissed the appeal.

 3. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  made
    in time on the basis that the judge erred in law  in  failing  to  take
    account of the Appellant's submissions that he  meets  the  Immigration
    Rules as a partner of Ms S K,  a  recognised  refugee  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom with five children, who look upon the Appellant as their
    father.  The Appellant's wife is a recognised refugee and there was  no
    consideration by the judge that she would be at risk if she were to  be
    obliged to go to Pakistan.

 4. The second ground of appeal asserted that  the  judge  failed  to  give
    proper consideration  to  the  evidence  relating  to  the  Appellant's
    relationship with his wife's 15 year old son  and  failed  to  properly
    consider his best interests.

 5. Permission to appeal was  granted  on  16  August  2017  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Holmes on the basis that the  judge's  approach  to  the
    Article 8  appeal  was  flawed  and  that  having  concluded  that  the
    relationships  between  the  Appellant,  his  wife  and  children  were
    genuine, the judge needed to demonstrate that she had focused on  their
    ability to live safely in Pakistan with the Appellant or to  sponsor  a
    successful entry clearance application.

 6. In a Rule 24 response dated 12 September 2017, the Respondent  did  not
    oppose the  application  for  permission  to  appeal  and  invited  the
    Tribunal to determine the appeal by way of a  fresh  hearing.   At  the
    hearing before me, Mr Bramble confirmed that  that  was  the  position,
    given that it is expressly accepted by the Respondent  that  there  are
    material errors of law in the judge's decision.

 7. I accept the Respondent's concession that there are material errors  of
    law in the decision of FtTJ Amin.  The consequence of  my  decision  is
    that in light of the fact that the  judge  made  negative  findings  in
    respect of the Appellant's credibility at [21] to [23] and [30] and  in
    light of the fact that the determination is vitiated by errors of law I
    remit the appeal for a hearing de novo by a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    other than Judge Amin.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that there are material  errors  of  law
in the decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Amin. The  appeal  is  remitted
back to the First tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 19 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

