
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11373/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th September 2017                |On 31 October  2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                     a m
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Pipi, instructed by Just & Brown Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic  of  Congo  (DRC)
    and was born in 1978. He appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R G Walters  dated  21st  January  2017  dismissing  his
    appeal against the refusal of his human rights claim and  the  decision
    to deport him.

2.   At a hearing on 22nd May 2017, I found that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Walters had erred in law in  his  assessment  of  proportionality.  The
    judge failed to take into account relevant evidence in  his  assessment
    of family life  and  failed  to  properly  direct  himself  in  law.  I
    therefore set aside the judge's finding that the Appellant  had  failed
    to establish family life and show a breach of Article 8. The appeal was
    adjourned for rehearing. The issues  were  whether  the  Appellant  had
    established family life with his mother  in  the  UK  and  whether  the
    Appellant's return to the DRC would breach Article 8.  At that stage Mr
    Pipi accepted that he could only succeed under Article  8  and  he  was
    unlikely to meet the Article 3 threshold.


The Appellant's Immigration History

3.   The Appellant is a citizen of the DRC who arrived in the  UK  in  1991,
    at the age of 13, with  his  mother.  His  mother's  asylum  claim  was
    refused in 1998, but the  family  were  granted  exceptional  leave  to
    remain until 19th June 1999. The Appellant and his family were  granted
    further leave to remain until 19th June 2002.  In  2002  and  2005  the
    Appellant made applications for further leave to remain,  but  withdrew
    them.  On  20th  March  2009,  the  Appellant's  family  were   granted
    indefinite leave to remain, but the Appellant's application was refused
    because of his criminal convictions.

4.   On 25th  February  2015,  the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  attempted
    robbery  at  Wood  Green  Crown  Court  and  sentenced  to  two   years
    imprisonment. The Appellant approached a woman in  the  middle  of  the
    street at 8 o'clock in the evening and demanded that she give  him  her
    handbag. He pulled on her scarf which caused her to fall over  and,  as
    she was getting back to her feet, he slapped her with an open  hand  on
    the side of her face which caused her to  have  chips  to  two  of  her
    teeth. The sentencing judge commented  that  this  must  have  been  an
    extremely frightening incident from the complainant's point of view and
    the offence was of  sufficient  seriousness  to  warrant  an  immediate
    sentence of imprisonment.

5.   To date the Appellant has  27  convictions  for  40  offences.  In  the
    refusal letter, the  Respondent  concluded  that  the  public  interest
    required his deportation. The Appellant had not been lawfully  resident
    in the UK for most of his life; he  was  not  socially  and  culturally
    integrated; and there were no very significant obstacles to integration
    because there was sufficient care and support for his  mental  illness.
    The  Appellant  was  diagnosed  in  1997  at  the  age   of   19   with
    schizophrenia. The Respondent concluded that  the  Appellant's  private
    life did not outweigh the public interest.   In  assessing  his  mental
    health, she found that it did not reach the threshold of Article 3.


The Appellant's evidence

6.   The Appellant did not attend the hearing because  he  was  detained.  I
    was told that he was currently in immigration detention  having  served
    his latest custodial sentence in July 2017. His evidence  is  contained
    in his witness statements dated 2nd December 2016 and 18th August 2017.



7.   In his latest witness statement, he states: "I am very  devastated  and
    restless since my human rights application on 18th  December  2015  for
    indefinite leave to remain in the UK was refused by  the  Secretary  of
    State. This is because the refusal on my application rendered me unable
    to engage in any form of meaningful activities in the  form  of  a  job
    (with which to support myself and be able to live my  life  independent
    of my mother).  I feel ashamed of myself and also pity my  mum  because
    she alone has been carrying the enormous  difficult  tasks  of  caring,
    maintaining and supporting me. I do sincerely feel sorry for my mum and
    also sincerely sorry for all the troubles I have  caused  or  subjected
    any person to due to my situation and condition.
    I was unable to attend the last hearing that took place on  1st  August
    2017 in this matter it is due to my detention in prison. I regret  that
    I made no attempt whatsoever to contact my  mum  and/or  my  solicitors
    after the court hearing I attended at which I was detained. The  reason
    for this is because I felt ashamed and did not want to face  either  of
    them when I have clearly have let both of them down by my behaviour and
    character. I feel that I am helpless over  my  situation  and  that  my
    battle against  mental  condition  is  almost  an  impossible  one  and
    endless.
    Regarding the reason why I have been involved in further crimes since I
    came to live with my mum,  I  cannot  understand  why  myself  thinking
    honestly about it.  However,  looking  back  now  and  how  the  crimes
    occurred I can link my action and behaviours regarding those crimes  to
    two things. The first thing is that being idle  and  without  money  to
    support myself (i.e. with which to buy food and things I need from time
    to time) without having to overburden my  poor  mum;  I  became  easily
    lured by a few persons that call themselves  my  friends.  They  demand
    that I help them by doing the acts. They often partake in it but always
    find a way to escape without me hence  I  became  the  one  caught  and
    treated as criminal even when the actual culprit.  The  police  do  not
    easily understand me when I try to tell them about  those  friends  who
    force me to do acts; instead the police seem satisfied having me  alone
    booked for the offence.
    I do not naturally like being in trouble and/or to commit the crimes  I
    did. I get threatened with violence by persons that say that they  were
    my friends but if refused to do what I was  asked  by  them  to  do.  I
    sometimes get myself locked up in my mum's house for three to four days
    in order to avoid having to see or meet with the individuals.  I  often
    do not even remember when, where and how I got involved  in  committing
    those crimes for which I get arrested for by the police.
    The second reason is that my sister who lives with my mum frustrates me
    a lot.  She has been doing these from the time I started  living  there
    with my mum.  Whilst she often behaves herself when my mum was  in  the
    house, however, when my mum leaves to go to church or to work she would
    start to verbally insult me and to avoid  her  insults  I  would  force
    myself to go on the street where  I  often  need  up  meeting  the  bad
    individuals that pretend to be nice and friendly to me who  would  then
    later force me to do things from which they would get some money. It is
    those individuals that prevent me from going back to my mum's house  on
    time and made me to not take my prescribed drugs on many occasions when
    instead I get given their own drugs to take.
    Before I went to the hearing at which I was detained I was told  by  my
    sister that she was planning to move to outside London for a  job  that
    she was being offered and confidence that if she moves out of my  mum's
    house I will be left alone and no longer wander about  on  the  streets
    when I do not need to go outside mum's house.  It means  that  I  would
    easily be able to avoid the persons calling themselves my  friends  who
    all they do would force me to do criminal acts as a bit of favours  for
    them which then get me into trouble. Also staying inside my mum's house
    would help me take my prescription drugs as my mum would always  ensure
    that I do not miss taking any of my drugs; also she ensures that  I  am
    very hygienic and that I eat the food she prepares in the house,  which
    are healthier for me.
    I easily forget to take my prescription drugs if not  for  my  mum  who
    reminds me to take them.  I do not know what I would do if my  mum  was
    taken away from me or if I am separated from my mum.
    I have not returned to my home country the DRC since I arrived here  in
    the UK on 10.2.1991 with my mother and sister. I arrived  here  shortly
    after my father died in the DRC. I fear for my  life  if  I  should  be
    forced to go back to the DRC for any reason. I have  vowed  not  to  go
    back there because I believe that my father's death was not natural and
    that it was caused by his political opponent in DRC. The thought of  my
    father's sudden death made me to hate everything in the  DRC  or  about
    the DRC. I am not a violence person but I know that people in  DRC  are
    very violence. If I returned there I could easily  be  harmed.   People
    there would easily feud with me if I should be forcibly removed to that
    country when I am unable to support myself due to  having  no  job,  no
    shelter, no relatives to assist or seek care for me.  My  mum  and  two
    sisters are residing in the UK.  Like myself I cannot see any  of  them
    wanting to return to  DRC  to  live  but  three  of  them  are  already
    naturalised as British citizens and are working here in the UK.  I  too
    want to reside permanently in the UK and also  to  be  able  to  secure
    whatever job once I get the right to reside and work here in the UK;  I
    aim to earn and maintain a decent standard of living and  perhaps  show
    some gratitude to my mum and the community where I live in the  UK  and
    my mum's church where she goes to pray for me regularly.
    I am sincerely sorry and regret all the mistakes and  troubles  I  have
    been involved or caused to members of the public  here  in  the  UK.  I
    often feel hopeless because what has been happening to me; and I  would
    like  to  appeal  that  my  personal  circumstances  are   given   fair
    consideration by the judge such that the judge would find it in his/her
    gentle and kind heart to deal with my situation and show compassion  by
    allowing my appeal. I am emotionally  disorientated  and  very  unhappy
    with myself for what I have done.  I promise to try my utmost  best  to
    turn a new leaf and become useful to myself, my mum, my community  here
    in the UK.  I believe that if my leave to remain application under  the
    human rights my mental issues, private and  family  life  together  was
    granted I would possibly have by now established myself positively here
    in the UK  by  way  of  securing  employment  and  seeking  to  find  a
    girlfriend with whom to settle down to build a life together.   I  have
    remained very miserable in the UK since my application was refused.  It
    is because the refusal decision shattered my hope and the plans  and  I
    have to rebuild my future.  The decision has not helped my situation in
    any way or form.
    If forced to leave the UK I will be devastated, very  lonely,  isolated
    and rendered helpless and hopeless in the DRC and also be subjected  to
    serious health and safety risks due to my ongoing mental health  issues
    as I continue to rely immensely on the support I receive from my mother
    and the available prescription drugs given to me  here  in  the  UK.  I
    doubt if those drugs are available in DRC and even if they are I surely
    cannot afford to buy them there.
    I  plead  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  in  refusing  my
    application which I believe does sits unwell with my  human  rights  be
    overturned (sic). This is because the decision failed  to  consider  my
    established family and private life in the UK and overlooked my ongoing
    serious mental health issues."


The Evidence of the Appellant's mother

8.   The Appellant's mother attended and gave evidence. She  relied  on  her
    statement of 2nd December 2016 in which she states:


         "I am extremely concerned  and  devastated  about  the  Appellant's
         ongoing mental health condition. As a mother I am doing  everything
         in my power to assist and support him as he continues his fight  to
         overcome the situation he found himself in  concerning  his  mental
         condition.
         ...My son was and remains a very considerate and caring person  and
         we love each other so much. He is a very kind and generous person I
         do not want to  lose  him.   The  effect  of  any  forced  physical
         separation from each other would be devastating  to  me  because  I
         know he is very vulnerable and  cannot  possibly  cope  or  survive
         without the proper care and support I have been providing him;  and
         apart from which he also needs adequate provision of his medication
         and treatments in order to help him cope  with  his  mental  health
         conditions."

9.   The Appellant's mother stated that she rarely stays away from  her  son
    apart from when she is at work and, when he gets into  trouble,  it  is
    because he is mixed up with other people involved in criminal activity.
     She tries to dissuade him from associating  himself  with  individuals
    who lure him to partake in criminal activities. She is  employed  as  a
    care worker and continues to look after the Appellant without  claiming
    benefits. She is concerned about her son and worries that he may become
    too frustrated by his lack of status in the  UK,  preventing  him  from
    engaging in some meaningful activities, which could have been assisting
    him in his fight against his mental health conditions including  taking
    up a job and/or going back to school.

10.  She also relied on her witness statement of 20th  June  2017  in  which
    she states:


         "[The Appellant] left home when he was  about  17  and  joined  bad
         company.  Before he left home he did not know how to cook  at  that
         young age and I did all the cooking for him. In  January  2016,  he
         was bailed to reside with me. I then realised that he did not  (and
         still does not) know how to cook so I do all the cooking  for  him.
         When he was living in Longbridge in accommodation provided for  him
         by the council he nearly died. I cannot remember exactly when  this
         was but I think it may have been around 1999. I used  to  check  on
         him and provide him with food and care as often  as  I  could.  One
         day, I went there to see him and knocked on his door but there  was
         no response. I got very worried. As I was going back  downstairs  I
         heard a faint voice and went back. He just managed to open the door
         and I saw him half dead. He had been in bed for two weeks  and  not
         eaten so I took him to hospital where he was treated.  If I had not
         gone to his flat that day I believe he would have died.
         Further his personal hygiene suffered a great deal when he was away
         from home.  Since he started  living  with  me  that  has  improved
         because I remind him to attend to his personal hygiene.
         I also make sure that he takes his medication regularly. The doctor
         told me that the reason he kept relapsing was because  he  did  not
         take his medication regularly and each time he failed to adhere  to
         the  medication  he  relapsed  and   started   committing   crimes,
         neglecting himself and going in and out of mental hospital.   Since
         he started living with me in January 2016 I have made sure that  he
         takes his medication regularly so I physically give him  his  night
         medicine and remain with him until he takes it. If I do not do that
         he will not take it regularly as required.  He does  not  have  the
         ability to organise himself and stick to strict  administration  of
         the medicine without being prompted or assisted  to  actually  take
         them. Further whenever I see any  sign  of  downward  turn  in  his
         mental health I alert the medical carers  who  take  the  necessary
         action.
         Since he has been living with me he has not relapsed because of the
         support I give him as explained above and I am very aware  that  if
         he is not supported he will not survive there for longer than a few
         months.
         I have no surviving relatives in DRC. He left DRC at the age of  13
         and has never been back. If he arrived at the airport he would have
         no clue where to go and there is no one there to look after him and
         give him the type  of  support  I  give  him  so  he  will  rapidly
         deteriorate."

11.  She was asked some additional questions in  which  she  confirmed  that
    she has a sister who lives in Milton Keynes and a brother who lives  in
    Belgium.  She has no aunts or uncles in the DRC and  her  parents  have
    died.  If deported it would be very hard for the Appellant  because  he
    came to the UK when he was very little and he did not know the area.

12.  In cross-examination, the Appellant's mother stated  that  she  was  in
    the DRC last year for her father's funeral which took  place  in  April
    2016.  She stayed in a hostel in the  capital  city  of  Kinshasa.  The
    funeral was arranged by her, her sisters and brothers and her  father's
    friends. Those in the DRC arranged it and those in the  UK  contributed
    some money. Her father had been living with her step mum who was  still
    alive. She was only 50 her father was 92 when he died. Her step mum had
    now gone to live with a new boyfriend and she had had no  contact  with
    her since then.  Some friends in her area, and neighbours,  contributed
    money for the funeral. They could not assist her son on return  because
    her father's friends could not support a young man like the  Appellant.
    She did not have a telephone number for them and had not  attempted  to
    contact them.  She was not able to write  because  the  post  took  too
    long.  Her son has a mental health problem and if he  was  returned  to
    the DRC no one would be able to care for him. She  could  not  go  back
    there because she was working as a care assistant  and  there  were  no
    care homes or nursing homes there.  She did not earn  enough  money  to
    pay someone to look after her son in the DRC  and  none  of  her  other
    family members could help. Her sister was a widow with children and her
    brother had fallen on very hard times.

13.  The Appellant had lived with her since January 2016 and she  made  sure
    he took his medication. She did not know why  he  continued  to  commit
    criminal offences. When she goes out to work or to the church, and when
    the Appellant goes out, she does  not  know  what  he  was  doing.  She
    accepted that even  though  he  was  taking  medication  he  was  still
    committing criminal offences and he had been sent to  prison  since  he
    had been living with her. When he had been in her house he had not gone
    to prison before, but he had told her that he was going to court and he
    did not come back.  When asked what she meant in her statement when she
    said that the Appellant had not relapsed since he had been living  with
    her she stated that when he was in her house he never  went  to  prison
    before.  He had told her he had to go to court and he did not go back.

14.  The Appellant had not lived with her for twenty  years.   He  had  been
    living alone and she used to visit him and clean his house. When he was
    sentenced to two years' imprisonment for robbery, she was  not  looking
    after him. He was not calling her either and so she  went  to  Dagenham
    police station to find out where he was. They did not tell her that  he
    was in prison. She stated that the Appellant's problems were because he
    did not have a right to stay in the UK and therefore he could not  earn
    money to support himself. He was unable to work and  it  was  hard  for
    him. If he could get papers to be able to stay he would be able to  get
    a job and move on. He would not be able to get a job in the DRC because
    the country is in trouble and people are killed every day.  There  were
    no jobs there. The Appellant has had no papers since 2002. He  did  not
    get indefinite leave to remain with the rest of the family  because  he
    was in prison. The Appellant had told her that if he was granted  leave
    to remain he would move on.  He would like a last chance.

15.  In re-examination, the Appellant's mother stated that her husband  came
    from Nigeria. He could not return to the DRC if  she  chose  to  return
    with the Appellant because her husband worked here and could not  leave
    his job. Her daughter was still living  at  home  and  she  had  a  job
    outside London and was planning to move out.  She did not get  on  with
    the Appellant and they always argued about food.


Medical evidence

16.  The medical evidence of Dr NK is dated 4th January 2016.   He  confirms
    that the Appellant suffers from  schizophrenia  and,  when  unwell,  he
    experiences bizarre delusions that he is invisible and  is  accompanied
    by  a  spirit.  The  Appellant  experiences  second   person   auditory
    hallucinations giving him commands and advice. He has problems sleeping
    and his daily activities are disrupted by taking protracted walks.  His
    symptoms respond well to anti-psychotic olanzapine which the  Appellant
    continued to take on a daily basis. Without medication the  Appellant's
    symptoms would return and his health would deteriorate. There would  be
    a likelihood of 80% relapse within a year  if  he  stopped  taking  his
    medication. Dr NK stated that, as far as he was  aware,  there  was  no
    appropriate treatment available for the Appellant in the DRC.

17.  In his letter dated 1st  August  2016,  Dr  M  states  that  his  first
    meeting with the Appellant was on 22nd July 2016 and the purpose was to
    discuss concerns reported by his mother that he might be  relapsing  in
    his mental state. At this meeting, the Appellant denied hearing  voices
    or being fearful of anything. He spent most of his  time  in  his  room
    preoccupied with thoughts about his situation of what would  happen  to
    him. He was not interacting with other family members and  appeared  to
    be low in  his  mood  and  manner.  The  Appellant  denied  taking  any
    substances although he admitted to drinking alcohol. At that  time,  he
    was attending the probation service once a week.  The Appellant was  in
    good physical  health.  There  was  no  psycho  motive  retardation  or
    agitation observed in his behaviour and his speech was normal in  tone,
    volume and was coherent. His mood was low but he denied any thoughts of
    harming himself. He reported good sleep although his concentration  was
    poor. He was  prescribed  fluoxetine  for  28  days  and  a  three  day
    prescription of olanzapine.

18.  There was also evidence from ER, a Social Worker.  She  confirmed  that
    the Appellant had been known to mental health services since  2008.  He
    had  regular  appointments  with  a  Consultant  Psychiatrist  and  was
    currently on medication of olanzapine  and  fluoxetine.  The  Appellant
    received a huge amount of support from his family especially his mother
    who prompted him to take his medication  and  attend  appointments.  On
    19th June 2017, the date of her report,  the  Appellant  was  currently
    free of drugs and alcohol which had contributed to his continued stable
    mental state.  The  support  he  received  from  his  family  had  been
    paramount in ensuring compliance with medication  and  abstinence  from
    alcohol. Should the Appellant  stop  taking  his  medication  or  using
    alcohol again this would be a huge detriment to his  mental  state  and
    potentially require him to return to  hospital.  He  should  remain  on
    these medications to ensure continued stable mental state. The  ongoing
    support from his family once discharged  from  mental  health  services
    would be his main support network. The only  area  of  stress  for  the
    Appellant and his family was the  ongoing  court  appearances  and  the
    uncertainty of his legal status.

19.  The letter of 4th December 2015 from SC, a mental health social  worker
    at IRC The Verne, states that the Appellant has 4 GSCE's and achieved a
    L2 City and Guilds qualification in Business studies. He has had formal
    employment with an agency; working  at  Ford  Garage  fixing  cars,  in
    security and car parking. He became unwell and was unable  to  continue
    working. He had good insight into his mental  health  and  living  with
    schizophrenia. He was calm and relaxed with good eye contact. There was
    no evidence of psychotic features  and  the  Appellant  was  reasonably
    kempt and dressed in his own clothing. At that time, he was  prescribed
    20mgs of olanzapine


Background material

20.  At page 54 of the Appellant's bundle, there  was  evidence  that  those
    with mental health issues were stigmatised. Many people  believe  those
    suffering from mental health disorders to be associated with witchcraft
    and sorcery and, therefore, would turn to  traditional  healers  rather
    than mental health services. There was also evidence at page 41, (WHO -
    Mental Health Atlas 2011 - Department of Mental  Health  and  Substance
    abuse) that the majority of primary healthcare doctors and nurses  have
    not received sufficient in service training on mental health within the
    last five years. Officially approved manuals  and  the  management  and
    treatment of mental disorders were not available  in  the  majority  of
    primary healthcare clinics. Official referral procedures for  referring
    persons from primary care to  secondary/tertiary  care  do  not  exist.
    Referral procedures from tertiary/secondary care to primary  care  also
    do not exist. Prescription regulations  authorised  primary  healthcare
    doctors to prescribe and/or to continue prescription  psychotherapeutic
    medicines, but with restrictions.  The Department of  Health  does  not
    permit primary care nurses to prescribe and/or continue prescription of
    psychotherapeutic medicines. Official policy does  not  permit  primary
    healthcare nurses to independently diagnose  and  treat  mental  health
    disorders within the primary healthcare system.

21.  In  the  refusal  letter,  the  Respondent  relies  on  the  Democratic
    Republic of Congo Information and Guidance which states that  there  is
    sufficient care and support for cases of  mental  illness.  There  were
    suitable  facilities  for  the  Appellant.  He  would  have  access  to
    prescription drugs because he could be  financially  supported  by  his
    family and pay for them.

22.  In the Democratic Republic of Congo Mental Health Profile -  Psychology
    in Africa August 2013 report, it states: Mental health is part  of  the
    primary health care system. Actual treatment of  severe  mental  health
    disorders is available at the primary level.  Mental  health  is  being
    included in the primary  health  care  and  process  charts  are  being
    defined  for  mental  disorders.  Regular  training  of  primary   care
    professionals is carried  out  in  the  field  of  mental  health.  The
    Government also partially supports some charitable  organisations  like
    SOSAME that provide mental health services. There are no community care
    facilities for patients with mental  disorders.  There  is  one  mental
    health care centre.

Submissions

23.  Mr Melvin relied on the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  and  his  written
    submissions handed up on the last occasion. The relevant cases  were  N
    [2005] UKHL 31, MM (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 270 and GS (India) [2015]
    EWCA Civ 40. The threshold was a  high  one.  Absent  other  Article  8
    factors, medical evidence was unlikely to affect the outcome of appeals
    that did not reach  the  'very  exceptional'  test  in  the  Article  3
    analysis. The absence or inadequacy of  medical  treatment,  even  life
    preserving treatment, in the country of return could not be  relied  on
    at all as a factor engaging Article 8. Where Article 8 was  engaged  by
    other factors, the fact that treatment may  not  be  available  in  the
    country of return, may be a factor in the proportionality exercise.

24.  Mr Melvin  submitted  that  Paposhvili  v  Belgium  (App  No  41738/10,
    13.12.16) was not binding on this court and, in any event, it turned on
    its own facts. There was a threshold of exceptionality and it  had  not
    been met in this case. There was little risk of  deterioration  of  the
    Appellant's health on return  in  any  event.  The  Appellant  had  not
    established family life with his mother. He was 37 years old and  there
    were no circumstances over and above normal emotional ties to establish
    such dependency.  The Appellant had lived apart from his mother for  21
    years and he had only been bailed to her address because he had nowhere
    to live at that time. She offered support and food, but had been unable
    to prevent his further offending. In fact, it  made  little  difference
    where the Appellant lived in terms of his offending  behaviour.   Since
    his release from imprisonment and the imposition of a deportation order
    the Appellant has continued to offend. The Appellant's deportation  was
    in the public interest.

25.  Mr Melvin did not accept that there was nobody in  the  DRC,  relatives
    or otherwise, who would be able to assist the Appellant. In any  event,
    family  members  in  the  UK  were  working  and  could   support   him
    financially. The Appellant seeks leave to remain  to  take  a  job  and
    support himself, and one last chance to reform. There was no reason why
    he could not support himself in the DRC. Medication and support for his
    mental health condition was available.  The  Appellant  sees  a  Social
    Worker occasionally and his GP gives him a repeat prescription. He  has
    stated that, if he is granted leave, he would apply for a job and  move
    on. There was no evidence from the mental health  providers  that  this
    was not possible. Therefore, on the facts of this case, the Appellant's
    mental health did not prevent him from working. There  was  nothing  in
    the Social Worker's report which dealt with his offending and there was
    no report from a Consultant Psychiatrist. In fact,  there  was  no  new
    evidence of the Appellant's mental  health  since  the  hearing  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Walters.  There was no deterioration  in  his
    wellbeing. He has committed 40 offences  over  a  lengthy  period.  The
    public interest outweighs the Appellant's private life. He has remained
    in the UK without leave since 2002 and his mental health was  not  such
    that it was an overriding factor. Mr Melvin invited me to  dismiss  the
    appeal.

26.  Mr  Pipi  relied  on  his  skeleton  argument  and  the  extracts  from
    Paposhvili set out therein:


         "183.    The Court  considers  that  the  'other  very  exceptional
         cases' within the meaning of the judgment in N v  UK  paragraph  43
         which may raise an issue under Article 3 should  be  understood  to
         refer to situations involving the removal of a seriously ill person
         in which substantial grounds have been shown for believing that  he
         or she, although not at imminent risk of dying, would face  a  real
         risk, on account of the absence of  appropriate  treatment  in  the
         receiving country or the lack of access to such treatment, of being
         exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or  her
         state of health resulting in intense suffering or to a  significant
         reduction in life expectancy.  The  Court  points  out  that  these
         situations correspond to a high threshold for  the  application  of
         Article 3 of the Convention in  cases  concerning  the  removal  of
         aliens suffering from serious illness."


         ...


         188. As the Court has observed above, what is in issue here is  the
         negative obligation not  to  expose  persons  to  a  risk  of  ill-
         treatment proscribed by Article 3. It follows that  the  impact  of
         removal on a person concerned must be assessed by comparing his  or
         her state of health prior to removal and how it would evolve  after
         transfer to the receiving State.


         189. As regards the factors to be  taken  into  consideration,  the
         authorities in the returning State must verify on a  case  by  case
         basis whether the care generally available in the  receiving  state
         is sufficient and appropriate in practice for the treatment of  the
         applicant's illness so as to prevent him or her  being  exposed  to
         treatment contrary to Article 3.  The benchmark is not the level of
         care existing in the returning State;  it  is  not  a  question  of
         ascertaining whether the care  in  the  receiving  state  would  be
         equivalent or inferior to that provided by the healthcare system in
         the returning State. Nor is it possible to derive from Article 3  a
         right to receive specific treatment in the receiving state which is
         not available to the rest of the population.


         190. The authorities must also consider the  extent  to  which  the
         individual in question will actually have access to this  care  and
         these facilities in the receiving state. The Court observes in that
         regard that it has previously questioned the accessibility of  care
         and refers to the need to  consider  the  cost  of  medication  and
         treatment, the existence of a social and family  network,  and  the
         distance to be travelled in order to have access  to  the  required
         care.


         191. Where, after  the  relevant  information  has  been  examined,
         serious doubts persist regarding  the  impact  of  removal  on  the
         persons concerned  - on account of the  general  situation  in  the
         receiving country and/or their individual situation - the returning
         State must obtain individual and  sufficient  assurances  from  the
         receiving State as a  precondition  for  removal  that  appropriate
         treatment will be available an accessible to the persons  concerned
         so that they do not find themselves  in  a  situation  contrary  to
         Article 3.


         192. The Court emphasises that, in cases concerning the removal  of
         seriously ill persons, the event which triggers  the  inhumane  and
         degrading treatment and which engages  the  responsibility  of  the
         returning State  under  Article  3  is  not  the  lack  of  medical
         infrastructure in the receiving state. Likewise, the issue  is  not
         one of any obligation for the  returning  State  to  alleviate  the
         disparities  between  its  healthcare  system  and  the  level   of
         treatment existing in receiving state through the provision of free
         and unlimited healthcare to all aliens  without  a  right  to  stay
         within its jurisdiction.  The responsibility that is engaged  under
         the Convention in cases of this  type  is  that  of  the  returning
         State, on account of an act - in this instance, expulsion  -  which
         would result in an individual being exposed to a risk of  treatment
         prohibited by Article 3."

27.  On that basis, Mr Pipi submitted that there  was  no  requirement  that
    the high threshold set out in N  applied  in  this  case.  The  medical
    evidence showed that when the Appellant did not take his medication  he
    was likely to relapse. Dr NK  stated  that  he  suffered  from  bizarre
    delusions and these  would  expose  him  to  a  risk  of  inhumane  and
    degrading  treatment  on  return.   It  was  not  the  case  that   the
    authorities would mistreat him, but there was an absence of  care  such
    that the Appellant would be stigmatised by the wider community and,  as
    his situation deteriorated,  he  would  be  at  risk  of  inhumane  and
    degrading treatment.  The  treatment  available  in  the  DRC  was  not
    sufficient to prevent  the  Appellant  from  deteriorating  such  that,
    coupled with  social  stigma,  the  Appellant  would  not  receive  the
    required care and would be treated by society at  large  or  by  mental
    healthcare professionals in an inhumane and  degrading  way  in  breach
    Article 3.  There was no need to establish a total absence of care.

28.  Mr Pipi submitted that the Appellant had established family  life  with
    his mother. There was ample  evidence  in  his  statement  and  in  his
    mother's oral evidence to show more than  normal  emotional  ties.  The
    Appellant was dependent on his mother to have a decent quality of life.
     She was helping him with his  personal  hygiene  and  his  medication.
    Although, the Appellant had continued offending whilst  on  medication,
    part of the problems had arisen  because  of  his  arguments  with  his
    sister and he had started going  out  and  getting  into  trouble.  The
    Appellant's mother had confirmed that he and his sister argued and  his
    sister was planning to move out. When she had done  so,  the  Appellant
    would have no incentive to leave the  house  and  therefore  would  not
    encounter those people who get him into  trouble.  Whether  there  were
    friends or relatives who could assist him in the DRC was  not  relevant
    because they would be unable to cope with the Appellant's mental health
    condition and his behaviour. The Appellant will only be able to  obtain
    work if he keeps taking his medication and his condition is stabilised.
    This was only possible with the support of  his  family.  He  would  be
    unable to work in the DRC because he would not be able to stabilise.

29.  Mr Pipi relied on the remaining points in  his  skeleton  argument.  In
    SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813, the court held that the concept of a
    foreign criminal's integration in the country to which it  is  proposed
    that he be deported, as set out in Section 117C(4) and paragraph  339A,
    is a broad one. It was not confined to the mere ability to find  a  job
    or to sustain life while living in the country there. ... The  idea  of
    'integration' calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be  made  as  to
    whether the individual will be  enough  of  an  insider,  in  terms  of
    understanding how life and society in that other country is carried  on
    and a capacity to participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
    opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day to day
    basis in that society and to  build  up  within  a  reasonable  time  a
    variety of human relationships to give substance  to  the  individual's
    private life.


Findings and conclusions

Article 3

30.  The Appellant left home at the age of 17 years old  and  was  diagnosed
    with schizophrenia when he was 19 years old. He has not lived with  his
    mother for 20 years during which time he has  lived  independently  and
    been able to administer his  own  medication.  He  was  bailed  to  his
    mother's address in January 2016. She accepts that she goes out to work
    and church and there are  times  when  she  does  not  know  where  the
    Appellant is. He accepts that he does not  inform  his  mother  of  his
    whereabouts. I find that the Appellant's mother has little control over
    the Appellant's actions.

31.  The evidence from  the  Appellant  is  that  he  forgets  to  take  his
    medication if he is not reminded. The evidence from the  social  worker
    is that his mother prompts him to take his medication. I do not  accept
    that she has been responsible for  administering  his  medication.  The
    situation is not such that the Appellant is  unable  to  treat  himself
    because he is too ill to do so. I find that the Appellant  is  able  to
    administer his own medication because he has been able to do so in  the
    past and his mental health has not deteriorated such  that  he  is  now
    unable to do so.

32.  The Appellant's mental health is not such that he  is  unable  to  seek
    help or obtain medication. He is not so ill that he requires  the  help
    of his mother to be able to function. The Appellant's mother is able to
    provide financial support for him. The medical evidence indicates  that
    the Appellant's condition is  controllable  if  he  is  prescribed  the
    relevant drugs. He has an insight into his condition  and  is  able  to
    function independently.  It  is  clear  from  his  statement  that  the
    Appellant appreciates the consequences of his actions.  He  blames  his
    lack of status for his inability to get a job. He is not prevented from
    gaining employment because of his schizophrenia

33.  There was no up to date material  before  me  on  the  availability  of
    mental health services or treatment for schizophrenia in the DRC. Dr NK
    stated that he was not aware of appropriate treatment.  The  background
    material before me is dated 2011 and 2013 and shows that there are very
    limited mental  health  facilities  in  the  DRC.  I  accept  that  the
    treatment may not be equivalent to that in the UK and the Appellant may
    not be able to obtain the same drug.  However, there  was  insufficient
    evidence before me to show that the Appellant would be unable to obtain
    drugs to treat his schizophrenia.

34.  The Appellant has failed to show that there would be a  real  risk,  on
    account of the absence of appropriate treatment in the DRC or the  lack
    of access to such treatment, of being exposed to a  serious  rapid  and
    irreversible decline in  his  state  of  health  resulting  in  intense
    suffering. On the evidence before me the threshold in Paposhvili is not
    met. On the evidence that has been produced the Appellant's deportation
    would not result in a breach of Article 3.


Article 8

35.  The Appellant is a foreign criminal and the deportation  of  a  foreign
    criminal is in the public interest. The Appellant has been sentenced to
    two years imprisonment and therefore the public interest  requires  his
    deportation unless one of the exceptions in section 117C  applies.  The
    Appellant has been living in the UK for 26 years from the age of 13. He
    had leave to remain until  2002  and  therefore  the  majority  of  his
    residence has been unlawful. He cannot bring himself within Exception 1
    and Exception 2 does not apply.

36.  He has been living with his mother, since  he  was  bailed  in  January
    2016, as a matter of necessity. He had not lived with her  for  20years
    prior to that. She appears to be able to exercise little  control  over
    him and he has still been committing offences. The evidence  before  me
    from the Appellant's mother and in his witness statement does not  show
    more than normal emotional ties such that  he  has  established  family
    life with her. She is doing her best to help him,  but  that  does  not
    amount to family life for the purposes of Article 8.

37.  Even if I accept that the Appellant has established  family  life  with
    his mother, the interference with his family and  private  life  is  in
    accordance with the law and necessary  in  a  democratic  society.  The
    remaining issue is proportionality.

38.  The Appellant has been committing crimes  throughout  his  adult  life.
    His  first  conviction  was  in  February  2000  for  possession  of  a
    controlled drug. He has committed 40 offences and has  27  convictions.
    The Appellant, on his own evidence in his witness  statement,  has  not
    sought to improve his situation. The  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
    public interests in his deportation is significant.

39.  I find that the Appellant has failed  to  provide  sufficient  evidence
    show  that  he  could  not  obtain  treatment  in  the  DRC   for   his
    schizophrenia. His condition is not so serious that  he  is  unable  to
    function in any meaningful way and there was insufficient  evidence  to
    show that he would be unable to integrate into society because  of  his
    mental illness, notwithstanding the evidence of social stigma.

40.  Accordingly, I find that the public interest in  deportation  outweighs
    the Appellant's right to family and private life. The Appellant  cannot
    satisfy  the  exceptions  in  Section  117C  and  his  deportation   is
    proportionate.  I dismiss his appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 27th October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 27th October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
