
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11800/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 October 2020                    |On 07 October 2020                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                R C (Jamaica)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of R C who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
    decision on 11 March 2005 to deport him from the United  Kingdom  after
    he was sentenced to 3 years'  imprisonment  for  supplying  a  class  A
    controlled drug (cocaine).

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Jamaica  and  is  a  foreign  criminal  as
    defined in section 117D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 (as amended).  Pursuant to sub-section 117C(1), his deportation is
    in the public interest, and pursuant to subsection  117C(2),  the  more
    serious  his  offence,  the  greater  the  public   interest   in   his
    deportation.

Background

 3. The claimant entered the United Kingdom on 12 July 1998  as  a  visitor
    and was then granted leave  to  remain  as  the  spouse  of  a  British
    citizen, expiring 27 July 2002.  On 15 August 2002,  the  claimant  was
    convicted on four counts of supplying Class A drugs (cocaine) and on  3
    September 2002 he was sentenced to three years'  imprisonment  on  each
    count, to run concurrently.  On 12 September 2003, he was served with a
    notice of decision to deport.

 4. The claimant had, and exercised, an in-country right of appeal  against
    the deportation decision: he was appeal  rights  exhausted  on  25  May
    2004.   The  claimant  was  then  detained  under  immigration   powers
    following the completion  of  his  prison  sentence,  but  was  granted
    immigration bail on 19 July 2004, subject to reporting restrictions.

 5. On 11 March 2005, the deportation order was  signed.   On  30  December
    2005, the claimant failed to report as required and on 2  January  2007
    he was listed as an absconder.  A visit to his home on 2 September 2007
    did not find him at home.  The claimant did not embark for Jamaica  but
    remained unlawfully in the United Kingdom.

 6. The claimant next came to light when he submitted  an  application  for
    further leave to remain on 19 October 2012, almost seven years after he
    had absconded.  On 10 June  2013,  the  Secretary  of  State  sent  the
    application to the  Criminal  Casework  section  in  Liverpool,  to  be
    treated as a request to revoke the March 2005 deportation order.

 7. On 13 February 2014, an emergency travel document pack  was  completed,
    and on 25 February 2014, the claimant attended a face to face interview
    at the Jamaican High Commission.

 8.  On  25  July  2014,  the  claimant's  representatives   made   further
    submissions, asserting that his deportation would not be  conducive  to
    the public good, and relying on his parental relationship for  his  son
    and daughter, both British citizens and both minors.   The  mothers  of
    both children supported his application.  The claimant's case was  that
    he was the primary carer of his son, and that he shared the care of his
    daughter with her mother.

 9. The claimant's daughter was a minor at  the  date  of  application  but
    reached  her  majority  in  January  2020.   The  Secretary  of   State
    considered that her mother was her primary carer, although the claimant
    took an active part in his daughter's life.  The claimant  also  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with his  adult  stepson  from  his
    marriage here (the boy was 26 years old at the date of decision).

10. The claimant's son is now 19 years old, having reached his majority  in
    April 2020.  The respondent accepted that the claimant's son lived with
    his mother and the claimant, but not that the claimant was the  primary
    carer.  He no longer lives at home: he has  succeeded  in  obtaining  a
    Tottenham Hotspurs Academy place, against stiff competition, and  comes
    home only at weekends.

11. The claimant's mother also lives in the United  Kingdom,  as  does  his
    sister.

First-tier Tribunal decision

12. The First-tier Judge found that both young people needed  their  father
    and that if he were to be removed, there would be a detrimental effect,
    particularly on his son. The judge found  that  there  were  compelling
    circumstances which outweighed the public interest  in  the  claimant's
    removal.

13. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

14. In her grounds of appeal, the Secretary of State argued that the First-
    tier Judge had failed to take the decision of the Court of Appeal in RC
    (Jamaica) [2018] EWCA Civ 1188, a decision concerning  this  appellant,
    as the Devaseelan starting point in approaching the question of whether
    removal of the claimant would be unduly  harsh  for  his  (then)  minor
    children, an error which had infected the entire decision.

Rule 24 Reply

15. There was no Rule 24 reply on behalf of the claimant.

Further directions

16. On 31 March 2020, the Upper Tribunal sent out triage directions made by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Keith in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic.   The
    appellant was invited, if so advised, to submit further submissions  on
    the error of law issue, with a right for the respondent  to  reply,  if
    triage submissions were made, and a further  right  of  reply  for  the
    appellant thereafter.

17. Both parties were directed  to  say  whether  they  considered  that  a
    further hearing, oral or remote, was required.  In default, the  appeal
    would be considered on the papers and triage submissions, if any.

18. Neither party responded.  On 29 June 2020, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill
    extended time to give the parties a final opportunity to respond to the
    triage directions.   Both parties responded with written submissions.

Submissions received

19. Triage submissions were received  from  the  Secretary  of  State.  She
    repeated her Devaseelan submission and argued that the judge had failed
    to consider and apply the unduly harsh test in paragraph 399(1) of  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) and that her reasoning was wholly
    inadequate.  Despite  the  finding  that  there  were  very  compelling
    circumstances, the judge had not specified what these  were,  nor  were
    any such circumstances identified in the decision.

20. The decision was fundamentally unsound and should be  set  aside.   The
    Secretary of State considered it likely that a  face  to  face  hearing
    would be required to remake the decision, in the Upper Tribunal.

21. The claimant's solicitors replied, out of time,  requesting  a  further
    extension of time.  The solicitors claimed only to  have  received  the
    grant of permission on 7 August 2020.  There was no explanation for the
    delay of almost two weeks  from  7  August  2020  to  20  August  2020.
    After setting out the  law  on  Devaseelan  starting  points  (but  not
    engaging with the Court of  Appeal's  actual  findings  of  fact),  the
    claimant argued that on the basis of other evidence before  the  First-
    tier Judge, her finding had been open to her.

22. The respondent's triage  submissions  did  not  address  the  issue  of
    whether any hearing was required at the error of  law  stage.   She  is
    taken therefore to concur with the indication in the  triage  direction
    that the question of a material error of law would be resolved  on  the
    documents and submissions before the Tribunal.

23. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Analysis

24. I am satisfied that it is appropriate to make a decision on whether the
    First-tier Tribunal decision contains a material error of  law  on  the
    basis of the decisions and submissions before me.

25. The provisions  of  section  117C(3)-(6)  are  not  triggered,  as  the
    sentence was less than four years,  but  subsections  117C(1)  and  (2)
    remain applicable and the claimant is a foreign criminal as defined  by
    section 117D(2).   Deportation of foreign criminals is  in  the  public
    interest and this was a serious offence.

26. The First-tier Tribunal, and the  Upper  Tribunal,  are  bound  by  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in R C (Jamaica) when,  unusually,  the
    court remade the decision without remitting it.    Lady  Justice  Arden
    (as she then was), with whom Lord Justice Simon agreed, found as a fact
    that:

         "I have now to consider whether it would be correct  to  remit  the
         matter to the  Upper  Tribunal  for  further  fact-finding  ...  no
         particular  facts  have  been   identified   as   needing   to   be
         reconsidered.  ...It seems to me therefore that the only matters to
         be taken into account are those which are already known and are set
         out in the Upper Tribunal and the First-tier Tribunal's  decisions.
         In the light of the fact that the First-tier  Tribunal  found  that
         deportation would not have dire consequences for the  children  but
         simply that it would not be in their best interest and further that
         they would be able to have contact with their father even after his
         removal, either through occasional visits to Jamaica  or  in  other
         ways, in my judgment there is no doubt about the conclusion  to  be
         made in this case on the  basis  of  the  correct  test.   I  would
         therefore not remit this matter to the Upper  Tribunal  but  decide
         the application in favour of the Secretary of State  on  the  basis
         that the [claimant] has not satisfied the test of unduly harsh.   I
         am extremely grateful to the submissions that  have  been  made  to
         this court and I would allow [the Secretary of State's]  appeal  on
         the basis that I have described."

27. In not taking that factual finding as a starting point in  the  present
    decision, there is no question that the First-tier Judge erred  in  law
    and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is fatally tainted  thereby
    and must be set aside and remade.

28. The question then is what should be done after the  decision  has  been
    set aside.  In remaking the decision, the Upper Tribunal must  take  as
    its Devaseelan starting point the finding of Lady Arden that effect  of
    the claimant's removal would not be unduly harsh for his children,  who
    were then minors.

29. Both are now adults  and  the  issues  which  were  determined  in  the
    Secretary of State's favour by Lady Arden in 2018, and  by  the  First-
    tier Judge in favour of this claimant in January 2020, no longer arise.



30. Nor is there any evidence of Kugathas  dependency  or  any  exceptional
    circumstances or new facts capable of displacing Lady Arden's  decision
    that it would not be unduly harsh for these young adults to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom without their father if he is deported to Jamaica.

31. The claimant has not asked for a further hearing and I do not  consider
    that one is necessary.

32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the claimant's
    appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

33. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision by dismissing
    the claimant's appeal.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     4 October
2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


