
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/11697/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 February 2018                        |On 14 March 2018                 |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MRS NN RAHMATHUNNISA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Balroop, Counsel instructed by Malik Law
Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In order to avoid confusion I shall refer to  the
    Secretary of State as such throughout and to Mrs Rahmathunnisa  as  the
    claimant.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of India, born on 2 March 1935. The  claimant
    entered the United Kingdom on 8 November 2015 on a visit visa which was
    valid from 12 August 2015 until 12 February 2016.  She  re-entered  the
    United Kingdom on 10 January 2016 on  the  same  visit  visa.    On  21
    January 2016 she applied for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on
    the basis that it would breach Article 8 of the European Convention  on
    Human rights (on the basis of her  right  to  enjoy  private  life)  to
    return her to India.  The claimant, in her  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, asked for consideration under the private
    life provisions and additionally that  she  required  24  hour  current
    supervision as a result of her ill-health and fragility.  The Secretary
    of State refused the claimant's application  on  20  April  2016.   The
    Secretary of State did not accept that there would be very  significant
    obstacles to the claimant's integration into India  as  she  had  lived
    there all her life, that the claimant had not submitted any evidence to
    show that she would be unable to have the same level of care  that  she
    had previously received whilst in India  if  she  returned  there.  The
    Secretary of State  also  considered  whether  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances warranting a grant of leave under Article 8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules but reiterated that the claimant had had 24 hour care
    and supervision in India and had not submitted any evidence  that  this
    could not be reinstated were she to return.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The claimant appealed against the respondent's decision to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated on 25 October 2017 First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J H H Cooper allowed the claimant's appeal.   The  judge
    found that the claimant would meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  E-
    ECDR.2.5 of Appendix FM if she were making  an  application  for  entry
    clearance from India.  The judge found that the claimant could not meet
    the requirements of Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules.   This  was
    accepted.  The judge considered there  were  exceptional  circumstances
    justifying a grant of leave under Article  8  on  grounds  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  The judge found that  to  return  the  claimant  to
    India solely for the purpose of making an entry  clearance  application
    would impose very great strains on her health  and  concluded  that  it
    would be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the  claimant's  and
    sponsor's right to enjoy family life together.

 4. The Secretary of State applied for permission  to  appeal  against  the
    First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   On  19  December  2017   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chohan granted the  Secretary  of  State  permission  to
    appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

Submissions

 5. The grounds of appeal set out that the judge erred in failing  to  give
    adequate reasons for the decision.  The judge has  not  considered  the
    need to have any objective medical evidence to  confirm  the  assertion
    that the claimant requires a high level of personal care as a result of
    her   medical issues.  The  judge  has  failed  entirely  to  make  any
    findings on the claimant's medical conditions, appearing content simply
    to rely on video footage of the  claimant.   Although  the  sponsor  is
    medically qualified, the judge has  overlooked  that  his  evidence  is
    provided in a subjective context.  His evidence is clearly  biased  and
    his credentials and CV have not been scrutinised in the  usual  way  an
    expert providing a medical report would be.  The judge has not regarded
    any objectively procured evidence  concerning  the  claimant's  medical
    condition or the level of care she requires.  The sponsor asserts  that
    the claimant's current care arrangements are not as  good  as  what  he
    could provide but no evidence of this is provided and  the  judge  does
    not appear to have considered this assertion any further.  The claimant
    has not provided any evidence as to why her current  care  arrangements
    cannot continue in India or  any  objective  evidence  to  support  the
    assertion that appropriate medical care cannot be sought in India.

 6. The judge found that if the claimant were applying for entry  clearance
    from outside the UK she would qualify at the time of the  hearing,  the
    inference being  that  her  appeal  should  otherwise  succeed  as  per
    Chikwamba (FC) (Appellant) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    (Respondent) [2008] UKHL 40. The judge is misdirected in  this  finding
    having assumed that the only reason to refuse the case is as the result
    of the claimant being in the UK already.  However, the  judge  has  not
    adequately considered her claim to require the full-time  care  of  her
    sponsor  and  has  therefore  misdirected  himself  without  a   proper
    assessment of the core  issues.   The  judge  has  entirely  failed  to
    adequately consider Section 117B and the need for effective immigration
    control.  The claimant is likely to be a considerable burden on the NHS
    and may not be able to successfully integrate into British society.  EB
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 is relied  upon,  the  UK  cannot  be
    expected to provide medical care to the world.  The judge has erred  in
    his  approach  to  the  required  balancing  act,  the  judge  has  not
    considered all relevant factors in the round.

 7. In oral submissions Ms Everett submitted that there  were  no  findings
    regarding the medical evidence.   The  claimant  had  medical  problems
    prior to entry into the United Kingdom.  The claimant indicated that it
    was her intention to return to India in her  application  for  a  visit
    visa.  Many of the medical conditions referred to were conditions  that
    occurred whilst the claimant was in India.  It is  not  clear  how  her
    condition is said to have  deteriorated  significantly  whilst  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The judge has not considered  any  objective  evidence
    with regard to the medical care that is  available  in  India  and  has
    simply accepted what the sponsor has said at face value.  The judge was
    required to make specific findings on the medical care available to the
    claimant in India  in  order  to  make  a  finding  that  she  met  the
    requirements for entry clearance.  There is an absence  of  reasons  on
    critical issues throughout the decision.

 8. Mr Balroop referred  to  paragraph  28  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision where the judge recites the requirements that must be met  for
    entry clearance.  There was no need for the judge  to  go  any  further
    other than to be satisfied that the claimant needs long-term care.  The
    findings were open to the judge,  in  particular  that  there  were  no
    suitable carers.  He referred to paragraph 26 where the judge  set  out
    that the claimant's situation had deteriorated since  arriving  in  the
    UK.  There was a difference in the claimant's health between  what  was
    happening before she left India and after she arrived in the  UK.   The
    Tribunal was entitled to take into account the subjective  evidence  of
    the sponsor because this was based on  experience.   He  accepted  that
    Section 117B had not been considered by the judge but that even if that
    were an error of law it is not material when looking  at  the  findings
    overall.  The claimant  would  be  exempt  from  the  English  speaking
    requirement.  The claimant would be financially independent, given  the
    sponsor's level of income and family life existed prior to the claimant
    coming to the UK as a result of the dependence on the  sponsor.   There
    would be no burden on the NHS  as  evidence  of  private  health  cover
    insurance had been submitted.

 9. In reply Ms Everett submitted that at paragraph 30 it is not clear that
    there is evidence that shows that the Rules are satisfied  and,  whilst
    the judge was entitled to  find  the  sponsor  credible,  there  was  a
    substantial amount  of  care  including  hospital  submissions  over  a
    lengthy period whilst the claimant was living in India.   There  is  no
    indication as to why the judge accepted that there  are  only  domestic
    carers available in India.  She submitted it is simply  not  sufficient
    to accept a submission by a relative  that  is  not  supported  by  any
    substantive objective evidence or based on  enquiries  that  have  been
    undertaken as to the care that would be available and answers to  those
    enquiries to prove that care would not  be  available.   She  submitted
    that the Secretary of State is unable to ascertain from  this  decision
    why the judge made the findings that she did.

Discussion

10. The judge set out at paragraphs 24 onwards:

         "24. It is clear, for the reasons acknowledged in  the  grounds  of
             appeal, that the Appellant cannot  meet  the  requirements  of
             Appendix FM...  in  that  the  Appellant  entered  the  United
             Kingdom on a  visitor's  visa  and  applied  from  within  the
             country, rather than applying for entry clearance from India.

         25.  The Sponsor is a practising GP, earning a  substantial  income
             and owning significant assets both here and in India.  I found
             him a convincing and credible witness, who gave  his  evidence
             in a measured and (so far, perhaps, as it is  possible  for  a
             son to do in relation to  his  own  ailing  mother)  objective
             manner.

         ...

         27.  Had she been in a position to make such  an  application  from
             India, I am satisfied from the evidence that  she  would  have
             met all the requirements of Section E-ECDR of Appendix FM.   I
             consider in particular paragraphs E-ECDR 2.4 and 2.5.

         28.  E-ECDR.2.4 requires that the applicant ...'must as a result of
             age, illness or disability require long-term personal care  to
             perform everyday tasks'.  On the Sponsor's evidence, following
             the death of the Appellant's husband in 2007, she was  on  her
             own with carers for some 9 years, latterly requiring  24  hour
             care for several years.  The evidence is  that  currently  she
             lives with the Sponsor and his wife, and when they are out  at
             work is looked after by full-time  carers.   The  medical  and
             psychiatric reports  submitted  to  the  Respondent  with  the
             application are consistent with this description, and  I  have
             no doubt that the requirements of paragraph  E-ECDR.2.4  would
             be met, were she making an entry  clearance  application  from
             India today.

         29.  Paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 requires (so far as is material  to  this
             application):

                  'The applicant... must be unable, even with the  practical
                  and financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the  required
                  level of care  in  the  country  where  they  are  living,
                  because

                  (a)  it is not available and there is no  person  in  that
                      country who can reasonably provide it; or

                  (b)  it is not affordable'.

         30.  There is no suggestion on the part of the  Sponsor  that  care
             would not be affordable in India - indeed he has  been  paying
             for it for some years already, but he  is  emphatic  that  his
             mother's needs are now such that no  suitable  carers  can  be
             found.  He describes those that used to provide the service as
             essentially being domestic workers, rather than professionally
             trained carers, pointing out that the system is not  the  same
             in India as in the United Kingdom.  He  acknowledged  in  oral
             evidence that the Appellant has a nephew, but  explained  that
             he  was  married  with  his  own  children,  and   could   not
             realistically provide the intensive level  of  care  that  the
             Appellant now requires.

         31.  During the course of the  hearing,  with  my  permission,  the
             Sponsor showed video footage on his  tablet  computer  of  his
             mother, which I  describe  in  my  record  of  proceedings  as
             follows:

                  'One section shows a large lady struggling to get  out  of
                  bed and use a wheeled walker to make her way slowly across
                  the room.  Clearly a difficult process.

                  Second section shows her being addressed by  Sponsor  (off
                  camera) who asks her a series of simple questions such  as
                  her date of birth, where she lived in India, where she was
                  now etc, to all of  which  she  appeared  to  make  little
                  response'.

         32.  Considering all the evidence,  I  accept  that  the  Appellant
             would  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  E-ECDR.2.5   of
             Appendix FM were she making an application for entry clearance
             from India today.

         33.  Because the Appellant cannot meet all the requirements of  the
             Immigration Rules, the issue then becomes  whether  there  are
             exceptional circumstances justifying a grant  of  leave  under
             Article 8 on grounds outside the Immigration Rules.

         34.  Considering the Razgar questions,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
             Appellant and the Sponsor do enjoy family  life  together,  in
             that there are 'further elements of dependency, involving more
             than the normal emotional ties' (per Kugathas)  between  them.
             Removal  of  the  Appellant  to  India  would  amount  to   an
             interference with their  enjoyment  of  that  family  life  of
             sufficient gravity as to engage Article 8.

         35.  There is no question but that the  Respondent's  decision  was
             taken  lawfully,  in  pursuit  of  the   legitimate   aim   of
             maintaining  effective  immigration  control.   The  issue  is
             therefore  whether  removing  the   Appellant   would   be   a
             proportionate step in pursuit of that aim.

         36.  That raises the Chikwamba issue -  namely  whether,  I  having
             found that the Appellant would be  more  likely  than  not  to
             succeed on an application for  entry  clearance  as  an  adult
             dependent  relative  if  it  were  made  from  India,  it   is
             proportionate in all circumstances to require  her  to  return
             there solely for the purposes of making that application.

         37.  I am satisfied that if the Appellant had to return  to  India,
             the Sponsor would have to accompany her.   Evidence  has  been
             produced to show that he is a busy GP in a practice with  some
             12,500 registered patients.  I take  judicial  notice  of  the
             fact, supported by the Guardian article at AB 102, that  there
             is a shortage of GPs  in  the  NHS,  such  that  removing  the
             Sponsor from the United Kingdom, even for the period  that  it
             would take for  the  Appellant  to  make  an  entry  clearance
             application, is a factor weighing against that step having  to
             be taken.

         38.  I am satisfied also that to require  this  frail  and  elderly
             lady, who is suffering from a degree of dementia, to return to
             India solely for the purpose  of  making  an  entry  clearance
             application would impose very great strains on her health.

         39.  In the cast majority of cases it is  important  for  effective
             immigration control that individuals must not be seen to 'jump
             the queue' by entering the United  Kingdom,  albeit  lawfully,
             for  an  ostensibly  temporary  purpose  and  then  making  an
             application to remain from within  the  country.   However,  I
             conclude  that  in  this  particular  case  it  would   be   a
             disproportionate  interference  in  the  Appellant's  and  the
             Sponsor's right to enjoy family life together in her declining
             years to require her to return  to  India  to  make  an  entry
             clearance  application  which  would  be  highly   likely   to
             succeed."

11. There does not appear to be a specific finding by the  judge  that  the
    level of care required by the claimant is  unavailable  in  India.   It
    might be inferred from paragraphs 30 to 32 that the judge in  accepting
    the sponsor's evidence that no suitable carers can now be  found,  that
    the judge considered that the required level of care  required  is  not
    available in India.  The judge does not appear to have engaged  in  any
    critical way with the evidence of the sponsor.  In this particular case
    the claimant was receiving 24 hour care in India before she came to the
    United Kingdom.  The sponsor described the carers as essentially  being
    domestic  workers  rather  than  professionally  trained  carers.    No
    evidence  was  adduced  that  professionally  trained  carers  are  not
    available in India or that residential care is not  available  to  meet
    the claimant's needs.  It might be the  case  that  such  care  is  not
    available. However without any objective evidence in  support  of  that
    claim the judge's finding is insufficiently  reasoned.   There  was  no
    evidence for example of the  sponsor  undertaking  enquiries  in  India
    about residential  care  homes  or  about  obtaining  the  services  of
    professionally trained carers.  Whilst the judge is entitled to  accept
    the evidence of a  witness  the  requirement  of  paragraph  E-ECDR.2.5
    places a burden on an applicant to prove that  the  required  level  of
    care is not available and there is no person in that  country  who  can
    reasonably provide it.  To simply accept the unsupported evidence which
    consisted of unsubstantiated assertions about  the  level  of  care  in
    India is insufficient to support a finding that the requirement of  the
    Immigration Rules would be met.

12. A finding  that  the  claimant  would  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules if an entry clearance application was met  would  not
    be sufficient to allow  the  appeal.   The  judge  therefore  correctly
    considered whether there were exceptional  circumstances  justifying  a
    grant of leave under Article 8 on grounds outside the Immigration Rules
    (the judge was not imposing a threshold test of  exceptionality).   The
    judge commenced by considering whether the first questions as  set  out
    in Razgar were answered affirmatively,  finding  that  they  were,  and
    decided that the issue then was whether the respondent's decision would
    be a proportionate step in pursuit of the legitimate aim of maintaining
    effective  immigration  control.   The  judge  moved  straight  to  the
    Chikwamba issue described as whether or not it would  be  proportionate
    in all the circumstances to require the claimant  to  return  to  India
    solely for the purpose of making that entry clearance  application.  In
    addressing proportionality solely on that basis the  judge  has  missed
    out the important balancing exercise.  The judge has failed to consider
    Section 117B of the Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  A judge must have
    regard to the provisions of Section 117B  when  considering  Article  8
    outside of the Immigration Rules.  This is an error of law.

13. Is that a material error of law? With regard to  the  Chikwamba  issue,
    the judge noted that the sponsor would have to accompany  the  claimant
    to India.  However, in evidence, it is clear that  the  sponsor  has  a
    sister in Belgium with whom the claimant has stayed and been cared for,
    and also the claimant's wife who currently, together with the  sponsor,
    cares for the claimant.  The judge noted that there is  a  shortage  of
    GPs in the NHS so removing the sponsor, even  for  that  period,  is  a
    factor weighing against that step having to be taken.  It is not  clear
    that any of these factors were considered during the hearing and  there
    does not appear to be any evidence with regard to these factors in  the
    bundle.  I note that the sponsor will not  be  in  the  United  Kingdom
    between 21 February and 6 April this year.  It is therefore not at  all
    clear that had he been asked these questions during the hearing that he
    would have given evidence that he was unable to accompany the  claimant
    to India if an entry clearance application were required to be made.  I
    do accept that the judge was entitled to conclude that the state of the
    claimant's health at the date of the hearing in October 2017  was  such
    that to have to return to India for the  purpose  of  making  an  entry
    clearance application would impose very great strains on her health.

14. The difficulty with the Chikwamba approach in this case is that  it  is
    predicated upon a finding that the claimant would be more  likely  than
    not to succeed on the application for entry  clearance.   The  Tribunal
    erred in reaching the conclusions on the likelihood of success in entry
    clearance by failing to adopt a critical and reasoned approach  to  the
    test required relying simply  on  the  unsupported  assertions  of  the
    sponsor.  If the claimant was not likely to succeed or if there was not
    sufficient evidence to reach a conclusion on that matter then Chikwamba
    would  not  be  relevant  and   an   appropriate   balancing   in   the
    proportionality exercise would  be  required  to  be  undertaken  under
    Article 8.

15.  The  proportionality  exercise  undertaken  by  the  judge  cannot  be
    considered to be adequate and therefore there was an error of  law.  It
    was a material error of law not to consider Article 117.

16. I find that there is a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
    decision. I set that decision aside pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

17. I considered whether or not I could  re-make  the  decision  myself.  I
    considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings. I
    am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact  finding  that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

18. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case to be re-heard
    at Taylor House before any judge other than Judge H H Cooper   pursuant
    to section 12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a) of the TCEA. A  new  hearing  will  be
    fixed on the next available date.

19. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously. Having
    considered all the circumstances and evidence  I  do  not  consider  it
    necessary to make an anonymity direction.





Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State against the decision of the  First-tier
Tribunal is allowed. The case is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
Taylor House before any judge  other than Judge H H Cooper






Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 12 March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw




