
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11953/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th November 2018                         |On 13th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                           MRS Mennana El Battioui
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Morocco born  on  26th  June  1963.   The
    Appellant entered the UK on 8th June 2014 with entry clearance  as  the
    spouse of a settled person until 28th February 2017.  On 25th  February
    2017 the Appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain as  a  spouse
    of a settled person.  That application was refused by Notice of Refusal
    dated 22nd August 2017.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Paul sitting at Taylor House on 23rd  July  2018.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 13th August  2018  the  Appellant's
    appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

 3. On 21st August 2018 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  It  was  contended  therein  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had erred in her assertion that  the  Appellant  had  an
    automatic right to re-entry and that  any  applications  made  must  be
    considered on their merit and it was not the place  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to become a primary decision maker.

 4. On 11th October 2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal I D Boyes granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge  Boyes  considered  it  was  difficult  to
    reconcile the judge's reasoning that the Appellant can properly  return
    to Morocco and yet that it would be disproportionate for her to do  so.



 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel Mr Muquit.  Mr Muquit is familiar with his matter  in  that  he
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Secretary of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Whitwell.

 6. I appreciate that  this  is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State.
    However, for the purpose of continuity throughout  the  appeal  process
    Mrs L Battioui is referred to herein as the Appellant and the Secretary
    of State as the Respondent.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. Mr Whitwell starts by making the contention that in paragraph 19 of the
    decision the judge has erred in law in finding that the  Appellant  has
    an automatic right of re-entry.   He  submits  that  whilst  it  is  an
    extension of the grounds it is unclear what the relevance made  therein
    to the principles set out in Chikwamba has to the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  I do note that thereafter Mr Whitwell goes on try
    and set out and extend his arguments, based on the fact  that  this  is
    not factually a Chikwamba case and to his submission that there  is  no
    reason why family life could not  continue  by  way  of  the  Appellant
    returning to Morocco, at least for the  purpose  of  making  a  further
    application.

 8. As a preliminary  issue,  Mr  Muquit  challenges  the  Chikwamba  point
    arguing that this is a new ground of appeal that  has  not  been  taken
    before.  I am asked by both representatives to rule on the point as  to
    whether or not, at this late stage, it is  open  to  the  Secretary  of
    State to raise a new ground of appeal.  I  find  that  it  is  not  and
    consequently despite the submission of the authorities  of  R  (on  the
    application of Chen) v the Secretary of State of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and R (on the application of Thakral)  v  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department by Mr Whitwell I rule that I do not  need
    to consider those authorities further.

 9. It is emphasised to me that the only mistake here made by the Appellant
    was that she sought an application of indefinite leave to remain rather
    than just leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  It is the  submission
    of Mr Muquit that the findings at paragraph 19 by the judge have to  be
    looked at alongside previous paragraphs and that it was  accepted  that
    there were no difficulties financially in that the  Appellant  met  the
    relevant Rules and that the judge had quite  properly  looked  at  this
    matter at paragraph 16 in concluding that  if  the  Appellant  were  to
    return to make an entry clearance application  it  is  highly  probable
    that such an entry clearance application would, based on the facts,  be
    successful.  He points out that this is a mistaken application for  ILR
    and whilst that may be an error of law in the assessment by the  judge,
    it not being disputed that had there been application merely for  leave
    to remain, that would have been granted.   He  submits  therefore  that
    whilst there is therefore an error of law it is not material.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

12. There is an error of law  in  this  decision  and  that  error  is  the
    assumption made by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  that  the  Appellant
    would have an automatic right of re-entry.  There is also an error made
    by the Appellant in that she  had  mistakenly  applied  for  indefinite
    leave to remain  as  against  merely  seeking  leave  to  remain.   The
    question therefore arises as to  whether  the  error  is  one  that  is
    material to the outcome of the decision.  I find that it is not.

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is not lengthy, it runs to some
    nineteen paragraphs but that is not to say that it does not  succinctly
    address all relevant factors.  At paragraphs 12 to 15  the  judge  sets
    out the basic principles to be considered in a  case  of  this  nature.
    The judge has made a perfectly proper and what indeed could be called a
    classic approach to the addressing of the issues in this matter and  at
    the end of the day has  made  a  discretionary  decision  that  on  the
    balance  the  arguments  did  not  cross  the  threshold   of   showing
    insurmountable objects and that whilst there would be disruption to the
    marriage and the consequences for the  parties  having  to  live  apart
    would be significant, the threshold had not been crossed. As  a  result
    the judge made findings at paragraph 16 to the effect that the  husband
    was exempt from the income requirements by reason  of  the  receipt  of
    personal independence payments acting as carer  for  his  mother.   The
    judge was wrong in finding that entry  clearance  application  must  be
    granted but not that it might be granted.

14. However, I have to remind myself that the judge has already  made  some
    discretionary findings and thereafter has  gone  on  to  consider  this
    matter and ask the question of whether interference is disproportionate
    because the disruption to family life is not necessary in this context.
     The judge has applied the five stage test  of  Razgar.   Consequently,
    the judge thereafter comes to a decision that I was satisfied the judge
    was entitled to reach.  Namely that the removal  of  the  Appellant  to
    Morocco would be disproportionate.  Therefore, the judge  was  entitled
    to make the findings that she did and whilst there is an error  of  law
    in the decision it is not material and on that basis I find there is no
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  I
    dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

