
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/ 11969/ 2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House Remotely                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 December 2020                            |On 3 March 2021               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                     GM
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER IN FORCE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Counsel instructed by Dotcom
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead members of the  public  to  identify  the  appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court.  I  make  this
order because the case requires detailed consideration of the health of the
appellant's son who is a child and there is no legitimate  public  interest
in the identity of a child with such serious disabling physical conditions.

2. This  is  an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
dismissing the appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  Secretary  of
State on 27 April 2018 refusing the appellant leave to remain in the United
Kingdom.

3. The appellant is a citizen of Albania.  She claims to  have  entered  the
United Kingdom irregularly on 24 February 2015.  Certainly she was  present
in the United Kingdom on 25 February 2015 because she claimed asylum.   The
asylum application was refused and an appeal dismissed.  Her appeal  rights
were exhausted in January 2017.  However, in April 2017 partly as a  result
of  matters  that  emerged  during  the  appeal  hearing  she   was   given
discretionary leave to remain.

4. She has a son, who I identify simply as "E", who was born in  June  2015.
It follows that the appellant was pregnant when she left Albania.

5. The child E has very significant health problems.  In layman's  language,
and for the purposes of following the appeal rather  than  describing  with
clinical accuracy his condition, all the body  parts  associated  with  the
creation, storage and expulsion of urine  are  underdeveloped.   He  cannot
pass urine in the normal way and is dependent on a catheter administered by
his mother to drain his bladder which is itself an improperly formed organ.

6. The appeal against the decision to refuse leave on human  rights  grounds
has previously been  determined  unsatisfactorily  by  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Blundell.  That decision was set aside by the Upper Tribunal and  the
appeal was redetermined, this time by First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan.

7. For reasons that I  endeavour  to  explain  below  I  have  come  to  the
conclusion that there is no material error in Judge Khan's decision and  so
I will dismiss the appeal.

8. In doing this I am very aware that the  appellant's  son  has  particular
and serious medical needs and that removing him from the medical care  that
is available to him in the United Kingdom as well as the support mechanisms
that have been developed in  his  school  is  an  extremely  serious  step.
However, there are many children in the world who would benefit from expert
medical treatment in the United Kingdom but that does not give them a right
to enter, and only rarely to remain, in the United Kingdom. I am  satisfied
that on the evidence before him the First-tier Tribunal Judge was right  to
dismiss the appeal even though for reasons which I will  explain  parts  of
the decision can be criticised fairly.

9. I begin by looking at the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Blundell
because that helps me understand the decision complained of.  As  indicated
the appeal on asylum grounds was unsuccessful but the appellant and E  were
given discretionary leave  that  lasted  until  30  September  2017.   They
applied for further leave just before that leave expired and supported  the
application  with  a  letter  from  solicitors  acting  on  behalf  of  the
appellant.   The  gist  of  the  case  then  is  that  E  had  been   given
discretionary leave so that he could undergo surgery in the United  Kingdom
but he continued to be significantly  unwell  and  it  was  contended  that
removing him (and by implication leaving him  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
removing his mother) would be contrary to the United Kingdom's  obligations
under Article 3 and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

10. In outline it was the  Secretary  of  State's  case  that  E  would  get
adequate treatment, or rather that adequate  treatment  was  available  for
him, in Albania.  The Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  refers  to  a  "MedCOI"
Report, which I take to be a Medical Country  of  Information  Report,  and
with reference to generic evidence concludes that appropriate expertise  is
available in Albania and appropriate medication and that the "threshold  in
N (FC) v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31 has not been reached".

11. Judge Blundell's summary of E's health  problems  is  particularly  apt.
It is set out at paragraph 18 of his decision and reasons and I  repeat  it
below:

  "[E] was born on [ ] June 2015.  Although the ultrasound scan  in  Tirana
  revealed 'no obvious foetal abnormalities',  E  fell  ill  shortly  after
  birth and has received extensive treatment in the UK.  There is  a  great
  deal of medical evidence before me concerning his  condition.   A  letter
  from Dr Wesley Hayes, a Consultant Nephrologist from GOSH, dated 23  June
  2018 is  of  particular  assistance.   Dr  Hayes  stated  that  E  has  a
  urological condition which is managed  by  Professor  Cuckow,  comprising
  narrowing of  the  urinary  tract  following  surgical  intervention;  an
  abnormality of  the  prostate;  and  micropenis.   In  addition,  he  has
  abnormal kidney function and  high  blood  pressure.   He  has  undergone
  several surgical procedures and was, at that time,  under  three  monthly
  review  for  his  kidney  function  and  blood  pressure.   He   received
  medication for his blood pressure and antibiotics to minimise the risk of
  infection.  He also required regular input from  the  Nephrology  Bladder
  Nurse.  It was difficult to provide a prognosis at that time.   Dr  Hayes
  did say, however, that if 'ongoing care from  a  Paediatric  Nephrologist
  and Paediatric Urologist were not available to E, there is a risk that he
  would experience sepsis, kidney failure and growth impairment".

12. At paragraph 20 Judge Blundell summarised the evidence from  the  school
that E attended.  His development was  delayed  and  he  could  be  clumsy.
There were key workers trained to help him.  At paragraph 23 Judge Blundell
said:

  "The respondent referred in the  Notice  of  Immigration  Decision  to  a
  MedCOI  document  which  suggested  that  the  requisite  medication  and
  expertise was available in Albania.  As I have recorded  above,  I  asked
  [the Presenting Officer] to produce  this  unpublished  document  at  the
  start of the hearing.   He  was  unable  to  do  so  and  I  refused  his
  application to produce it on another day.  It is a matter of concern that
  this material was not made available to the Tribunal and the appellant in
  advance of the  hearing.   I  proceed  on  the  basis  considered  in  MH
  (Pakistan) [op cit] and decline to attach any weight to the assertion  in
  the refusal letter, since it is unsupported by any evidence".

13. The judge then explained why the appeal could not  succeed  on  "Article
3" grounds and why the appellant's case was hopeless without the  needs  of
her son being considered.  The judge then  reviewed  the  medical  evidence
before him and noted that there was a letter from a Professor Buba  at  the
University Hospital  Centre  Mother  Teresa  in  Tirana  saying  that  that
hospital could not help, it did not have the necessary expertise  but  also
saying they could  not  comment  on  what  might  be  achieved  in  private
hospitals.  Judge Blundell said that at paragraph 30:

  "This letter falls some way short of establishing  that  the  appellant's
  son could not receive adequate treatment in  Albania  as  a  whole.   The
  letter refers specifically to the facilities available in  Mother  Teresa
  Hospital alone and Professor Buba is quite clear that  he  is  unable  to
  comment on the facilities available  in  private  hospitals.   Given  the
  rejection of the appellant's asylum claim and her  failure  to  establish
  that she has no support network in Albania, both of  these  gaps  in  the
  letter are significant.  There may be other facilities in which  adequate
  treatment is available through public funding and there  may  be  private
  facilities in which the appellant could - with the support of her  family
  - access adequate treatment for her son.  Whilst I am prepared to  accept
  that there is some benefit in E receiving a continuity of care from GOSH,
  I cannot find on the evidence before me that his best interests  militate
  in favour of him and his mother remaining in the  UK  on  account  of  an
  absence of suitable treatment in Albania.  In light of the fact  that  he
  would be accompanying his mother to the country of their nationality, and
  taking into account  the  absence  of  adequate  evidence  to  show  that
  treatment would not be available, I find that E's best interests  are  to
  follow his mother to Albania".

14. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal  the  appellant  abandoned  any
claim based on Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

15. The Upper Tribunal Judge found  the  following  errors  of  law  in  the
decision as it related to Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
Rights.  First, there was  no  consideration  of  any  improvement  in  the
appellant's son's condition so that the circumstances that led to his being
given discretionary leave may have changed.  Second, the  finding  that  it
was in E's best interest to accompany  his  mother  to  Albania  was  wrong
because there was no medical evidence to show that treatment was  available
to Albania or that the support and assistance available in school would  be
reproduced.  Third, there was no  adequate  assessment  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal  of  how  care  could  be  transferred  to  a  different  hospital
presumably in Albania.

16. The remitted hearing of  the  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge M A Khan.  It is his decision to dismiss the appeal before  him  that
came before me.

17. Judge Khan heard evidence and considered the material before him.

18. He found the appellant to be generally incredible and gave  reasons  for
that finding.

19. He set out his conclusions as to this appeal from paragraph 35.

20. At paragraph 38 he set out a large quotation from a letter of Dr  Ashraf
Gabr who was an associate specialist in paediatrics  dated  15  July  2019.
This referred to E being "significantly much better".

21. He then looked at a letter from E's general medical  practitioner  dated
27 September 2019.  This referred to E being diagnosed at a very young  age
with a variety of related problems and his condition being managed  at  the
Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children  and  there  being  "no  definite
improvement overall" and E requiring "twice daily catheterisation".

22. Judge Khan then noted part of Dr Gabr's letter where Dr Gabr  said  that
E needed a "multidisciplinary team in paediatric  urology  and  nephrology"
but then said he could not comment on whether such a team was available  in
Albania.

23. Judge Khan then referred to a letter dated 8 November  2019  written  by
one Karen Ryan who, according to the judge, "appears to be a nurse".

24. I consider that letter now.  There is no doubt  that  Karen  Ryan  is  a
nurse.  She identifies her qualifications as "CNS Urology".  At the risk of
stating the obvious, "CNS" indicates "Clinical  Nurse  Specialist"  and  is
regarded as a higher nursing qualification.  Ms Ryan  opines  that  "it  is
unlikely that this level of specialism is available in Albania" but  offers
no explanation to justify that opinion.  Judge Khan then  referred  to  the
care plan for E and the observation that it was "extremely unlikely" that E
would be taken ill suddenly at school.

25. At paragraph 45 Judge Khan said:

  "Clearly things have moved on from E's early life as a baby.  Although he
  is regularly assessed and monitored by Dr Gabr, there is  no  mention  of
  any further treatment by way of operations suggested by Dr Gabr.  Dr Gabr
  states that he cannot comment on the health system and  the  availability
  for E's treatment in Albania".

26. The Judge Khan noted that it was not for  the  respondent  to  establish
that treatment was available but for the appellant to show that it was not.



27. It was the appellant's oral evidence that she had not made enquiries  as
to whether any facilities were available in Albania which  may  not  be  as
good as those in the United Kingdom but which would still be of significant
value.

28. The judge did note a statement  from  the  appellant's  solicitors  that
they had been in contact with the school  in  Albania  and  referred  to  a
written response from the school.   The  judge  described  the  appellant's
evidence as "neither persuasive nor believable, particularly  in  light  of
previous credibility findings on his [sic] evidence."

29. Judge Khan did have a document  that  at  least  identified  the  MedCOI
response indicating that general  medical  and  inpatient  treatment  by  a
paediatrician is available for these conditions.

30. Having acknowledged the seriousness of the condition  Judge  Khan  found
that the appellant had benefited from many procedures  and  operations  and
the situation was "nowhere as near as it was in April 2017" (paragraph 48).



31. Judge Khan's Decision  and  Reasons  is  criticised  and  permission  to
appeal was given by a First-tier Tribunal Judge.

32. I can simplify things  to  some  extent  by  recording  that  Mr  Clarke
accepted that there were things to criticise in the decision of Judge Khan.
 Whilst there is certainly evidence of continuing treatment and evidence of
relative wellness it is hard  to  see  how  Judge  Khan  concluded  on  the
evidence before him  that  there  was  a  significant  improvement  in  the
appellant's  child's  condition.   Indeed,  there  seems  to  be  no  clear
prognosis for E at all.  To some extent the medical practitioners will have
to await events.

33. However, Judge Khan did  find  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  was
sourced properly before the Tribunal that some treatment would be available
and he clearly weighed this against the absence of evidence that  treatment
would not be available which he clearly recognised as a continuing  problem
in the evidence before him.

34. There was no clear and reasoned finding about the best interests  of  E.
To me it seems clear on the evidence the best interests of E are to  remain
in the United Kingdom with his mother who will support him as  he  benefits
from treatment under the health service and from  a  school  where  special
provisions are made and where he is making a good impression.  It does  not
seem to be suggested anywhere that E would get better treatment in  Albania
and the  evidence  about  what  treatment  is  available  is  very  scanty.
However, it is trite law that  the  best  interests  of  a  child  are  not
determinative of an appeal and certainly not determinative of  the  outcome
of a human rights balancing exercise.

35. I consider the grounds in more detail.

36. Paragraph 3 begins with the assertion that the  appellant  and  her  son
were granted discretionary leave "to remain in the United Kingdom  for  the
son to continue his medical treatment and for his long term prognosis to be
clarified".  It is not absolutely clear to me where this phrase  originates
or that it is strictly correct although it  is  said  that  the  Presenting
Officer confirmed that this was the position according to the notes on  the
Home Office system.  I do accept that it is a fair general  description  of
the reasons for giving discretionary leave.

37. According to the grounds, in the refusal letter the Secretary  of  State
considered the earlier grant of  discretionary  leave  and  said  that  the
circumstances resulting in this grant "no longer  prevail".   It  was  said
that the child E's condition had been  diagnosed  and  had  stabilised  and
there had been necessary follow-up treatment available in Albania.

38. The grounds point out that further surgery is  planned  and  that  Judge
Khan has significantly understated the  severity  of  E's  condition.   The
grounds also contend that the judge was wrong to find  that  the  appellant
had family contacts and had not given  proper  reasons  for  rejecting  her
evidence to the contrary.

39. At paragraph 15 Judge Khan is  criticised  further.   The  grounds  also
complain that, contrary to the finding of  the  judge,  the  appellant  had
provided a letter from Dr Buba about  treatment  in  Albania  and  she  had
contacted schools but they were not very responsive.  The grounds  conclude
with the assertion that if  the  appellants  (plural)  are  entitled  to  a
further grant of discretionary leave then there is no  public  interest  in
their removal.  That much is probably uncontroversial.  It is the word "if"
that is the problem.

40. In an effort to expedite the case efficiently in the  time  of  national
lockdown Directions were given that led to the  appellant  serving  written
submissions.  These are signed by Mr Wilding.  Appropriately, they echo the
grounds.  They begin by complaining that the judge did not outline the kind
of life the appellant's son would face in Albania in the light of the known
medical conditions and available treatment and associated with this how the
appellant herself would cope.  They criticise the judge  for  his  apparent
dismissal of the nurse's letter and  repeat  the  evidence  that  he  needs
multidisciplinary treatment.  They remind me of the reports of Dr Gabr,  Dr
Cukow and Dr Hayes.  They complain that there is no "best interest" finding
at all and certainly not in the light of the  evidence  about  the  child's
health and likely circumstances in Albania.   They  further  complain  that
Judge Khan did not consider properly the appellant's explanation for  being
unable to obtain a death certificate for her father.  It is the appellant's
case that she had always lost contact with her family and such things  were
not available.

41.  They  conclude  by  complaining  that  the   balancing   exercise   was
inadequate.

42. These things were developed in submissions before me.

43. There is the Rule 24 Notice in the form of a letter signed by  Mr  Chris
Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.  The letter points  out  that
the findings about the death certificate are part  of  an  overall  adverse
credibility finding and says that the judge  did  refer  generally  to  the
medical evidence but this is not a  particularly  illuminating  or  helpful
document.

44. As is apparent from my commentary, there  are  certain  points  where  I
agree with the criticisms made  in  the  grounds.   Judge  Khan's  apparent
conclusion that there has been a significant improvement in the appellant's
child's condition is not supported by the evidence.  He has got  older  and
is doing well at school and his condition is better understood  but  he  is
still a very damaged and poorly child.  There is no thorough evaluation  of
the conditions facing the appellant or the child on return but  neither  is
there any good evidence, as far as I can see, that the appellant would  not
be able to cope if she were not able to get treatment for the child.

45. I agree with Mr Avery's rather  isolated  submission  that  there  is  a
general adverse credibility finding  and  this  is  brought  about  by  the
appellant's own conduct.  She has not shown that she would not have contact
with her family and that does make a difference to any balancing exercise.

46. I cannot agree that there is any kind of public law  obligation  to  the
appellant created by the period of leave granted after the  first  hearing.
That was something the Secretary of State wanted to consider and  this  was
done.  What Mr Wilding was not able to  do  was  to  identify  any  present
policy now that entitles the appellant to remain or that in any  other  way
shows an obligation entitling her to remain.  It is not a good point and Mr
Wilding did not make much of it.

47. Mr Clarke had one strong point and  he  advanced  emphatically.  However
much sympathy one must feel towards  this  child  and  the  mother  who  is
clearly doing all that can be expected there is not any evidence  that  the
child cannot manage in Albania.  There is evidence  from  competent  people
that hospitals cannot provide  care  but  there  is  no  evidence  that  no
hospital can provide care.  It  is  not  sufficient  to  say  that  private
hospitals might be able to do something but the writer does not know.  That
writer may not know but someone else needs to be asked  and  Mr  Clarke  is
right to say that is not for  the  Secretary  of  State.   It  is  for  the
appellant to show that she cannot take the child to Albania and get  proper
care and she has not excluded possibilities that are identified in her  own
evidence.

48. I fully accept that the child's conditions are complex.  I would not  be
surprised if it is the case that there  is  nowhere  in  Albania  that  can
provide appropriate, still less comparable, give support but I do not  know
that and I cannot make decisions based on what boils down to "gut instinct"
and what might be an  entirely  unjustified  prejudice  against  healthcare
facilities in Albania.  It is for the appellant to show  me.  She  has  had
help from solicitors for some time and the evidence is not there.   Without
that evidence the other criticisms fall away because they are not material.

49. Judge Khan has clearly had regard for child's state.  I do  not  suggest
for a moment that Judge Khan has persuaded himself that  the  child  is  in
good health but any suggestion in his decision that the child does not need
constant care and supervision in the sense of regular contact with  medical
specialists  is  unsound.   None  of  this  matters  because  the  evidence
necessary for a conclusion to lead to this appeal  being  allowed  has  not
been laid and the decision is not deficient in a way that matters.

50. There is some suggestion before me that fresh evidence  has  been  found
of a kind that is suitable to assist the appellant.  If that is right  then
I respectfully ask the Secretary of State to give it appropriate  care  and
not to be in a hurry to say it should have been produced  earlier  so  will
not be considered now.  This case is about the welfare of a child with very
significant physical difficulties and a mother who is managing but probably
needs some support.  The main reason for dismissing the appeal is, I  find,
sound, namely that the evidence necessary to allow the appeal  had  not  be
led. If it is produced then I hope that the Secretary of State  will  think
carefully.

51. Nevertheless without in any way undermining the good  work  done  by  Mr
Wilding and his solicitors the necessary work to lead to the  appeal  being
allowed has not been done.  Judge Khan could not have allowed  this  appeal
on the material before him because the evidence was not there to show  that
the necessary treatment for the child was not available to the child in the
event of return to Albania.

52.  It  follows  that  I   dismiss   the   appeal   as   indicated   above.





Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 1 March 2021                   |






