
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11566/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th December 2019                        |On 4th February 2020          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     AB
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Mair, Counsel instructed by D & A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"),
      and it is appropriate that a direction is made. Unless and until a
      Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, AB is granted anonymity. No
      report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her
      or any member of her family.  This direction applies amongst others to
      all parties. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
      contempt of court proceedings.


   2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  Her appeal against a decision
      of the respondent dated 9th November 2015 to refuse her application
      for  indefinite leave to remain as a victim of domestic violence was
      dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge ("the judge") for reasons
      set out in a decision promulgated on 21st March 2017.


   3. At paragraph [12] of the decision, the judge identifies the two issues
      that arose in the appeal. First, whether the appellant meets the
      requirements for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom as
      the victim of domestic violence as set out in paragraph 289A of the
      immigration rules. Second, whether the application for  indefinite
      leave to remain could be refused under paragraph 322(2) of the rules.


   4.  The judge refers to the evidence that was before the Tribunal at
      paragraphs [14] to [20] of the decision.  At paragraphs [14] and [15],
      the judge referred to a report of 'Domestic Violence Incident - Non-
      Crime' relating to an incident recorded in a Police Log from West
      Midlands police.  In addition to that evidence the judge refers to the
      evidence of the appellant and two witnesses, [MA] and [AQ].  The
      evidence of the appellant was that there had been a number of
      incidents of abuse from the family of her husband culminating in the
      incident where the police attended and she was take away by the police
      to a relative's house.  The judge considered there to be significant
      discrepancies in the evidence of the witnesses, and the lack of any
      record in the police log of a physical assault. The judge found the
      evidence of [AQ] to be unreliable and at paragraphs [25] and [26], the
      judge stated:


         "25. In the circumstances given the myriad inconsistencies, I
         cannot accept that the appellant's account is reliable. Whilst it
         must be considered " a piece of evidence that the appellant was
         subject to domestic violence", to quote the reasons for refusal
         letter, that can only be the case taking the appellant's account at
         its highest.

         26.  I am not, however, prepared to take the appellant's case as
         described in her statement at its highest. The appellant paints a
         picture of being controlled by her husband and his family which is
         at odds with someone who had the support of her father-in-law. As
         the "pater familias" and head of the household I cannot accept she
         would have been so constantly badly treated as she described
         without his intervening."

   5. At paragraph [29], the judge concluded:


         "I am satisfied that the appellant has simply been party to an
         unhappy marriage with the added misfortune of friendly female in-
         laws. Whilst I am conscious that domestic violence does not require
         physical assaults and can involve psychological and controlling
         behaviour as well as verbal abuse. To find as a fact that the
         appellant has been subjected to that would involve me having to
         accept the uncorroborated evidence of the appellant. In the
         circumstances I am not prepared to do that, especially as the only
         really testable evidence is in relation to the police incident
         where I find the appellant is unreliable."

The appeal before me


   6. The appellant claims the judge erred in the assessment of the
      evidence.  The appellant had provided evidence of domestic violence in
      the form of a 'Police log' and evidence that the police were called to
      the former matrimonial home.  The evidence established that the
      appellant had left the property and the incident had been
      characterised by the police as one of "domestic violence".  The
      appellant refers to the published guidance of the respondent which
      provides information about the documentary evidence that is required
      in support of an application where it is alleged that the relationship
      was caused to permanently breakdown as a result of domestic violence.
      The respondent recognises in the published guidance, that victims may
      not have official documentary evidence to prove domestic violence but
      evidence such as a police report which confirms attendance at an
      incident resulting from domestic violence, is of assistance. It is
      said that, in paragraph [25], the judge refers to the appellant's
      account as being unreliable, but  appears to accept that the police
      log is "a piece of evidence that the  appellant was subject to
      domestic violence", but only if the appellant's case is taken at its
      highest.   That implies a requirement for a standard higher than the
      balance of probabilities in the judge's consideration of the claim.


   7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on 15
      November 2017. The matter comes before me to determine whether there
      is a material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,
      and if so, to remake the decision.


   8. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Mills, rightly in my judgment,
      concedes there is a material error of law in the decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal.  He accepts that the appellant had provided a copy of a
      police report which confirms attendance by the police at an incident
      resulting from domestic violence. He accepts therefore, that there was
      sufficient evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to establish that
      the requirements for indefinite leave to remain in the UK as the
      victim of domestic violence, as set out in Paragraph 289A of the
      immigration rules, are met by the appellant.    He accepts that the
      decision as to whether the application for  indefinite leave to remain
      could be refused under paragraph 322(2) of the rules, is closely
      aligned to the question whether the appellant was the victim of
      domestic violence, given the circumstances in which the appellant
      claimed the TOEIC certificate had been obtained.  She claimed that her
      husband had made the arrangements for the TOEIC certificate as part
      and parcel of the controlling behaviour that was exercised over her.


   9. Mr Mills concedes therefore that the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Lodge should be set aside, and, that I should remake the
      decision allowing the appeal.  I do so.


Decision:


  10. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge is set aside


  11. I remake the decision and allow the appeal

Signed                                  Date          24th January 2020


 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




