
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11094/2018
                                                               HU/11095/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision & Reason promulgated
On 8th April 2019 On 10th May 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                              MRS POOJABEN [P]
                              MR JATINKUMAR [P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS NOT MADE)
                                                          Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                          Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms U Dirie, Counsel, instructed by G Singh
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The 1st appellant is married to the 2nd appellant. They are nationals
      of India. The 2nd named appellant was born on 21 May 1984. He came to
      the United Kingdom on 29 September 2011 with leave until 13 August
      2014 as a student. The 1st appellant joined him as a dependent on 7
      May 2013. She had leave in line with her husband's until 13 August
      2014.

   2. On 12 August 2014 the 2nd appellant applied for further leave to
      remain as a Tier 2 general migrant. This was refused on 3 November
      2015. The respondent contended he had earlier been working as a
      manager of his uncle's shop in breach of his earlier leave.

   3. In November 2016 the appellants were detained after reporting and were
      to be removed. Following judicial review proceedings being intimated
      they were released the following day. On 6 May 2017 the 1st appellant
      gave birth to their son, [P].

   4. On 16 March 2017 the 1st appellant applied for leave to remain on the
      basis of her article 8 rights. Her husband was named as her dependent.
      The covering letter emphasised the 1st appellant's mental health and
      enclosed a psychiatric report from a Dr Singh dated 7 March 2017.

   5. Her application was refused on 4 May 2018. By that stage their child
      had been born. The refusal letter referred to appendix FM and family
      life and pointed out that neither were British and they were living as
      part of a family unit and would be returned as such. In terms of
      private life and paragraph 276 ADE the appellant had not been here the
      necessary 20 years. The respondent did not see any significant
      obstacles to her reintegration. Similar reasons were given in relation
      to the 2nd appellant. No exceptional circumstances were identified.

The First tier Tribunal

   6. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Malley at Taylor
      House on 27 November 2018. Both parties were represented. The judge
      heard from the second appellant and his uncle. In a decision
      promulgated on 21 January 2019 the appeals were dismissed. At hearing,
      the 2nd appellant was cross-examined about medical services available
      in India. He accepted this was not an issue but said that the 1st
      appellant, because of her mental state, could not travel to India and
      referred to the potential impact upon her mental health by removal.
      The judge also heard from the 2nd appellant's uncle who said he could
      not take responsibility for accompanying the first appellant to India.

   7. First-tier Tribunal judge O'Malley accepted the medical evidence
      demonstrated that the 1st appellant had struggled with mental health
      issues since her detention in November 2016 and there was reference to
      post-traumatic stress disorder from this. There was also a current
      diagnosis of postnatal depression. She was described by the consultant
      as suffering from severe depression, which the judge accepted. There
      was reference to panic attacks and moderate post-traumatic stress.

   8. The judge referred to the case law in relation to medical claims and
      the high threshold in order to succeed. The judge did not accept the
      view of the psychiatrist that if she did not have a settled status
      here then she would take her own life. The judge said there was a need
      for clarification of this conclusion, pointing out the appellant had
      been in a state of uncertainty about her right to remain since 2014
      and to date had been no attempts at self-harm. The judge also felt
      this was at odds with views expressed in letters from her GP.

   9. The judge accepted that flying to India would increase her emotional
      distress and would be likely to lead to a panic attack. However, the
      judge concluded appropriate steps could be taken to ensure her safety
      on the flight.

  10. The judge also heard about the first appellant's family in India and
      accepted that whilst there was no suggestion of a breakdown in
      relations the appellant did not want to share her medical condition
      with them. The judge concluded the situation would not engage article
      3. The judge accepted there was medical treatment available in India
      and she would be able to access this.

  11. The judge found the decision did not engage family life and they would
      be returned as a family unit. Regarding their child the judge
      concluded his best interests were served by being with both parents
      and he had no strong ties to the United Kingdom given his age.

  12. Regarding private life the judge did not find significant obstacles to
      return. Again, reference is made to the availability of treatment in
      India. Regard was had to the factors set out in section 117 B.

  13. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on the basis the
      judge should have raised with the appellant's representatives concerns
      about the content of the psychiatric report so that they could
      respond. For instance, the Judge said the conclusion in the report
      that the appellant would take hello life if you did not have a right
      to remain require clarification.

  14. It was also contended that the judge erred in concluding the appellant
      would seek treatment in India because she had sought treatment in the
      United Kingdom. The psychiatrist was of the view that the appellant
      would not access treatment in India due to feelings of shame. It was
      also contended that there were no adequate measures that can be taken
      to protect her against self-harm if returned to India.



The Upper Tribunal

  15. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
      judge erred at paragraph 61 in stating it was not clear how the
      consultant psychiatrist reached the conclusion that the risk of self-
      harm was high given the absence of any such history or comment by the
      GP.

  16. Permission was also granted in relation to what was said at paragraph
      62 that the judge may have erred in rejecting the claim that if the
      first appellant continued to be under threat of removal it would drive
      her to take her own life.

  17. The appellant's representative relied upon the grounds for which
      permission had been granted. Reference was made to the Judge's
      comments at paragraph 64 and it was said the first appellant's
      anxiousness about her family's attitude came within the scope of Y &
      Anor (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]
      EWCA Civ 362. I was referred paragraph 36 of that judgement:

         "... a series of cases, of which J is the best known, have
         acknowledged that returning someone to a situation which is likely
         to drive them to suicide is a breach of art. 3, the mode of
         reasoning in the present case (which is far from unique) is such
         that no art. 3 "foreign" claim based on a risk of suicide is likely
         ever to succeed. Indeed Hughes LJ in AJ (Liberia) v Home
         Secretary [2006] EWCA Civ 1736 remarked on the fact that, so far as
         the reported cases went, none ever had. The reasoning is that,
         since Y had made no attempt at suicide despite more than one
         refusal of his asylum claim, and since Z's attempt at suicide had
         not been seriously life-threatening...there is no real risk that
         return will impel either appellant to commit suicide. The effect is
         that, apart from an asylum-seeker who actually commits suicide,
         only one who comes close enough to succeeding to manifest a serious
         intent is going to be regarded as presenting a serious risk of
         suicide on return. Yet the medical logic is exactly the reverse: it
         is that individuals who are at serious risk of suicide if returned
         can be stabilised, using therapy and medication, and kept from self-
         harm so long as they feel safe here. For such individuals the
         recent past may be no guide at all to the immediate future."

  18. In response, Mr Jarvis pointed out that the judge had accepted much of
      the history given as set out at paragraph 53 onwards. He contended
      that in the absence of an express concession the judge was entitled to
      make their own assessment of the risk presented. There were medical
      facilities available in India and the judge was entitled to find that
      she would access treatment on return. Regarding the practicalities of
      her return to India it was pointed out you were travelling with her
      husband who could tend to her needs.

   Consideration

  19. First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Malley set out the sequencing at paragraph
      53. The judge set out the medical evidence at paragraph 60 and
      directed themselves of the dangers, both before, during, and after
      removal. This followed on the acceptance at paragraph 59 that the
      appellant had struggled with mental health problems since detention in
      November 2016 and subsequently develop postnatal depression. The judge
      recited the case law and in relation to health cases from paragraph 15
      onwards and reference the high threshold involved.

  20. The judge evaluated the reports from the consultant psychiatrist. The
      judge at paragraph 61 did however question the psychiatrist's opinion
      that forced removal would drive her to kill herself. It was open to
      the judge to make this point. The judge is not bound to automatically
      accept every aspect of the report. The judge asked themselves the
      right questions and when the judge refers to the psychiatrist
      conclusions needing clarification this is by way of a figure of
      speech. I take the judge to mean the conclusion reached on certain
      aspects by the psychiatrist does not follow.

  21.  The judge had similarly queried the doctor's view that if her
      immigration status remained uncertain this would drive her to take her
      own life. The judge made the point that she had been here and her
      immigration status was uncertain and had not harmed herself. I
      appreciate that simply because at person has not historically harmed
      themselves is not mean in a different environment they would not do
      so. In Y & Anor (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362 there were additional stressors, namely
      past events in Sri Lanka and a fear of harm from others plus the
      devastation caused by the tsunami. In the present instance the
      appellant was being returned to a country where she has family and
      which has not experienced in recent times widespread violence.

  22. The judge in reaching a decision noted there was medical treatment
      available in India. There was also no disharmony amongst her family
      who could be expected to support her. The judge was entitled to assess
      the medical evidence and reached a conclusion that was open for the
      reasons stated. In summary, I find no material error of law
      established.

Decision.

No material error of law has been established. Consequently, the decision
of first-tier Tribunal judge O'Malley dismissing the appellant's appeal
shall stand


                                                         Deputy Upper
Tribunal Judge Farrelly.

