
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11191/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 2 October 2018                   |On: 31 October 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                           MR PHURIWAT VICHIENARAT
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Bellara of Counsel
For the respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Thailand, appealed against the decision  of
    the respondent, refusing to Tim further leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom under Appendix FM of the immigration rules and Article 8 of the
    European Convention  on  Human  Rights.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  C
    Greasely dismissed the appellant's appeal in a decision promulgated  on
    20 April 2018.

 2. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  PJM
    Hollingworth on 13  August  2018  stating  that  it  is  arguable  that
    unfairness has been  seen  to  arise  because  the  appellant  was  not
    represented at the hearing because is Counsel was not able to attend.

 3. At the hearing there was no dispute that unfairness had  risen  because
    the appellant was not represented at the hearing  as  Counsel  was  not
    able to attend due to a family bereavement and was urgently required to
    fly abroad with his wife and daughter. The solicitors for the appellant
    had sent a fax on the morning of the hearing and Counsel had telephoned
    the appellant on the morning of the hearing telling him  he  could  not
    attend the hearing. Mr Bellara said that it was the  Easter  break  and
    therefore it was not possible to instruct an alternative Counsel.

 4. The appellant is entitled to legal representation and through no  fault
    of his he was not able to receive it at the  hearing.  The  appellant's
    legal representatives took all due steps to inform  the  Tribunal  that
    Counsel could not attend the hearing. In the circumstances  the  appeal
    hearing should have been adjourned. As a  consequence,  unfairness  has
    resulted.

 5. In the circumstances, I direct that the appeal  be  placed  before  any
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  apart  from  first-tier  Tribunal  Judge  C
    Greasly for the appeal to be heard de novo.

    Decision

    Appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal



Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                  Ms S Chana
                                         Dated this 23rd day of October 2018












