
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11203/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th January 2018                 |On 31st January 2018                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                              MR DALE MCINTIER
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by EMLC
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. This is an appeal against a decision by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Green dismissing an appeal on human rights grounds.


      2. The appellant is a US citizen aged sixty-two.  He entered the UK as
         a visitor in April 2015.  His wife, Sandra McIntier, is  a  British
         citizen.  The couple lived together in the USA for some years.  The
         appellant's wife  became  ill  and,  being  dissatisfied  with  the
         medical treatment she received in the USA, returned to the  UK  for
         treatment.


      3. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal accepted that the  appellant's
         wife is significantly disabled.  She has a variety  of  health  and
         care needs and the appellant is her primary carer.  The  judge  was
         not satisfied, however, that her care needs could  not  be  met  by
         someone else and, if necessary, that she would  not  be  adequately
         cared for by the state.  If the appellant were to return to the USA
         to apply for entry clearance the couple  could  stay  in  touch  by
         telephone and social media.


      4. The judge further found that the appellant receives a pension  from
         the USA.  He has a son there and an interest in a property.   There
         were no very significant  obstacles  to  his  return  even  for  an
         indefinite period.


      5.  The  judge  considered  whether   there   were   any   exceptional
         circumstances which would render refusal of  leave  and  removal  a
         breach of Article 8.   Temporary  separation  while  the  appellant
         obtained entry clearance would not be disproportionate, in terms of
         Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 and Hayat [2012] EWCA Civ 1054.


      6. The application  for  permission  to  appeal  addressed  first  the
         question of whether the appellant should be expected to  return  to
         the USA to obtain entry clearance.  It was contended that the First-
         tier Tribunal had  conflated  the  test  of  whether  there  was  a
         sensible reason for requiring the appellant to return to the USA to
         apply for entry clearance with the test of whether there were  very
         compelling reasons for the appellant to stay in the UK.  It was not
         clear that the judge of the First-tier Tribunal  had  in  mind  the
         correct question.  There was no sensible reason for  the  appellant
         to return as he met the relevant requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules.


      7. Secondly the application contended  that  in  assessing  the  claim
         outwith the Rules the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  have  proper
         regard  to  the  evidence  and  reached  findings  which  were  not
         adequately supported in fact or law.  The First-tier Tribunal found
         the impact on the appellant's family life  were  the  appellant  to
         leave the UK indefinitely  would  not  be  disproportionate.    The
         Tribunal did not, however, set out what this impact  would  be  and
         such a finding was not  supported  by  the  case  law.   Where  the
         appellant was his wife's primary carer, family life  could  not  be
         maintained by Skype, email and occasional visits.  The question was
         raised  of  whether  the  appellant's  wife  could  afford  medical
         treatment.


      8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that all the  grounds
         were arguable.



Submissions


      9. At the hearing Mr Winter addressed me on the circumstances  of  the
         appellant and his wife and drew my attention to the grounds of  the
         application for  permission  to  appeal.   Mr  Winter  referred  to
         paragraph 22 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Here  the
         judge stated that he had already set out the impact on family  life
         of the appellant returning to the USA indefinitely.   In  fact  the
         judge had not set out the impact of this.  Even if he had done  so,
         the appellant's wife would stay in the UK  for  medical  treatment.
         Family life could not be maintained  by  electronic  communications
         and occasional visits.  The appellant was the primary carer for his
         wife.  His wife's permanent residence in the USA had  lapsed.   She
         was in receipt of attendance allowance at the higher rate for  help
         and supervision by both day and night.  Her GP said she was not  in
         a position to fly to the USA.


     10. For the respondent Mr Matthews referred  to  paragraph  15  of  the
         decision, where the judge looked at the intentions of the appellant
         and his wife and observed that they were not particularly  reliable
         witnesses.  This was relevant because the appellant  entered  as  a
         visitor and attempted to switch to a partner, which was not allowed
         under the Immigration Rules.  At paragraph 16 the  judge  correctly
         noted that paragraph EX.1 of Appendix  FM  of  the  Rules  did  not
         apply.  At paragraph 17 the judge set out the medical evidence.  At
         paragraph 18 the judge accepted that the appellant was  his  wife's
         primary carer but was not satisfied that her care needs  could  not
         be met by alternative means.  The judge then proceeded to  consider
         whether the appellant could return to the USA to  apply  for  entry
         clearance or to carry on family life and found the appellant  could
         do either.  The judge considered the effect of  separation  on  the
         appellant's wife's health needs.


     11. Mr Matthews then turned to the case law on requiring  a  person  to
         return to their country of origin to  apply  for  entry  clearance.
         The most recent case on this was Chen IJR [2015] UKUT 00189.   This
         stated at paragraph  39  that  an  appellant  would  need  to  show
         significant  interference  with  family  life  arising   from   the
         requirement to apply  for  entry  clearance.   This  was  the  test
         applied by the  judge.   The  judge  took  account  of  the  public
         interest arising from the appellant having entered  as  a  visitor.
         At paragraph 22  the  judge  found  the  public  interest  was  not
         outweighed in the balancing exercise under Article 8.  This finding
         could only have been made in the context of respect for family life
         as set out in Chen.  Mr Matthews  pointed  out  that  in  terms  of
         Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC  11  the  public  interest  must   be   given
         appropriate  weight  and  the  test  of  compelling   circumstances
         required  to  be  considered  through  the  terms  of   the   Rules
         themselves.  In this case there was a non-switching rule,  although
         this was not necessarily the only aspect of the public interest  to
         be considered.  The judge found  it  was  not  disproportionate  to
         expect the appellant to apply for entry  clearance  and  there  was
         also an issue of choice as to where  the  appellant  and  his  wife
         would carry on family life.  There was no error of  law  identified
         in the application for permission to appeal.


     12. In response Mr Winter referred to Rhappiah [2016] EWCA Civ  803  as
         showing that the public interest could be outweighed by special  or
         compelling circumstances.  Here there was the medical condition  of
         the appellant's wife and the appellant's role as her primary carer.
          Mr Winter further submitted that the  decision  in  Chen  did  not
         alter the effect of Chikwamba or Hayat.  The decision in  Chikwamba
         was upheld in Agyarko.   Mr  Winter  sought  to  rely  also  on  MA
         (Pakistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 953.   A  disproportionate  interference
         would arise given the level of care  required  by  the  appellant's
         wife.  Mr Winter referred to his written submissions for the First-
         tier Tribunal in which it as pointed out that the appellant met all
         the requirements for entry clearance.

Discussion


     13. I may interfere with the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  only
         if the decision is based upon an error  of  law.   As  Mr  Matthews
         pointed out, there are two aspects to the decision.  The  first  is
         whether it would be disproportionate if the choice by the appellant
         and his wife to carry on family life in  the  UK  were  not  to  be
         respected.  The second was whether it would be disproportionate  to
         require the appellant to return to  the  USA  to  apply  for  entry
         clearance  as  a  partner.   In  essence,  even  if  it  would   be
         disproportionate to expect the couple to carry on their family life
         outwith the UK, the appeal would still not succeed if it would  not
         be disproportionate to require an application for entry  clearance.
         The effect of this is that if the Judge of the First -tier Tribunal
         was correct in expecting an application for entry clearance  to  be
         made then any error in relation to the proportionality of  carrying
         on family lie outwith the UK would not necessarily be material.


     14. With this point in mind it  appears  I  should  address  first  the
         judge's approach to the question  of  requiring  the  appellant  to
         apply for entry clearance.  The starting point for this question is
         still the decision of the House of Lords in Chikwamba, in which  it
         was  acknowledged  that  it  would  not  always  be  necessary  and
         proportionate to expect a person who could not meet the Immigration
         Rules from within the UK to leave this country to apply  for  entry
         clearance from abroad.   Mr  Winter  submitted  that  the  test  in
         Chikwamaba was not affected by the more recent decision in  Agyarko
         and this is confirmed by the reference to Chikwamba at paragraph 51
         of Agyarko.


     15. In relation to how the Chikwamba principle is  to  be  applied,  Mr
         Matthews referred me, in particular, to paragraphs 36 and 39 of the
         decision in Chen.  He submitted that in terms of  paragraph  36  it
         was not necessary to  show  a  sensible  reason  for  requiring  an
         application for entry  clearance  to  be  made.   It  was  for  the
         appellant to show that removal pursuant to  the  refusal  of  leave
         would breach Article 8.  Paragraph 39 requires  a  person  to  show
         that there would  be  significant  interference  with  family  life
         arising from temporary removal to apply for entry clearance.  In Mr
         Matthews' submission this was the test the Judge of the  First-tier
         Tribunal applied in the present appeal.


     16. The judge's reasoning on whether requiring the appellant  to  apply
         for   entry   clearance   would   constitute   a   disproportionate
         interference with family life is to be found at paragraph 22 of the
         decision.  Here the judge  initially  emphasises  the  question  of
         whether there is a "sensible reason" to require an application  for
         entry clearance.  As stated at paragraph 36 of Chen,  to  pose  the
         question in these terms is a misunderstanding of  the  decision  of
         the Court  of  Appeal  in  Hayat,  to  which  the  judge  referred.
         Although the decision in Chen was before the  judge,  he  does  not
         appear to have had regard to it.


     17. As paragraph 22 proceeds the  judge  appears  to  state  two  quite
         contradictory tests.  He states on  the  one  hand,  supposedly  in
         reliance on Hayat: "If the requirement to apply for entry clearance
         constitutes a disruption sufficient to engage Article 8, there will
         be a disproportionate  interference  unless  there  is  a  sensible
         reason for insisting on it."


     18. Further on in the same paragraph the judge states: "Where Article 8
         is engaged and there is no sensible reason for the disruption,  the
         Article 8 claim should be determined on its substantive merits.   I
         accept that there will be some hardship for the Appellant  and  his
         wife but I am not prepared to go so far,  based  on  the  evidence,
         this amounts to undue hardship and a very compelling reason for the
         Appellant's appeal to be allowed."


     19. Thus the judge sets out in the same paragraph these  two  different
         tests, neither of which is correctly stated.  On  the  first  test,
         according to the judge, if Article 8 is engaged  and  there  is  no
         sensible reason for requiring an application for  entry  clearance,
         both of which conditions the judge appears to accept are met,  then
         on the judge's own reasoning the appeal should have  been  allowed.
         Instead of reaching a decision in these terms, however,  the  judge
         proceeded to expound a second test, stating there is in essence  no
         difference between the test for requiring an application for  entry
         clearance and the test for allowing an appeal under Article 8 where
         the question of making an application for entry clearance does  not
         arise.  If this were correct, then the decision in Chikwamaba would
         be  irrelevant.   The  test  would  always  be  simply  the  normal
         balancing exercise under Article 8.


     20. While in Chen, at paragraph 36, it was pointed out  that  it  is  a
         misreading  of  Hayat  to  look  for  a  sensible  reason  why   an
         application for entry clearance should be made, as pointed  out  at
         paragraph 39 it is open to an appellant to show that an application
         for entry clearance would  be  granted  and  that  there  would  be
         significant interference with family  life  by  temporary  removal.
         This reduces the weight to be given to the  formal  requirement  of
         obtaining entry clearance but it is still necessary to consider the
         individual circumstances of the case.


     21. In this appeal I accept that at paragraph 22 the judge erred in law
         by failing to set out and apply correctly the  Chikwamba  test,  as
         explained in subsequent cases, most notably Chen.  As a  result  of
         this error the judge did not properly assess the proportionality of
         requiring an application for  entry  clearance  to  be  made.   The
         decision requires to be re-made on this point.


     22. It is clear that if the proper approach is taken then requiring  an
         application for entry clearance  to  be  made  would  constitute  a
         significant interference with family life.  It does not  appear  to
         be disputed that  an  application  for  entry  clearance  would  be
         expected to succeed - the suitability and eligibility requirements,
         including those relating to  maintenance  and  accommodation  being
         met.  As far as family life is concerned the appellant and his wife
         are in a relationship of long-standing.  This  is  not  a  case  in
         which family life has been established in precarious circumstances.
          The couple lived together in the USA.  By itself the existence  of
         the relationship might not  be  sufficient  for  the  appellant  to
         succeed.  There is, however, a  further  very  significant  factor.
         This is the high degree of disability suffered by  the  appellant's
         wife and the appellant's position as her principal carer.  In  this
         regard the  judge  observed  that  if  necessary  alternative  care
         arrangements might be made but when  making  this  observation  the
         judge was not addressing the correct question.   Indeed  in  making
         his findings the judge appears to have regarded  the  appellant  as
         alternatively a carer  or  a  husband  but  rarely  seems  to  have
         considered the impact of the appellant being both a husband  and  a
         carer.


     23. The decision which should be made on the  basis  of  Chikwamba  and
         Chen is that in the circumstances of this  appeal  it  would  be  a
         disproportionate interference  with  family  life  to  require  the
         appellant to leave the UK to apply for entry clearance.  The extent
         and severity of the interference with family life arising from this
         outweighs the formal requirement of obtaining entry clearance.


     24. I have not addressed in detail the other basis for the decision  of
         the First-tier Tribunal, to  the  effect  that  in  any  event  the
         appellant  could  return  indefinitely  to  the   USA   without   a
         disproportionate interference with family life under Article 8.  Mr
         Winter submitted that the judge's  findings  in  this  regard  were
         inadequate and, although it is not necessary for me to  decide  the
         point, I am inclined to agree.  As Mr Winter pointed out, the judge
         states at paragraph 22 that he  has  set  out  the  impact  on  the
         appellant's family life were he to leave the UK  indefinitely.   It
         is difficult, however, to ascertain where precisely in the decision
         this impact is set out.  Furthermore, as I have already noted,  the
         judge appeared reluctant to take into account the appellant's  dual
         roles of both a husband and a carer.  I am not satisfied  that  the
         judge's decision on carrying on family life in the USA  is  soundly
         based, although as  the  appeal  is  allowed  under  the  Chikwamba
         principle it is not necessary for me  to  consider  this  issue  in
         further depth.  I may merely add that the parties  appeared  to  be
         agreed that none of the provisions of s 117B  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  weighed  against  the  appellant,
         although of course acknowledging the  significance  of  the  public
         interest in s 117B(1).

Conclusions

     25. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.




     26. I set aside the decision.




     27. I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal.

Anonymity

I have not been asked to make a direction for anonymity and I see no  reason
of substance for so doing.

Fee award   (N.B. This is not part of the decision.)

Although I am allowing the appeal the issues involved are  of  a  degree  of
complexity such that I do not consider it appropriate to make a fee award.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Deans 30th January 2018
