
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/11555/2017
                                                               HU/11549/2017
                                                               HU/11546/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field house                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 September 2018                   |On 03 October 2018                |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                GURSIMAR [C]
                                KARANJIT [K]
                                    [G S]
                       (anonymity directionS NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M Hare, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are nationals of India born on 28 May 1982, 10  November
    1982 and 3 February 2006 respectively. They are father, mother and son.
    They appeal against the decisions of  the  respondent  dated  September
    2017 to refuse them further leave to remain in the United Kingdom under
    paragraph 276 ADE and Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.


 2. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  PJM
    Hollingworth on 15 August 2018 stating that it  is  arguable  that  the
    third appellant's circumstances who has resided in the  United  Kingdom
    for a period in excess of seven years have not  adequately  been  taken
    into account by the Judge in light of the seven-year  policy  which  is
    now enshrined in the immigration rules and paragraph 117A.


 3. The Judge at paragraph 67 of the decision concluded  that  in  all  the
    circumstances in relation to the application of section 55, because  of
    the age of the third appellant and the time the appellant has spent  in
    the United Kingdom his best interests are  best  served  by  the  third
    appellant remaining in the United Kingdom. However, at paragraph 69 the
    Judge stated he was satisfied that it would be reasonable to expect the
    third appellant to leave the United Kingdom and return  to  India  with
    his parents. At paragraph 75 of the decision the Judge  refers  to  the
    question of whether it would be unreasonable for the third appellant to
    leave the United  Kingdom.  After  finding  that  the  appellant  would
    receive a suitable level of education in  India  at  paragraph  85  the
    Judge concluded that the third appellant's return  to  India  with  his
    parents is reasonable.


 4. The decision made many references as to whether it would be too hot for
    the appellant to live in India, whether he would have  clean  water  to
    drink and whether various insects in India will  interfere  with  third
    appellant's well-being. I find these references to these peripheral and
    irrelevant matters took away from the judge's mind the  main  issue  in
    the appeal which was the best interests of the third appellant.


 5. The Judges findings are clearly contradictory and amount to a  material
    error  of  law.  The  Judge  has  found  it  was  both  reasonable  and
    unreasonable for the third appellant to accompany his parents to India.
     Even after finding that the appellant's best  interest  to  remain  in
    this country, he went on to conclude that he can return  to  India  and
    can continue with his education in  that  country.  The  Judge  made  a
    material errors of law in the decision and I set it aside. I now remake
    the decision.


 6. There is no dispute that the second and third appellants in respect  of
    EX 1 are in a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with  the
    third appellant and the issue remains whether it be reasonable  or  not
    reasonable to expect the appellant to leave the United Kingdom  who  is
    captured by EX1 of Appendix FM.


 7. If the appellants do not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, I must consider whether the respondent's decision  breaches  the
    appellants rights under Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights.


 8. There is no issue in the appeal that the first  and  second  appellants
    are in a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  their  son,
    the third appellant who is a qualified child.  I take into account that
    the  best  interests  of  the  child  must  be  based  on   a   careful
    consideration of the likely circumstances of the appellants  and  their
    child if returned as a family unit to India.  I must consider  all  the
    factors relevant to the child's well-being in all aspects of his  life,
    if returned to India. I must determine whether it would  be  reasonable
    to expect the child to return to India with his parents or whether  his
    parents should be allowed to live in the United Kingdom with him.


 9. There is no issue in the appeal that the third appellant's parents have
    lived in this country for short periods of leave  which  were  extended
    until 2014. The third appellant came to this country dependent  of  the
    first appellant's Tier 4 student which was valid until  15  June  2010.
    The first appellant and his dependents were granted  further  leave  to
    remain  the  same  category  on  four  further  occasions   and   their
    application for further leave was refused in September 2014. The  third
    appellant now has  seven  years  continuous  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The entirety of the third appellant's education has  in  place
    in the United Kingdom. The  third  appellant  is  about  to  begin  his
    secondary education.


10. In order to answer the question as to whether it  would  be  reasonable
    for the appellant to return to  India  with  his  parents,  I  have  to
    consider all the circumstances of the qualifying child. I must consider
    the child's best interests as my primary consideration although  it  is
    not a paramount consideration. In order to determine reasonableness  of
    return, I have to first identify what the child's  best  interests  are
    and where they lie.


11. The requirement that a non-British  citizen  child  has  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom  for  a  continuous  period  of  at  least  seven  years
    immediately preceding the date of application recognises that over time
    children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the  United
    Kingdom to the extent that it may be unreasonable to require the  child
    to leave the United Kingdom. Significant weight must be given to such a
    period of continuous residence.  Continuity  of  residence  is  another
    factor; change in the place of residence where a child has grown up for
    a number of years when socially aware is important. In the  absence  of
    countervailing factors, residents of over  seven  years  with  children
    well integrated into the educational system in the United  Kingdom,  is
    an indicator that the welfare of the child  favours  regularisation  of
    the status of mother and children. The best interests of children  will
    depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length  of
    time they have been here; (c) how long they have been in education; (d)
    what stage their education has reached; (e) to what  extent  they  have
    become distanced from the country to which it  is  proposed  that  they
    return; (f) how renewable their connection with it may be; (g) to which
    extent they will have linguistic,  medical  or  other  difficulties  in
    adapting to life in that country; and  (h)  the  extent  to  which  the
    course proposed will interfere with their family life or  their  rights
    (if they have any) as British citizens. If neither parent has the right
    to remain, then that is the background against which the assessment  is
    conducted.


12. In the recent case of MT and  ET  (child's  best  interests;  extempore
    pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 88 (IAC) which case concerned a  parent  who
    had overstayed for many years and with a criminal conviction for  using
    a false document to obtain employment. Yet, these were  not  considered
    powerful reasons to require the appellant to return country. The  court
    held that the qualifying child's parent's immigration history was still
    not so bad as to constitute the kind of "powerful"  reason  that  would
    render reasonable removal of ET to Nigeria.


13. I have  to  determine  whether  there  are  powerful  reasons  for  the
    appellant who is captured by EX1 of Appendix FM to return to India with
    his parents.


14. I find the starting point as to  what  is  in  the  best  interests  of
    children is to live with their parents wherever they live. However, the
    appellant has lived in this country continuously for  more  than  seven
    years. He is starting his secondary school  and  powerful  reasons  are
    necessary to require him to leave the United Kingdom.



15. In the case of Azmi Moyed and others [2013] UKUT it was stated that the
    children's connections to the United Kingdom become more important from
    ages of 4 to 11. The appellant is now nearly an adult although  he  was
    under 18 at the time of the application. I find that his ties  to  this
    country are well established. Taking into account all the jurisprudence
    in respect of a qualifying child, I find that it not be reasonable  for
    the appellant to return to India and  there  are  no  powerful  reasons
    advanced for why  he  should  have  to  leave  given  his  seven  years
    continuous residence in this country.



16. I find taking into account all the evidence in this appeal, it would be
    unreasonable for the child to return  to  India  with  his  parents  to
    continue family and private life in that country. It follows  that  the
    first and second appellants appeals must also succeed in line with that
    of the third appellant.


17. I therefore find that all three appellants' appeals succeed  under  the
    immigration rules.


Notice of Decision

Appeals allowed for all three appellants pursuant to the Immigration Rules

I make no anonymity orders.
I have allowed the appeals, but I make no fee order.


Signed by                                  Dated this 27th day of  September
2018
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana
