
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Numbers:
HU/11661/2017

                                             hu/11672/2017

                                             hu/11696/2017

                                             HU/11697/2017

                                             hu/11698/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22nd October 2018                    | On 7th November 2018              |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                     deputy upper Tribunal judge SAFFER

                                   Between

                              mr Faisal Durrani
                                 mrs Shabana
                                  master S
                                  miss S A
                                   miss A
                          (no anonymity direction)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr C Amgbah, Solicitor, UK Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The Respondent refused the Appellants' applications for leave to remain
    on 25th September 2017.   The  appeal  from  the  family  against  this
    decision was heard on 23rd February 2018 by  Judge  Barrowclough  ("the
    judge").

 2. The judge summarised the family's history in the United Kingdom  noting
    that the initial leave granted to Mr Durrani to enter as a  student  on
    3rd May 2005 led to his wife joining him  together  with  their  eldest
    child on 27th June 2009.  The younger children  were  then  born  here.
    Leave was extended until 27th August 2010. The  final  application  for
    leave to appeal against refusal of the decision was dismissed  on  21st
    June 2011.  Subsequent  applications  for  leave  to  remain  had  been
    refused by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  appeals  dismissed  by  the
    Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
    on 28th August 2018 on one ground only.  She stated;

         "I have concluded that it is arguable the judge fell into error  in
         that, despite directing himself as to the judgment in MA (Pakistan)
         [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at [21] that "leave should  be  granted  unless
         there are powerful reasons to  the  contrary"  when  applying  that
         principle at [29] it did not identify what those  powerful  reasons
         are.  It may be that this finding is based on the matters raised at
         [22] but this is neither clear nor is this critical aspect  of  the
         appeal arguably sufficiently reasoned."

 4. Judge Chapman also stated;

         "Whilst  the  fourth  Ground  of  Appeal  makes  reference  to  the
         children's family life and psychological evidence, none appears  to
         have been filed with the Tribunal to date and the judge  cannot  be
         blamed for not taking account of evidence that was not before  him.
         Any further evidence upon which the Appellants wish to  rely  would
         need to be filed in accordance with the provisions of  Rule  15(2A)
         of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008."

 5. Permission to appeal was refused in relation to other grounds filed.

Respondent's Position

 6. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 notice on 10th October 2018.  In essence
    this says the  judge  made  a  comprehensive  determination  and  found
    powerful reasons in that he applied the ratio of MA.  The judge made no
    material error of law.

Appellant's Position

 7. Mr Amgbah sought permission to reopen the application for permission to
    appeal to include a third ground namely the ability of the children  to
    reintegrate into life in Pakistan in that  he  argued  that  the  judge
    imported the parents' lack of reliability into the consideration of the
    children's best interests.  That was  based  on  [22]  of  the  judge's
    decision in that he states;

         "...I approach the evidence of both Mr Durrani and Mrs Shabana with
         considerable caution.  That is essentially for two reasons.  First,
         that at their first IAC appeal in March 2011 ... the Learned  Judge
         found their accounts and evidence to be unreliable and  not  worthy
         of belief.  He described  Mr  Durrani's  evidence  ...  'thoroughly
         unsatisfactory' and found Mrs Shabana's  evidence  ...  not  to  be
         credible.  ... it is I find significant that both  Mr  Durrani  and
         Mrs Shabana had been found to be less than  frank  or  truthful  in
         their evidence ...   Secondly  in  light  of  Mr  Durrani  and  Mrs
         Shabana's immigration history, which they accept as being  accurate
         ... this seems to me to be a classic example of  two  well-educated
         would be economic migrants playing the immigration system, at least
         until such time as their eldest  child  had  achieved  seven  years
         residence status, with all the different considerations  that  then
         arise."

 8. Mr Amgbah submitted that there are  powerful  reasons  as  to  why  the
    family should be able to stay and the fact that the judge  referred  to
    the fact that there were powerful reasons as being the  test  does  not
    mean he has applied that test because he has not  identified  what  the
    powerful reasons are.

Discussion

 9. In relation to the application to extend the grounds for permission  to
    appeal, in [22] the judge set out his concerns about  the  weight  that
    could be attached to what the parents told him.  That it  is  what  the
    judge is required to do.  It was not importing the parents'  dishonesty
    into the best interest  assessment.   It  was  importing  the  parents'
    dishonesty into what weight could be placed on what they said.  Indeed,
    the judge stated that specifically at  [23].   There  is  therefore  no
    merit in the assertion that a  new  ground  for  permission  to  appeal
    should be considered and I reject that.

10. The judge undertook a comprehensive Section 55 assessment  at  [24-29].
    He noted the length of time the  children  had  been  here,  they  were
    settled  in  school,  that  they  had  friends,  they  participate   in
    activities, and they were accustomed to life here.   He  accepted  that
    leaving those relationships and schools would cause emotional distress.
     He accepted they could not speak Pushto fluently but found  that  they
    had a minimum and basic understanding of the language  and  could  make
    themselves understood.  He found that it was probably in the children's
    best interests to remain here.  He properly said that was not  the  end
    point of his consideration.

11.  He  went  through  the  various  factors  as  to  what  the   family's
    circumstances would be in Pakistan.  He said they would be returned  to
    the home  environment  with  significant  family  membership  in  their
    village who could provide assistance and acclimatization.  He  did  not
    accept the family were too poor to help or it was a war zone.  He noted
    the parental education to university level which  presumably  had  been
    supported and paid for by their parent and family.  He  noted  that  Mr
    Durrani had the ability to earn a  significant  income  as  a  business
    management consultant. He noted that Mr  Durrani  accepted  his  family
    home was large enough to accommodate two siblings one  of  whom  had  a
    large family.  He found it probable that both the adult Appellants  are
    from middle  class  and  relatively  prosperous  backgrounds  and  that
    financial and other help and support would be  available  in  Pakistan.
    He noted that both adults worked  in  Pakistan  in  the  past  and  had
    transferrable skills.

12. The judge went on to note that the children are  in  good  health.   He
    went on to find that the children are young and not at a critical stage
    in terms of their academic progress.  He noted the lack of evidence  of
    relationships going beyond normal ties of friendship and affection  and
    the ability to maintain contact with  current  friends  through  modern
    means of communication.  He found that the children are so  young  that
    their distress at being removed from  their  friends  and  surroundings
    would be temporary and not long-standing.  He rejected the assertion of
    close family links here.  He found that language may be a  problem  but
    that it would be short lived.  He found that English  is  the  official
    language  used  in  Pakistan  and  that  the  adults  could   pay   for
    supplementary private tuition in English should it be required.

13. All these findings were available to the judge on the evidence.

14. It was against that background in [28] that the  judge  considered  the
    reasonableness test required of him.  He  considered  the  Respondent's
    legitimate interest in maintaining effective immigration  control.   He
    attached little weight to private life developed whilst here unlawfully
    or whilst leave was precarious.  He identified that this applied to all
    the Appellants during all of their time here.  He identified that  none
    of them had the legitimate expectation that leave  was  anything  other
    than temporary.  He reminded himself that the children were not  active
    or conscious participants in the decision to come or  remain  here  and
    should not be blamed for the conduct of  their  parents.   He  reminded
    himself that none of the children are  British  citizens  and  are  not
    entitled as of right to benefit from the  education  system  and  other
    public services in this country.

15. The judge considered holistically the evidence  and  summarised  it  in
    [29] by noting that their life could  be  satisfactorily  continued  in
    Pakistan to a reasonably acceptable level.  Bearing all  this  in  mind
    and taking the evidence in the round he was entitled to find as he  did
    that these are  powerful  reasons  to  uphold  and  maintain  effective
    immigration control and  that  removal  would  be  reasonable  and  not
    disproportionate.

16. In summary the judge did exactly  what  he  was  required  to  do.   He
    identified the relevant test.  He found facts.  He applied the facts to
    the test and was entitled to find that the facts he found  amounted  to
    powerful reasons as to why the family should be required to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  The grounds amount to nothing more than a disagreement
    with that assessment.  I therefore find  that  there  was  no  material
    error of law.

17. In relation to the second point that was raised by Judge Chapman,  this
    does not arise as the judge cannot be blamed for  evidence  not  placed
    before him and I do not give permission to reopen that  ground  because
    there was no material error of law in relation to the only matter  upon
    which permission to appeal had been granted.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a material point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.






Date 26 October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer



Fees

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.







Date 26 October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
