
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/11195/2018
                                                HU/11196/2018, HU/11198/2018
                                                HU/11200/2018, HU/11202/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 April 2019                     |On 26 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                          mr M J (first appellant)
                          mr Z A (second appellant)
                          mrs Y K (third appellant)
                          mr H J (fourth appellant)
                          mr F J (fifth appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss S Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by House of
                    Immigration Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Pakistan.  The  first  and   third
appellants are husband and wife (aged 60 and 52). They are  parents  of  the
second, fourth and fifth appellants. The latter three are now 27, 22 and  21
years old respectively. The third appellant was diagnosed with stage 4  non-
Hodgkin's lymphoma on 14 February 2018  and  commenced  chemotherapy  on  27
February.  This comprised six cycles  of  Bendamustine  and  Rituximab,  the
last of which  occurred  on  12  September  2018.  Her  remaining  treatment
consists of Rituximab maintenance  for  2  years  (at  2-monthly  intervals)
delivered by injections under the skin.

2.   In a decision sent on 16 November 2018, Judge  O'Brien  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal (FtT) dismissed their appeals against  the  decision  made  by
the respondent on 8 May 2018 refusing them leave to remain on  human  rights
grounds. The judge noted that there had been a  previous  appeal  which  had
been dismissed by Judge Parkes in December 2016.  In a decision  sent  on  1
March 2019, I set aside Judge O 'Brien's decision for material error of  law
in respect of her treatment of the medical evidence relating  to  the  third
appellant, which took the form of a  letter  from  Dr  Ahsan,  a  consultant
clinical oncologist dated 27 October 2018 based in  Pakistan.  I  considered
she failed to engage  with  the  opinion  of  the  doctor  that  specialised
oncology hospitals in Pakistan would not accept the third appellant  in  the
middle of  treatment  and  that  discontinuation  of  therapy  might  "cause
relapse or transformation into  a  more  aggressive  form  of  lymphoma  and
endanger [the] life of the patient".  I also considered that she had  failed
to  consider  the  third  appellant's  health   circumstances   cumulatively
alongside other relevant considerations.

3.   At paras 12-13 I said:

    "12. Given that there has been no challenge to the judge's findings  of
         fact regarding the appellants' circumstances save  in  relation  to
         the health circumstances of the third appellant,  I  conclude  that
         the case should be retained in the Upper Tribunal.  In fairness  to
         the appellants, since the judge's findings  of  fact  were  heavily
         dependent  on  Judge  Parkes'  assessment  of   their   Article   8
         circumstances in December 2016, I shall not exclude the  production
         of evidence updating the family circumstances.

    13.  As regards the issue of whether the third appellant would in  fact
         be  able  to  obtain  treatment  in  Pakistan  for  the   Rituximab
         maintenance treatment specified as being necessary for her  between
         September 2018 - September 2020, I consider  it  is  open  to  both
         parties to adduce further evidence relating to this issue."

4.    In  response  to  my  directions,  the   appellants'   representatives
submitted a consolidated  bundle  of  some  508  pages  which  included  new
witness statements dated 9 April 2019 from each of the five  appellants  and
a letter dated 16 March 2019 from a Dr  Arshad  Mehmood,  former  consultant
haematologist and oncologist of Walli hospital, Khurrianwala, Faisalabad.

5.   Given that I  stated  there  has  been  no  challenge  to  the  judge's
findings of fact save in relation to the health circumstances of  the  third
appellant, it is salient to set out the judge's findings  on  matters  other
than the third appellant's health circumstances: At paragraph 40  the  judge
observed that there had been an appeal decision by  Judge  Parkes  dated  30
December 2016 concluding that removal of the appellants  as  a  family  unit
would not be disproportionate.  The judge concluded  at  paragraph  41  that
she saw no basis for going behind the decision of Judge Parkes.

6.    In  seeking  to  explain  why  she  saw  no  significant   change   in
circumstances since the last judicial findings, the judge  first  considered
the first appellant's business, concluding at paragraphs 42-46 that  it  had
not been shown that its benefits to the UK economy were significant or  that
the first appellant could not re-establish it in Pakistan.

7.    At  paragraph  47  the  judge  then  addressed  the  medical  evidence
regarding whether the  first  appellant  was  at  real  risk  of  committing
suicide concluding that there would be no such risk.   At  paragraphs  48-49
the judge then set out why it had not been  established  that  the  family's
removal would pose  very  significant  obstacles  to  their  integration  in
Pakistan or insurmountable obstacles.

8.   Mr Tarlow confirmed that the respondent did  not  dispute  the  updated
witness statements put forward by the appellants. I then heard  submissions.


9.   Mr Tarlow submitted that in  assessing  the  further  medical  evidence
from Dr Mehmood, I should attach weight to the fact that it  confirmed  that
the third appellant had so far been responding well  to  her  treatment  and
that it did not state in definite terms that the third appellant  would  not
receive treatment in Pakistan. Mr Tarlow asked that I bear in mind what  had
been said by the UK doctor treating the third appellant regarding the  third
appellant's ability to tolerate any treatment without toxicities.

10.  Miss Iqbal submitted  that  Dr  Mehmood  had  identified  a  number  of
concerns, relating to affordability, admission for treatment  and  risks  to
the patient. This evidence corroborated that of Dr Ahsan. It should  not  be
forgotten either that the first appellant  has  psychological  problems  and
suffers  from  depression  and  anxiety  and  has  been   prescribed   anti-
depressants.  The family had integrated strongly into British  society.  The
up to date witness  statements,  the  educational  documentation  and  other
materials indicated the positive contribution they had made.

11.  Miss Iqbal submitted that I should consider that the third  appellant's
circumstances fell within the ambit of the principles set out by  the  ECtHR
in Paposhvili application no. 41738/10 in respect of Article 3 health  case.
 The third appellant was half way through her treatment  and  might  not  be
able to access the remainder of her  treatment  if  she  has  to  return  to
Pakistan. It  was  vital  that  her  treatment  regime  in  the  UK  be  not
disrupted.  If she relapsed she would face an even more aggressive  form  of
the cancer and a significant reduction in life expectancy.

12.  Miss Iqbal submitted that, looking at the appellants'  case  under  the
Immigration Rules first, there would be very significant obstacles to  their
return. The third appellant would not be able to access  medical  treatment.
The first appellant's business (he was  a  wholesaler  of  fresh  fruit  and
vegetables), which was currently providing work for 70-100 people (40-50  in
the UK), would have to close and the appellants would be left  with  nothing
if he had to pay all his debtors here in the UK; he had a 15-year  lease  on
a warehouse which he had paid for by way of a loan.   She  referred  to  the
two statements from accountants.  The fact that  the  family  had  got  into
immigration difficulties in 2010 stemmed from  wrong  advice  given  to  the
first appellant in 2011 when he made an application to stay on the basis  of
his business in the UK.  Apart from their reliance on the  NHS,  the  family
had not had recourse to any public funds.   When  the  third  appellant  was
diagnosed with cancer in 2018, the family were in a position to pay.

13.  As regards Article 8 outside the Rules, Miss Iqbal submitted  that  the
medical evidence relating  to  the  third  appellant  showed  that  she  was
responding well to treatment in the UK because she had a medical  team  able
to manage her treatment regime and stand ready to  intervene  if  there  was
any relapse. The doctors are familiar with her case and are  monitoring  her
closely. If she had to return to Pakistan it is unlikely she would  be  able
to find a hospital ready and able  to  take  on  her  maintenance  stage  of
treatment or to monitor it if she were to  relapse.  The  first  appellant's
health difficulties had also to be factored in. I should  place  her  severe
health difficulties and his psychological problems alongside the  fact  that
the family had put down roots in the UK and made a valuable contribution  to
the UK economy and were  a  strong  family  unit  which  needs  to  be  kept
together.

My assessment

14.  It is convenient if  I  first  address  the  third  appellant's  health
circumstances in the context of Articles 3 and Article 8 outside the  Rules.
As regards the first appellant's circumstances, I have  regard  to  his  and
his other family member's witness statements.  I note that  a  psychological
report dated 18 October  from  a  Dr  Shea  was  produced  stating  that  in
addition to diabetes the first appellant suffers from a  depressive  illness
likely due to his wife's health problems  and  anxiety  and  that  he  feels
frightened about being sent to Pakistan where he believes his wife will  not
be able to obtain treatment and he would want  to  commit  suicide  if  that
happened.  The doctor considers that it will also be very difficult for  the
first appellant in Pakistan considering his age  and  his  health  problems.
He has  suicidal  thoughts.  The  doctor  considers  that  any  reminder  of
returning to Pakistan triggers bad thoughts and  worsens  his  psychological
symptoms (including his anxiety  and  low  mood),  particularly  because  he
strongly believes that if they have  to  return  to  Pakistan  his  and  his
wife's physical health will rapidly deteriorate.  In relation to  the  first
appellant's anxieties about being able to start all over again in  Pakistan,
I note that in his latest witness statement he describes his UK business  as
doing well. He does not suggest that his psychological problems  are  having
a negative effect on his business activities  here.  I  note  also  that  he
originally did business in Pakistan including in  the  fresh  food  business
(ginger and garlic) (along with other areas of business)  and  he  has  paid
several business trips back to Pakistan since. He now  has  three  sons  who
between them  should  be  in  a  position  to  help  him  shoulder  business
responsibilities. The son F states that he has done some work experience  in
his father's business which gives him an insight into the  workings  of  the
business. His son Z states that when his parents tell him how  they  started
an important business from nothing and extended it to the  UK  "I  get  very
excited about turning [  the  business]  into  a  multi-national  business",
although he goes on the add that  he  is  not  used  to  Pakistani  ways  of
working. The first appellant's witness statement states  that  the  existing
business  deals  in  perishable  goods  by  importing  them  from  different
countries, including Pakistan, Jordan and Europe. I do not consider on  this
basis that the first appellant's business future is dependent on trading  in
Europe. I do not accept that return to Pakistan  would  transform  him  from
being a successful businessman  to  being  someone  unable  to  quickly  re-
establish business activities there. As noted earlier, I see no  reasons  to
depart  from  the  findings  made  by  Judge  O'Brien  regarding  the  first
appellant's psychological problems.  I would add that from the report of  Dr
Shea, it is clear that in part his anxieties are based on  his  belief  that
he and his wife's physical health will rapidly deteriorate if they  have  to
return to Pakistan. Whilst I have no reason to doubt the  sincerity  of  the
first appellant's subjective belief regarding this, it is not borne  out  by
the wider body of evidence available concerning access to treatment for  his
condition in Pakistan. For reason  I  now  turn  to  I  also  consider  that
neither are his  concerns  about  his  own  health  or  that  of  the  third
appellant's likely health  circumstances  in  Pakistan    objectively  well-
founded.

15.  I shall first of all address the medical  circumstances  of  the  third
appellant. Prior to her being diagnosed with cancer  in  2018,  she  suffers
from diabetes, hypertension and depression. The medical evidence shows  that
the treatment she has received so far for her cancer  has  gone  very  well.
The chemotherapy stage having been completed,  she  is  now  in  a  two-year
maintenance stage  in  which  she  continues  to  be  monitored  by  way  of
Rituximab maintenance therapy.  She is said to be tolerating Rituximab  well
with good control of the disease.  The  further  evidence  from  Dr  Mehmood
confirms that treatment for her type of  cancer  is  available  in  Pakistan
including the Rituximab maintenance therapy. However, both  Dr  Ahsan  in  a
letter dated 27 October 2018 and now Dr Mehmood have  written  to  say  that
they consider that there is a danger of discontinuation of treatment  (which
would cause relapse  or  transformation  into  a  more  aggressive  form  of
lymphoma and endanger the life of the third appellant) if  she  is  returned
to Pakistan. Dr Mehmood voices several concerns.

16.  First, there is the fact that the current medication is very  expensive
and not affordable to most patients (the same concern was  expressed  by  Dr
Ahsan). Tied to this, he states that  whilst  there  are  cheaper  forms  of
treatment available, "[s]he may not tolerate  the  alternative  regime  well
and  during  the  transitional  phase  of  change  from   one   to   another
regimen{sic]  disease  may  progress  adversely  and  endanger  her   life."
Regarding this concern, I do not find that it has been established that  the
family would be unable to afford in  Pakistan  the  same  treatment  she  is
receiving presently. Accordingly, there would be no need for selection of  a
cheaper regime for management and follow up; the family is relatively  well-
off in the  UK  and  would  be  more  so  in  Pakistan;  and  in  any  event
affordability is not  determinative  for  either  Article  3  or  Article  8
purposes.

17.  Second, Dr Mehmood (again echoing Dr Ahsan) states that there are  only
a few specialised oncology hospitals in Pakistan so the  patient  burden  is
very high and such institutes "usually do not accept  the  patients  in  the
middle of their treatment.". He notes that his hospital already has  a  long
queue of awaiting and booked patients. I do  not  find  this  evidence,  nor
that of Dr Arshad's, to be sufficient to establish that the third  appellant
would not be able to gain access to a specialised oncology  hospital  either
in Pakistan or elsewhere. He does not definitely state that  such  treatment
would be unavailable.  Neither  of  them  refers  to  any  independent  data
regarding the accessibility to such treatment for persons able  to  pay.  It
is not said how many hospitals have such units or  how  relevant  it  is  in
terms of being able to be admitted that the  patient's  continued  treatment
is unlikely to be clinically burdensome  (the  third  appellant's  Rituximab
maintenance  phase,  absent  complications,  only  comprises   two   monthly
injections together with  monitoring).  Dr  Mehmood  does  not  assert  that
patients can never be taken on mid-way through  cancer  treatments  and,  as
already noted, the treatment stage which the third appellant is now  in,  is
relatively uncomplicated. On the available evidence, it  is  not  reasonable
likely that the third appellant would relapse.

18.  Dr Mehmood's third concern relates to disruption of  her  treatment  in
the UK. He  says  that  it  is  very  important  for  her  to  continue  her
maintenance therapy in the same institution as  the  medical  team  here  is
very familiar with her disease. However, there is no reason  to  think  that
the third appellant's medical records in the UK, including full  details  of
her current treatment, would not  be  available  to  specialist  doctors  in
Pakistan or that doctors there are  not  proficient  in  carrying  out  such
treatment. The most difficult phase of  the  treatment  has  been  completed
successfully; and indeed, in a letter dated 8 March 2019 the opinion of  the
Consultant  Haematologist  treating  the  third  appellant   in   Heartlands
Hospital in Birmingham (Dr Murthy) was that:

    "We also note that on average people go on for  3  to  5  years  before
    requiring 2nd line of treatment after the  1st  line  of  chemotherapy.
    [The third  appellant]  has  showed  an  excellent  response  with  PET
    negative disease - in a situation like this  we  would  expect  a  good
    remission status.

    Regarding disruption of the Rituximab treatment, in her case I would be
    keen to continue the Rituximab maintenance for the time being as she is
    tolerating without toxicities. However, there is an  optional  stop  in
    the Rituximab maintenance as well if she had any side effects from  the
    treatment considering an excellent PET negative remission. "

19.   Dr  Murthy  further  states  that  the  main  purpose   of   Rituximab
maintenance is to delay the need for 2nd line treatment. On the strength  of
this letter, the necessity for 2nd line treatment in the  third  appellant's
case is low, as a good remission status is expected. I would add that  given
the family's financial circumstances, it would also be  reasonably  open  to
them, if for some  reasons  she  could  not  gain  access  to  a  specialist
oncology unit in Pakistan, to arrange for her  to  travel  to  receive  this
treatment privately in another country.

20.  I have to bear in mind, in relation to Article 3,  that  the  threshold
set by the case law is a high one. As stated by Sales, LJ (as he  then  was)
at [38] of AM (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA iv 64:

    "So far as the ECtHR and the Convention are concerned,  the  protection
    of Article 3 against removal in medical cases is now  not  confined  to
    deathbed cases where death is already imminent when the applicant is in
    the removing country. It extends to cases  where  "substantial  grounds
    have been shown for believing that [the  applicant],  although  not  at
    imminent risk of dying, would face a  real  risk,  on  account  of  the
    absence of appropriate treatment in the receiving country  or  lack  of
    access to such treatment, of being exposed  to  a  serious,  rapid  and
    irreversible decline in his or her state of health resulting in intense
    suffering or to a significant  reduction  in  life  expectancy"  (para.
    [183]). This means cases where the  applicant  faces  a  real  risk  of
    rapidly experiencing intense suffering (i.e. to the Article 3 standard)
    in  the  receiving  state  because  of  their  illness  and  the   non-
    availability there of treatment which  is  available  to  them  in  the
    removing state or faces a real risk of death within a short time in the
    receiving state for the same reason. In other words,  the  boundary  of
    Article 3 protection has been shifted from being defined  by  imminence
    of death in the removing  state  (even  with  the  treatment  available
    there)  to  being  defined  by  the  imminence  (i.e.  likely   "rapid"
    experience) of intense suffering or death in the receiving state, which
    may only occur because of the non-availability in  that  state  of  the
    treatment which had previously been available in the removing state."

21.  Applying this guidance, the third appellant's is not  a  case  where  a
real risk has been established that she would be unable to access  the  same
regime of maintenance treatment she  is  following  presently  or  that  she
would suffer a relapse. In assessing whether the third appellant would  face
a real risk of  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3,  I  must  consider  her
circumstances cumulatively, including the  first  appellant's  psychological
problems. (In relation to his difficulties, I have already found that I  see
no reason to depart from  the  findings  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
judge, that they  are  not  sufficiently  serious  to  constitute  a  factor
capable of crossing the respective Article 3 or Article  8  thresholds  even
when considered cumulatively with all other factors.)

22.  I turn them to consider the third appellant's health  circumstances  in
relation to Article 8. Bearing in mind the guidance given by  the  Court  of
Appeal in GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40, I  am  satisfied  that  her  health
circumstances do not cross the threshold  for  Article  8  purposes  either.
Here  again,  however,  I  must  consider  the   appellants'   circumstances
cumulatively and ask in particular whether, even if the  third  (and  first)
appellant's heath difficulties are not in themselves sufficient to make  the
respondent's  decisions  disproportionate,  they  are  sufficient  if  taken
together with other factors. In this regard the two main factors  relied  on
by Miss Akhtar are the value to the UK  economy  of  the  first  appellant's
business (and as part of that, the economic detriment to him  of  having  to
terminate it) and the extent of the family's integration into UK society.  I
remind myself that the Article 8 balancing exercise  requires  me  to  weigh
private and family life factors  in  favour  of  the  appellants  and  those
against. In addition to the factors that are  in  principal  focus  in  this
appeal there is the evidence fact that all but the third  appellant  have  a
good command of English and it is unquestionably established that  they  are
financially independent: see s.117B(2) and (3) of the NIAA 2002.   Save  for
heavy reliance on NHS treatment,  they  have  not  had  recourse  to  public
funds.

23.  As regards the first main factor, I have already noted that  I  see  no
reason to depart from Judge O'Brien's detailed  assessment  at  paras  42-46
that it had not been  shown  that  its  benefits  to  the  UK  economy  were
particularly significant or that the business (or something along  the  same
lines) could not be  re-established  in  Pakistan.  Judge  O'Brien  attached
considerable weight to the findings of Judge Parkes made  in  February  2016
that the first appellant had significantly overstated the  position  of  the
business. To the extent  that  it  is  submitted  again  that  the  family's
enforced departure from the UK would mean that  the  first  appellant  would
have to terminate the  business  causing  heavy  economic  loss,  I  am  not
persuaded that that has been established. It is  clear  from  the  financial
information provided in the auditor's accounts that the business is a  going
concern. The first appellant states that selling it would cause  him  to  go
into debt as he already has a sizeable loan for purchase  of  the  warehouse
in the UK. However, I fail to see why he could  not  sell  the  business  in
such a way that he remains responsible for that  loan.  The  evidence  falls
well short of establishing that the appellants' departure from the UK  would
cause them economic ruin and I note that the first appellant began his  life
as a businessman in Pakistan and originally had  a  Pakistan-based  company.
He has sons who are now adults who have had a  UK  education  and  would  be
able to bring their qualifications and skills and energy to assist  if  need
be. As noted  earlier,  two  of  them  have  expressed  some  knowledge  and
interest in the family  business  and  although  they  may  wish  to  pursue
further education, they are  young  adults  who  would  clearly  be  a  real
support to their father if they chose to be.

24.  So far as concerns the extent of the appellants' integration  into  the
UK, the second main factor on which Miss  Iqbal  sought  to  rely,  I  would
accept that the evidence shows that the  first,  second,  fourth  and  fifth
appellants have strongly integrated (and their ability to speak  English  is
one aspect of that), but the children  are  now  adults  having  gained  the
benefits of a UK education and whilst in many ways they could  be  described
as a model family, the weight I can attach  to  their  integration  must  be
diminished by the fact that much of their integration has taken place  at  a
time when their immigration status was  precarious:  see  s.117B(5)  of  the
NIAA 2002.  As Judge Parkes noted in December 2016, any private  life  built
up after refusal of their 2011 applications was in the  knowledge  that  the
family had to leave the UK. Further, as noted by Judge O'Brien at  para  48,
the three sons have completed or continued their education in various state-
funded institutions and none of them has yet lived in the  UK  for  half  of
their lives. Even  taking  the  family's  circumstances,  medical  and  non-
medical cumulatively, I am not persuaded that they suffice  to  establish  a
disproportionate interference with  their  Article  8  rights.  The  factors
weighing in favour of their being required to leave the UJK  outweigh  those
in favour of them remaining.

25.  I now turn to set out my findings as  to  the  appellants'  ability  to
meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. I am satisfied that  it  has
not been shown that  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
family's integration back into Pakistan society.  All  the  appellants  have
spent over half their lives in Pakistan. The first appellant has  worked  as
a businessman in Pakistan and two of his  sons  are  now  well-qualified  to
either help in his business activities if they choose or to seek  employment
of their own. The first four appellants speak Urdu and I concur  with  Judge
O'Brien that the fifth appellant, because Urdu is the language  his  parents
use at home, would be able to learn Urdu in a reasonable  time  frame  (para
48).  For reasons set out earlier, the third and  first  appellant's  health
circumstances would not significantly  affect  their  ability  to  integrate
back into Pakistan society and I have already  found  it  reasonably  likely
that the third appellant would be able to access suitable treatment for  her
cancer maintenance treatment. The first appellant would clearly be  able  to
obtain medical help in Pakistan for his psychological problems, if they  did
not significantly reduce once he became familiar again  with  the  realities
of Pakistan life and saw that his wife and he  would  in  fact  be  able  to
access and received adequate treatment.

26.  The appellants'' inability to meet the requirements of the  Immigration
Rules adds to the weight to be attached to  the  public  interest  in  their
removal from the UK and in earlier  assessing  their  circumstances  outside
the Rules I have taken into account that it was incumbent on  them  to  show
that such circumstances were of a compelling character.

27.  For the above  reasons  the  decision  I  re-make  is  to  dismiss  the
appellants' appeals.

28.  I would  only  add  that  I  do  not  consider  the  legal  proceedings
concerned with the appellants' immigration cases  should  reflect  adversely
on their credibility. Hence I  consider  that  were  any  of  them  to  make
further applications for entry clearance to come to the UK, the  history  of
proceedings in the UK and their outcome thus far  should  not  be  taken  to
reflect adversely on their credibility.

29.  To conclude:

The decision of the FtT judge has already been set aside for material  error
of law;

The decision I re-make is to dismiss the appellants' appeals.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 24 April 2019
[pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

