
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11668/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|By Microsoft Teams                   |On 23 September 2021                 |
|On 17 September 2021                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                              MR MUHAMMAD JAMIL
                               MRS HABIBA UMAY
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Malik Q.C, Counsel instructed by Irvine Thanvi
                    Natas Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


           DECISION MADE PURSUANT TO RULES 34, 39 & 40 (3) OF THE
               TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

      1. The appellants appeal with permission against the decision of First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Carey sent on 17 November 2020.

      2. Both parties agreed that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         involved the making of an error of law. At [88] the  judge  made  a
         clear  finding  that  the  information  that  the  first  appellant
         provided to the respondent was  inaccurate  given  his  much  lower
         profit for the adjacent tax years. It is agreed that  this  finding
         is  unsustainable  in  light  of  the  evidence  submitted  by  the
         appellant  to  the  respondent  in  support  of  his  self-employed
         earnings for the tax years 2010 to 2011 and 2012 to 2013.  Evidence
         of bank statements, invoices, accounts, letters  from  clients  was
         before the respondent and accepted by the respondent to be  genuine
         as noted in the Secretary of State's internal case notes which were
         also produced to the judge. The judge did  not  take  any  of  this
         material evidence into account when making the above finding.  This
         is a clear error of law and the judge's finding manifestly fed into
         his view of the appellant's character.

      3. Similarly, when making a finding  that  the  appellant  dishonestly
         misled the tax authorities, the judge failed to take  into  account
         further material evidence of the appellant's business  in  Pakistan
         which had made losses. This evidence was at Annex F of the  bundle.
         There is no reference to this evidence in the decision. The failure
         to take this evidence into account is also a clear error of law and
         the two errors are material to the issue of whether  the  appellant
         was dishonest.

      4. There is a further error in the approach  to  paragraph  322(5)  in
         that the judge having found the appellant to be dishonest failed to
         consider other circumstances about the appellant including positive
         features of his character to determine whether his presence in  the
         UK is undesirable. The judge did not carry out a balancing exercise
         when deciding whether  322(5)  applied  and  failed  to  take  into
         account  "positive  evidence"  including  supportive  letters   and
         references as well as the appellant's contribution to society.   An
         evaluation as part of the Article 8 ECHR  proportionality  exercise
         was not sufficient. The balancing exercise should have taken  place
         in the context of 322(5) of the immigration rules.

      5. In respect of disposal, I am mindful of statement 7 of  the  Senior
         President's Practice Statements of 10 February  2010.  This  appeal
         has already been heard by the First-tier Tribunal on two occasions,
         nevertheless it is not the appellant's  fault  that  the  decisions
         have been set aside because of  errors  of  law  and  there  are  a
         considerable number of factual findings to be made.  I am satisfied
         that the appropriate course of action, given  these  circumstances,
         is to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

      6. Rule 40 (3) provides that the Upper Tribunal must  provide  written
         reasons for its decision with a decision notice unless the  parties
         have consented to the Upper Tribunal not giving written reasons.  I
         am satisfied that the  parties  have  given  such  consent  at  the
         hearing.




    Notice of Decision

      7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law.

      8. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside,  and  the
         findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  set  aside  in  their
         entirety.

      9. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
         hearing before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Cary.






    Signed                 Date: 21 September 2021




    R J Owens
    Upper Tribunal Judge Owens
