
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11963/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd May 2019                               |On 16th May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                            Mr md rafiquel islam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Jorro, Counsel instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a national of Bangladesh,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision made by the Secretary of State on 17th  May
    2018 to refuse his application for leave to remain in  the  UK  on  the
    basis of his private life.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Khan  dismissed
    the appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  8th  January  2019.   The
    Appellant appealed to this Tribunal with permission granted  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Landes on 21st February 2019.

Grounds of appeal

 2. The Grounds of Appeal put forward four grounds.  It is  contended  that
    the judge failed to apply the approach to the burden  and  standard  of
    proof set out in SM and Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of proof) [2016]
    UKUT 229(IAC) which requires that the Respondent  bears  an  evidential
    burden and thereafter the Appellant is required to  raise  an  innocent
    explanation which meets the minimum level of  plausibility  before  the
    legal burden reverts to the Secretary of State.  It is contended in the
    second ground that the judge erred in reversing  the  burden  of  proof
    where at paragraph 23 he indicated that the Appellant was  required  to
    provide an explanation as to how his details had come to appear in  the
    ETS documents whereas the Appellant was simply  required  to  raise  an
    innocent explanation rather than discharge the entire burden of  proof.
    The third ground contends that the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  give
    reasons for his conclusions on material matters, it is  contended  that
    the judge failed to take into account the Appellant's evidence  as  set
    out in the decision before reaching the conclusion at paragraph 20 that
    the Appellant's evidence was vague.  The fourth  ground  contends  that
    the judge failed to apply the approach mandated by the Court of  Appeal
    in Majumder v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  1167  in  assessing  the  relevant
    factors in the Tribunal's assessment of the allegation of dishonesty.

Error of Law

 3. At the hearing Mr  Jorro  submitted  a  skeleton  argument.   Mr  Jorro
    highlighted a further preliminary  point  relating  to  how  the  judge
    approached Article 8.  He contended that the judge  made  a  number  of
    factual errors in his consideration of Article 8.  The Appellant  is  a
    single man but at paragraph 30 the judge  referred  to  his  wife.   He
    entered as a student but at paragraph 30 the judge  said  that  he  had
    limited leave to remain in the UK as a visitor.  The Appellant does not
    have any children but  at  paragraph  32  the  judge  referred  to  the
    Appellant's daughter. Also, he pointed out that the Appellant  is  from
    Bangladesh but the judge referred to  him  returning  to  Pakistan  and
    making an application for entry clearance as a spouse.  At the  hearing
    before me Ms Jones accepted that these are clear mistakes and  accepted
    that these may indicate that the judge had not taken  proper  care  and
    attention in his approach to the Appellant's appeal.

 4. I accept that the issues in relation to the treatment of Article 8 were
    not specifically referred to in the grounds or the grant of permission.
     However, in my view these are obvious factual errors. In my view these
    errors go to the heart of the appeal in that, although the  main  issue
    in this appeal was the assessment of the ETS issue, the  appeal  was  a
    human rights appeal therefore the assessment of the ETS issue was  only
    in the context of a human rights appeal.  In assessing the human rights
    appeal it is important for the judge to get the factual  basis  of  the
    Appellant's circumstances right  otherwise  the  entire  assessment  on
    human rights is undermined.

 5. I also accept that there was some confusion in the judge's approach  to
    the ETS documents.  The ETS  document  put  forward  by  the  Appellant
    related to a test taken on 19th September 2012  at  London  College  of
    Media and Technology however in the ETS information it is alleged  that
    the Appellant undertook a second English language test on 16th  October
    2012 at Bfluent School of English.  The Appellant did  not  submit  any
    certificate in relation to the  latter  test  in  connection  with  any
    application and it appears that no look-up tool  was  provided  by  the
    Secretary of State in relation to that test.  In my view it  was  clear
    from paragraph 23 that the judge conflated the two ETS  tests  and  did
    not apply the proper approach as set out in SM and Qadir to each  test.



 6. I accept also that the judge erred in his approach to  the  burden  and
    standard of proof as set out in SM and  Qadir.   At  paragraph  22  the
    judge found that the Respondent through the witness statements provided
    "has established that the  Appellant  used  a  proxy  for  his  English
    language test".  It is not clear whether the judge was referring to the
    initial evidential burden on the part of the Respondent or to the legal
    burden having considered the Appellant's explanation.  I accept that at
    paragraph 23 the judge  appears  to  have  placed  the  burden  on  the
    Appellant to explain  how  his  details  came  to  appear  in  the  ETS
    document.  I also accept that at paragraph 20 (which is the only  place
    where the judge assessed  the  Appellant's  evidence)  the  judge  gave
    insufficient reasons  for  rejecting  the  oral  evidence  set  out  at
    paragraphs 11 to 14 of the decision.  There  the  Appellant  had  given
    explanations as to when he registered,  the  fees  he  paid,  when  his
    photograph had been taken and as to the details  and  contents  of  the
    tests.  Whilst it was open to the judge to  reject  that  evidence  the
    judge failed to give adequate reasons for so doing.

 7. In light of the errors identified above I  find  that  the  judge  made
    material errors of law in his approach to the burden  and  standard  of
    proof and to the overall human rights appeal.  As these  errors  go  to
    the heart of the issues to be determined in this case I set  aside  the
    decision in its entirety pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the  Tribunals
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  I agree with the  view  of
    both parties that, in light of the Presidential Practice Statements the
    nature and extent of the judicial fact finding which is  necessary  for
    the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that, having regard to
    the overriding objective in rule 2 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, it is appropriate to remit the asylum  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material  error  of
law and I set it aside.  The appeal is to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date: 14 May 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of fees  is  to  be  determined  on  remittal  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

Signed                              Date: 14 May 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
