
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11544/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham CJC                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 May 2019                          |On 16 May 2019                    |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                    S E W
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person, with the assistance of Mr D Forbes of
Lifeline Options
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Watson promulgated on 13 April 2018  dismissing  an  appeal  against  a
    decision of the Respondent dated 9 September 2017 to  refuse  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.


2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 1 May 1977.  Included  as
    a dependant in her appeal is her son D born on 13 November 2009 in  the
    United Kingdom.


3.   The Appellant first came to the United Kingdom on 29 April  2003  as  a
    carer for her grandfather, with leave granted initially until  29  July
    2003, subsequently extended to 23 January 2004.   Upon  expiry  of  her
    leave no steps were taken to regularise her position.  The  Appellant's
    son was born almost 6 years after her leave had expired. Even then,  it
    was not until 12 May 2014 that an application was  made  to  regularise
    the Appellant's immigration status.  The  application  was  refused  in
    September 2015.  A further application was made on  11  November  2016;
    the refusal of this application on 9 September  2017  is  the  decision
    that is the subject of these proceedings.


4.   The Appellant's application was  refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
    'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 9 September 2017.


5.   The Appellant appealed to the Immigration and Asylum Chamber.


6.   Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant  was  assisted  by  a
    'McKenzie friend', being the wife of the vicar of that church which she
    attended.  In preparation for the appeal the Appellant  had  also  been
    assisted by a charitable organisation  -  Lifeline  Options.   Lifeline
    Options have also assisted the Appellant in the context of  the  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and the Appellant has been assisted by Mr Forbes
    of that organisation before me today.


7.   The Appellant's appeal  was  dismissed  for  reasons  set  out  in  the
    Decision of Judge Watson promulgated on 13 April 2018.


8.   An application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parker on 18 May 2018.


9.   One of the core issues in these proceedings has been  the  position  of
    the Appellant's son, and the extent to which he might benefit from  the
    effects of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules - and  also
    the extent to which the Appellant might benefit from section 117B(6) of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


10.  Before me Mr Mills on behalf of the  Respondent  has  very  fairly  and
    very properly conceded that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  fell  into
    error of law in her approach to  these  matters.   The  question  under
    section 117B(6) is one of 'reasonableness', and that is a  question  to
    be evaluated by reference to the  circumstances  of  the  child  alone.
    However, it is apparent at paragraph 26 of the Decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that the Judge in considering this issue had regard  also
    to the immigration history of the Appellant:

         "I find that in light of the mother's poor immigration history,  in
         view of the S117 factors which are against the Appellant that it is
         reasonable for the child to leave the UK".


11.   Mr  Mills  not  only  accepts  that  that  is  inconsistent  with  the
    applicable law as  now  understood  pursuant  to  the  decision  of  KO
    (Nigeria), but also that it amounts to a material error of law.


12.  In the  circumstances,  discussion  before  me  focused  upon  the  way
    forward in terms of  remaking  the  decision  in  the  appeal,  and  in
    particular the extent to which the primary findings of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be preserved as a foundation  for  a  consideration  of
    such matters anew.


13.  On balance I am persuaded that the  appropriate  way  forward  is  that
    this case be returned to the First-tier Tribunal for  the  decision  in
    the appeal to be remade by any Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Watson with all issues at large.  In reaching this  conclusion  I
    am influenced by two matters in particular.  The first is  in  relation
    to the nature of the accommodation for the Appellant  and  her  son  in
    Jamaica, and the second is in relation to the educational opportunities
    available to the Appellant's son in the event  of  being  relocated  to
    Jamaica.


14.  In respect of accommodation, the Appellant's witness  statement  before
    the First-tier Tribunal referred to the current living circumstances of
    family members in Jamaica.  In particular it  was  suggested  that  the
    only accommodation available the Appellant and her son was with  family
    members on a piece of land upon which there was a two-bedroomed  house;
    the land was agricultural land and the  Appellant's  relatives  existed
    through subsistence farming.


15.  I pause to note that a question was raised as  to  the  title  to  that
    land; however there was no suggestion  that  the  family  members  were
    facing any form of action to remove them from the land.  The  Appellant
    had also  filed  some  documents  in  respect  of  the  land  situation
    generally in Jamaica, but again it seems to me that there is nothing in
    those documents that would suggest that there was  any  threat  to  the
    family losing the land.  It also seems to me clear, notwithstanding the
    grounds of challenge in this regard that the Judge had consideration to
    all of  the  materials  that  were  placed  before  her.   Indeed,  she
    addresses herself specifically to certain of  these  matters,  and  not
    only makes it clear that reference was made to the supporting materials
    and the nature of the Appellant's case (see paragraph 5), but also that
    the Appellant described the situation that she and her son  might  face
    upon return to Jamaica in her oral evidence (see paragraph 21).


16.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  concluded  that   there   would   be
    accommodation for the Appellant and her son upon return to Jamaica, and
    that they would not be facing a situation of destitution (see paragraph
    22).


17.  However, it seems to me that what is missing from the Judge's  analysis
    is any clear consideration of the circumstance of the Appellant and her
    son  joining  a  household  consisting  of  a  two-bedroomed   property
    seemingly occupied by a significant  number  of  other  family  members
    totalling, according to the Appellant's evidence, eleven at present.


18.  Whilst this point alone might not have persuaded me that  there  was  a
    material error of law, in  circumstances  where  the  decision  in  the
    appeal requires to be remade  in  any  event,  I  consider  this  is  a
    pertinent matter that requires  some  further  exploration  by  way  of
    evidence upon rehearing.


19.  The second point is in relation to the educational  system.   Reference
    was made in the Appellant's witness statement to  a  concern  that  she
    would not be able to afford education  in  Jamaica  for  her  son.   Mr
    Forbes, however, acknowledges that no supporting materials  were  filed
    in the appeal in respect of the educational system in Jamaica  and  any
    possible difficulties in accessing education.  Nonetheless, he  informs
    me that he has available such evidence from other cases in which he has
    been involved.  It is accordingly suggested that were the matter to  be
    considered again the Appellant  would  seek  to  amplify  the  concerns
    expressed in her  witness  statement  in  respect  of  the  educational
    system, and support such concerns by reference to  country  information
    materials.


20.  I acknowledge, therefore, that there may be further matters that  might
    properly be the subject of consideration upon rehearing.


21.  In both of these contexts - accommodation and education - I am  mindful
    of the fact that the Appellant has  not  been,  as  it  were,  formally
    represented by legal representatives in these proceedings and it  seems
    to me that due allowance should be made for the fact that the materials
    before the First-tier Tribunal may not have  been  as  complete  as  Mr
    Forbes suggests that they now could be.  As I say,  on  balance,  I  am
    persuaded that consequently the circumstances of the Appellant and  her
    son should be reconsidered by way of a fresh hearing before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

22.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
    error of law and is set aside.


23.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Watson  with
    all issues at large.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 14 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis


