
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11424/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th April 2018                            |On 10th May 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                 Meareg [T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Worthington, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Eritrea born on [  ]  1998.   He  was  17
    years of age at the date of his application on 27th July 2015 for entry
    clearance to settle in the UK as the child of a recognised refugee, his
    mother [GT] "the Sponsor".

 2. The Sponsor had arrived in the UK in July 2011  when  she  was  brought
    here as a domestic worker by a family from Dubai in the UAE.   She  ran
    away from the family and  claimed  asylum.   She  was  granted  refugee
    status on 18th October 2012.

 3. The Appellant appeals with permission  against  the  decision  of  FtTJ
    Caswell  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  Respondent's   decision
    refusing him entry clearance on  26th  October  2015,  under  paragraph
    352D(iv) of the Immigration Rules and under Article 8, ECHR.

 4. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO), in coming to his  refusal,  was  not
    satisfied on two  points  under  paragraph  352D.   First  he  was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant had shown  that  he  was  not  leading  an
    independent life (352D(iii)).  That part of the refusal has now  fallen
    away and is no longer part of the decision before me.  The second  part
    of the refusal is that he was not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had
    shown that he was part of his mother's family unit when she reached the
    UK in 2011 (352D(iv)).

 5. In coming to his decision the ECO noted that  the  Appellant  had  been
    refused entry clearance on 5th  March  2014  (the  first  application).
    This decision had been subject to appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Saffer) and had been upheld in a decision  promulgated  on  13th
    January 2015.  It was said by the ECO that the same grounds which  were
    raised in the first application were  now  being  put  forward  in  the
    current application.  In other words, nothing new in terms of  evidence
    had been put forward sufficient to displace the findings which had been
    made dismissing the first application.

 6. When the present matter came before Judge Caswell she  noted  the  oral
    evidence of the Sponsor.  The evidence was summarised at  [4]  to  [7].
    She also noted the issue before her and expressed it in  the  following
    terms:

         "The Appellant's case is that the previous Determination  of  Judge
         Saffer, which dismissed  his  appeal  against  a  previous  refusal
         decision on the 13th January 2015, was based on different evidence,
         and the conclusions in that Determination should not be  followed."
         [8]

 7. The relevant facts of the Appellant's claim are of course well-known to
    both parties and  for  the  purposes  of  this  decision  they  can  be
    summarised as follows.  The Appellant is the only son  of  the  Sponsor
    and her husband, whom she married in 1996.  All three are nationals  of
    Eritrea.  The Sponsor's husband was made to enter military service  and
    has remained in national service.  She last heard  from  him  in  2009.
    Because her husband was in the army and because it was said  there  was
    no one else to support the family, the Sponsor went to work in Dubai in
    the UAE as a domestic worker.  She left her son  in  the  care  of  his
    grandmother and travelled to Dubai in  2001.   She  remained  with  the
    Dubai family working for them for long hours with little time  off  and
    low pay from 2001 to 2011.  It was at that point that they came to  the
    UK and the Sponsor ran away from them and claimed asylum.   During  the
    period she was in the UAE, she sent small sums of money back to Eritrea
    for her son and her mother and also visited when she was granted  leave
    from her employer.  This resulted in four visits of four weeks each.

 8. The Sponsor last visited the Appellant in Eritrea in 2009.  She said in
    her evidence to Judge Caswell that she was unable to return to  Eritrea
    after that time because the authorities had  found  out  that  she  had
    financially helped her brother to flee Eritrea.  The Appellant remained
    living with his grandmother until he  himself  left  Eritrea,  probably
    illegally, in September 2013 and  went  to  Ethiopia.   He  spent  four
    months in a refugee camp, before being taken in by a family  friend  of
    the Sponsor, Mr Negasi.   The  Appellant  presently  remains  with  the
    Negasi family.  His claim is that he is no longer welcome there and the
    Negasi family keep pressing the Sponsor to take him.  The  Sponsor  has
    visited the Appellant in Ethiopia and  there  is  evidence  that  money
    transfers have been sent there for the Appellant's support.

 9. The FtTJ noted and considered the evidence before her.  First she  made
    a finding that there was no real issue as to whether the  Appellant  is
    leading an independent life and found that the evidential picture  does
    not show that he is.  That finding disposed of paragraph 352D(iii)  and
    it is correct to say that no further challenge has been raised to  that
    finding.

10. She then said the following at [17]:

         "The issue before me is whether the Appellant  meets  the  test  in
         paragraph 352D(iv) of the Rules, namely, that he "was part  of  the
         family unit of the person granted  asylum  at  the  time  that  the
         person granted asylum left the country of his habitual residence in
         order to seek asylum."  The Determination of  Judge  Saffer  is  my
         starting point, and it shows that he  decided  that  the  sponsor's
         country of habitual residence for this  purpose  was  the  UAE.   I
         agree with that finding.  The Appellant lived in the UAE from  2001
         to 2011, when she came with the UAE family to the UK.  Although she
         spent some short periods visiting Eritrea up to 2009 (sixteen weeks
         in total), I find that Eritrea was  not  her  country  of  habitual
         residence from the time she left it in 2001."

11. The FtTJ noted  that  Mr  Worthington  referred  her  to  the  reported
    decision of BM and AL (352D(iv); meaning  of  "family  unit")  Colombia
    [2007] UKAIT 55.  However even taking the principles in BM and AL  into
    account, she decided that she could not find, on a true construction of
    the meaning of the Rules, that a person can  voluntarily  live  in  one
    country for a number of years, have their child living with and  looked
    after by other people in another country, and still say that the  child
    is part of their family unit.

12. She then reminded herself that what was before her was an appeal  under
    the Human Rights Act, namely an Article 8 issue.  Having done  so,  she
    considered Article 8 but nevertheless found that the Appellant's appeal
    stood to be dismissed.

Onward Appeal

13. The  Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal.   The  grounds  seeking
    permission contended that the Appellant met  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, in that he was part of his mother's family  unit  at
    the time that she fled Eritrea.  The grounds then refer to  BM  and  AL
    and contended that the FtTJ had erred by failing to have proper  regard
    to the reason for the separation between the Appellant and Sponsor,  in
    that it was one of economic necessity rather than  social  choice.   It
    was said that the Sponsor's working conditions in Dubai were not  good.
    Nevertheless she sent the Appellant what money she was able  to,  spoke
    to him regularly, and made all the key decisions concerning him.

14. Further it was contended that this is not a case where a grant of entry
    clearance to the Appellant would result in his being  taken  away  from
    the other parent, thus disrupting an alternative family unit.   Finally
    it was said that whilst the living  arrangements  were  unconventional,
    the FtTJ was wrong to conclude that the Appellant and Sponsor were  not
    part of the same family unit.

15. Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms:

    1.   By a Decision promulgated on 8 May 2107 (sic) Judge of the  First-
         Tier Tribunal Caswell dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the
         Respondent's decision to refuse his application for entry clearance
         for family reunion with his mother.

    2.   The grounds on which permission to appeal is  sought  submit  that
         the Judge erred in law in finding that the Appellant was  not  part
         of his mother's family unit when she left her country  of  habitual
         residence to claim asylum.   It  is  submitted  that  on  a  proper
         understanding of the principles enunciated in BM & AL [2007]  UKAIT
         55,  the  Appellant  was  part  of   his   mother's   family   unit
         notwithstanding that she was living and working in the UAE and  she
         had left him in the care of his grandmother.  This is arguable.

    3.   If the Appellant were to succeed on the above issue, then arguably
         he would meet  all  the  requirements  of  paragraph  352D  of  the
         Immigration Rules and arguably the refusal of entry clearance would
         be unlawful under S.6 Human Rights Act 1998.

16. The Respondent served a Rule 24 response defending the decision.   Thus
    the matter comes before me to determine whether the decision of the FtT
    discloses such error of law that the decision must be set aside  to  be
    remade.

Error of Law Hearing

17. Before me Mr Worthington appeared for the Appellant, Mrs Pettersen  for
    the Respondent.  Mr Worthington's  submission  relied  on  the  grounds
    seeking permission.  He said that what constitutes a family unit  is  a
    matter of construction and BM and AL emphasised that the concept  of  a
    family is wide and depends crucially on the context in which  the  word
    is used.  He used the phrase, "no one size fits all."  The term "family
    unit" is not limited to children living in the same  household  as  the
    refugee.  He said  that  in  the  present  case  the  Sponsor  had  not
    abandoned her child but had gone to work  in  Dubai  through  force  of
    circumstances in order to support her family back in Eritrea.  She  had
    left the Appellant in the care of his grandparents and kept  in  touch,
    visiting when she was able to.  When he left Eritrea, she was  the  one
    who arranged for him to live with the Negasi  family  in  Addis  Ababa.
    The FtTJ had applied the wrong test.  The decision should therefore  be
    set aside and remade allowing the appeal.

18. Mrs Pettersen in response defended the decision.   She  submitted  that
    the FtTJ had properly set out and turned her mind to BM  and  AL.   She
    gave proper consideration to drawing upon the  guidance  given  in  the
    jurisprudence.  The FtTJ came to the conclusion that the Appellant  was
    not part of  the  Sponsor's  family  unit  whilst  she  was  habitually
    resident in Dubai, and this was after a full consideration of the facts
    pertaining to this appeal.  A proper construction of the Rule had  been
    carried out.  The meaning of "family unit" in this part of the Rule had
    to be looked at in the context of "habitual residence".  The FtTJ  made
    a finding at [19] that she could not find that a true  construction  of
    the meaning of the Rules meant that a person can voluntarily reside  in
    one country for a number of years, have their  child  living  with  and
    being looked after by other people in another  country  and  still  say
    that the child is part of their family unit.  These were findings  open
    to the judge.  The decision was sustainable and the  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.

Error of Law Consideration

19. The issues before me are:

          i. did Judge Caswell err in her finding that  the  Appellant  was
             not part of his mother's family unit when  she  left  UAE  and
             subsequently claimed asylum: and

         ii. is it the case that circumstances of this case  in  any  event
             constitute a breach of Article 8 ECHR Family Life?

20. In coming to my decision, I note first of all the guidance given in  BM
    and AL as to the true nature of the test  inherent  in  the  phrase  "a
    family unit" where it is used in paragraph 352D(iv) of the  Immigration
    Rules.  In BM and AL the test was said to be a  question  of  fact.   I
    find that the FtTJ clearly kept BM and AL in mind when  coming  to  her
    decision because she says at [18] the following:

         "Mr Worthington seeks to persuade me that the Appellant was part of
         the sponsor's family unit in Eritrea at the time she was habitually
         resident in the UAE, and that this meets the test in the Rules.  He
         has directed my attention to various authorities, including BM  and
         AL above.  However, the facts in that case were different to  those
         here.  Although I accept the general principles,  that  what  is  a
         family unit for these purposes is  a  question  of  fact,  and  not
         limited to children who lived in the same household as the refugee,
         and that it is hard to find that a child  is  part  of  two  family
         units (all of which derive from the reasoning in that case),  I  do
         not find that any of this assists the Appellant in the case  before
         me...."

21. The FtTJ's reasons for finding as she did are  then  set  out  in  [19]
    where she says:

         "I do not find that a true construction of the meaning of the Rules
         is that a person can voluntarily live in one country for  a  number
         of years, have their child living with and being  looked  after  by
         other people in another country, and still say that  the  child  is
         part of their family unit.  If it is possible, I do not  find  that
         this is the case on the facts of this appeal...."

22. She then set out her findings that the Sponsor had not  spent  a  great
    deal of time with the Appellant over the last  sixteen  years  and  had
    given him limited amounts of financial support not sufficient  to  meet
    his needs.  On those findings she concluded that the Rule was not  met.



23. Before me, Mr Worthington  took  exception  to  the  concept  that  the
    Sponsor has in some way abandoned the  Appellant  by  putting  physical
    distance between them.  His case is that the Sponsor kept in touch with
    the Appellant, visited when she could and took decisions in  his  life,
    underlining her responsibility for him.   He  added  that  the  Sponsor
    could not be said to have exercised a lifestyle choice in going to  the
    UAE; it had been a matter of necessity.

24. I find however that the Appellant did make a choice to work in the  UAE
    and thereby to leave the care of her son to his grandmother.  No  doubt
    the choice made was difficult and  one  borne  of  economic  necessity.
    However she did not leave Eritrea in  2001  as  a  refugee.   Therefore
    looking at matters in the round and drawing on  some  assistance  which
    can be derived from the "sole responsibility" Rule, the  fact  is  that
    the  Appellant  has  clearly  been  brought  up  since  then   by   his
    grandmother.  His day-to-day care was with her, no  doubt  she  oversaw
    his welfare and general upbringing.  I find therefore that  the  FtTJ's
    finding that the Appellant was part of his grandmother's  family  unit,
    and therefore not part of his mother's, is a sustainable finding.

25. I am reinforced in  this  by  consideration  of  the  Immigration  Rule
    itself.  Prior to paragraph 325D  coming  into  force,  family  reunion
    cases were dealt with by way of policy considerations.  Paragraph  352D
    came  into  force,  as  I  understand  it,  to  reflect  those   policy
    considerations.  The Rule exists to enable family reunion for  families
    fractured because circumstances have occurred which caused a person  to
    flee persecution,  leaving  close  family  members  behind.   The  Rule
    requires the fracture in the family to have occurred as a direct result
    of the persecution, not because of some future event.

26. The case here is as the FtTJ found, that the Appellant's mother was not
    forced to leave Eritrea on account of persecutory conduct.  Instead she
    left Eritrea to go to the UAE on account  of  economic  considerations.
    The  FtTJ  describes  it  as  voluntarily  leaving   Eritrea   and   Mr
    Worthington's case is that the Appellant left  to  go  to  the  UAE  on
    account of necessity.  Perhaps the wording used by the FtTJ could  have
    been better expressed.  No doubt the Sponsor had to make a hard choice,
    but nevertheless the fact remains that the  family  was  fractured  not
    because the Sponsor was fleeing persecution and was therefore forced to
    leave her habitual residence, but as a  result  of  difficult  economic
    considerations.  It was not until  a  decade  later  that  the  Sponsor
    claimed asylum after being brought to the UK from Dubai.   I  find  the
    FtTJ gave proper consideration and findings on the evidence  which  was
    before her.

27. For the foregoing reasons I find  that  the  FtTJ's  finding  that  the
    Appellant was not part of the Sponsor's family unit is neither perverse
    nor unreasoned, and therefore it stands.

28. That of course is not the end of the matter.   The  Appellant's  appeal
    before the FtT was an Article 8, ECHR appeal.   Drawing  on  the  wider
    considerations in Article 8, the FtTJ was asked  consider  whether  the
    factors in this appeal were such as to merit consideration outside  the
    Rules.

29. I find that the difficulty for Mr Worthington is  that  the  judge  did
    look at the wider Article 8 considerations and  found  that  there  was
    nothing which would assist the Appellant.  She considered the fact that
    he is in Ethiopia and therefore outside  his  country  of  origin,  but
    found on the evidence before her that even though he was a minor at the
    date  of  application,  he  was  approaching  his  maturity.   She  was
    satisfied that he had help and support from  the  Negasi  family.   She
    discounted the letter from  them  saying  that  they  could  no  longer
    accommodate him, not least because they had done so for the last  three
    years.   She  took  into  account  that  the  Appellant's  mother  sent
    financial support to him and had been able to travel to Ethiopia to see
    him.  The  Sponsor's  report  of  seeing  him  was  only  that  he  was
    "unhappy".  The Appellant is apparently in good health  and  altogether
    there is no up-to-date evidence in  documentary  form  of  any  current
    problems or difficulties for the Appellant.  The FtTJ  found  therefore
    that there was nothing to allow her to find that there are serious  and
    compelling circumstances such as to bring  the  Appellant  outwith  the
    Rules.

30. The FtTJ went further to say that if she were to consider the appeal on
    Article 8 grounds outside the Rules and find that there is family life,
    nevertheless she could not be satisfied  that  any  family  life  which
    exists between the Appellant and Sponsor would be such as to satisfy or
    meet the first two stages in the Razgar test.  This  is  on  the  basis
    that for the last sixteen years or almost all of the  Appellant's  life
    his contact with his mother consists of occasional visits, money  being
    sent and telephone and Viber communications.  As she found,  there  was
    no reason put forward why this could not continue.

31. Accordingly for all the foregoing reasons, I find that the decision  of
    Judge Caswell, promulgated on 8th May 2017, contains no  error  of  law
    requiring it to be set aside.  The decision therefore stands  and  this
    appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  promulgated  on  8th  May  2017,
dismissing the Appellant's appeal under Section 6 of the  Human  Rights  Act
1998 contains no error of law.  The decision therefore stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     06 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
