
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11317/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 2 August 2019                     |On 9 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                OLUWATOBI [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 9 June 1996 and is a male citizen of Nigeria.
    By a decision dated 8 May 2018, the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's application to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of
    his private life. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which, in a decision promulgated on 16  November  2018,  dismissed  the
    appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant attended the initial hearing in  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    person with his mother. I was careful to explain the nature  and  scope
    of the proceedings to the appellant and to ensure that  the  understood
    what I had said. I told the appellant that he should let  me  know  if,
    during the course of the hearing, anything was said which  he  did  not
    understand. He told me that he would do so. The appellant presented  as
    an intelligent young man who spoke fluent English and I had  no  reason
    at all to believe  that  he  did  not  comprehend  the  nature  of  the
    proceedings.

 3. The grant of permission states that it was  'arguable  that  the  judge
    failed to address  whether  the  appellant  was  a  vulnerable  witness
    consequent to a significant  history  of  mental  health  concerns  and
    therefore whether a lower standard of proof should be  applied  to  the
    appellant's evidence: AM (Afghanistan) [2018] 4 WLR 78.

 4. I asked the appellant to describe experience of  appearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. He told me that the 'judge was fine'. He explained
    that he had attended court initially as a 'float' appeal and  had  done
    so  with  a  professional  representative.  He  had   paid   for   that
    representative's attendance even though the case had not been called on
    the hearing. The representative had wanted  further  payment  when  the
    case was relisted and the appellant had been unable or unwilling to pay
    the fees. It was striking that the appellant made no  complaint  as  to
    the way in which he was treated before  the  First-tier  Tribunal;  his
    concern was solely with the fact that he had not had  a  lawyer  acting
    for him.

 5. The appellant told me that he is still on treatment for  psychosis  but
    that his doctors have been unable to diagnose the causes of his  mental
    difficulties. He said that he did feel a 'little bit better'  now  that
    he had at the time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

 6. At [3], judge notes that  the  appellant  was  not  represented.  As  a
    consequence,  the  judge  'took  [the  appellant]  through   the   case
    carefully.' The judge 'established... that [the  appellant]  understood
    the reasons why he had been refused leave which in essence was  because
    his account of being unable to return to  Nigeria  because  it  illness
    meant he had been rejected by his father had not been accepted and  are
    having spent most of his life in Nigeria, he would easily reintegrate.'
    In the light of comments made to me at the hearing  by  the  appellant,
    the grounds of appeal and the clear statements in  the  decision  which
    indicate that the judge was careful to explain the  proceedings  to  an
    unrepresented appellant, I am satisfied that the judge has treated  the
    appellant appropriately. In any event, the oral evidence given  by  the
    appellant was, save for what he  said  about  smoking  cannabis  (which
    could make no difference to the outcome of the appeal) uncontroversial;
    no part  of  that  evidence  as  recorded  by  the  judge  betrays  any
    suggestion of vulnerability on the part of the appellant witness.

 7. The grounds of appeal complained that the  judge  failed  to  take  the
    appellant's mental illness into account. I  note  that  the  judge  has
    dealt with the mental illness as a first consideration in his  Findings
    and Conclusions commencing at  [10].  It  was  open  to  the  judge  to
    disbelieve the appellant's claim that he had not smoked cannabis;  such
    medical evidence as was available indicated that he was suffering  from
    a  cannabinoid  induced  psychotic  disorder.  Thereafter,  the   judge
    analyses in detail  the  availability  of  mental  health  services  in
    Nigeria. No issue has been taken by  the  appellant  with  the  judge's
    findings.

 8. I am satisfied  the  judge  has  produced  a  careful  and  even-handed
    analysis, assessing the evidence in the light  of  the  fact  that  the
    appellant appeared before him unrepresented. I am  satisfied  that  the
    judge has fully taken into account the  fact  that  the  appellant  has
    suffered  from  mental  health  difficulties  and   has   taken   those
    difficulties properly into account in reaching his decision. Given  the
    uncontroversial nature of the evidence, the appellant's  mental  health
    condition was relevant primarily in respect of the treatment  which  he
    could expect to receive in Nigeria, an aspect of the case in which  the
    judge's analysis is unimpeachable.

 9. At the end of the appeal, I heard briefly from the appellant's  mother.
    She became upset when telling me that she  did  not  wish  to  see  her
    family broken up and that the appellant would struggle upon  return  to
    Nigeria. I was grateful to her  for  her  contribution.  However,  this
    appeal must be decided in accordance with the law and, for the  reasons
    I have stated above, I am unable to identify any error of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal. Consequently, the appeal  must  be
    dismissed.



Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 2 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane







