
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11360/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 July 2019                      |On 07 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     JL
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. D. Berg, the Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Ms. J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andonian, promulgated on 16  April  2019,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse leave to enter under the family reunion provisions.
 2. I make an anonymity direction, continuing that made in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:-



         "The grounds argue that the Judge erred  in  the  approach  to  the
         Appellant being in a family with the Sponsor and  wrongly  rejected
         the Appellant from pre-flight family reunion given he had left Iran
         when he was not seeking asylum and had married  before  making  the
         claim.  On the basis of the cases submitted with the  grounds  they
         are arguable and permission is granted."


 4. I heard submissions from Mr. Berg and Ms. Isherwood following  which  I
    reserved my decision.

Error of Law Decision

 5. The Judge finds that the Appellant does not meet  the  requirements  of
    part 11 of the immigration rules as the Sponsor had not  fled  Iran  to
    seek asylum ([35] and [36]).   Paragraph  352A(ii)  provides  that  the
    marriage must not have taken place "after the  person  granted  refugee
    status left the country of their former habitual residence in order  to
    seek asylum".  There is no dispute that the marriage took  place  after
    the Sponsor left Iran.  He did not leave Iran seeking asylum, but  left
    to join his then wife in the United  Kingdom.   He  made  a  sur  place
    application for asylum in the United Kingdom, which was  granted  after
    his marriage to the Appellant.


 6. I find that the Appellant cannot meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    352A.  I find that there is no error in the Judge's assessment  of  the
    immigration rules at [35] and [36].


 7. At [38] the Judge turns to consider the appeal under Article 8  outside
    the immigration rules, having found that the Appellant cannot meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM.  He states at [42], with reference to  the
    policy:

         "I have considered the policy document in the  appellant's  bundle.
         The fact remains  that  the  policy  is  effective  to  assist  the
         appellant in his article 8 claim provided that the family unit  was
         formed BEFORE (the Judge's emphasis) the claim of asylum.  I regret
         to say that there was no family unit formed in China."

 8. At [2.4] of the policy guidance it states:

         "Individuals  who  are  granted  refugee  status  or   humanitarian
         protection or humanitarian protection  on  sur  place  grounds  are
         eligible for family reunion.  For such individuals as long  as  the
         family unit was formed before the  claim  of  asylum,  it  will  be
         treated as pre-flight."

 9. This is correctly quoted  by  the  Judge  at  [40],  albeit  that  this
    paragraph is rather confused, and it is difficult to tell  which  parts
    are quoted from  the  policy  guidance.   I  note  that,  although  Ms.
    Isherwood provided me with  a  copy  of  the  new  guidance,  which  is
    referred to in the Rule 24 response, she made no  reference  to  it  in
    submissions.  She accepted that this new  guidance  was  not  in  place
    until March 2019, after the application and decision had been made.  It
    was therefore not the relevant guidance in place at  the  time  of  the
    Respondent's decision.  Ms. Isherwood agreed that the correct  guidance
    was that quoted, which was provided in  the  Appellant's  bundle  (page
    52).


10. I find that the policy  is  not  reflected  in  the  immigration  rules
    themselves, but nevertheless is a clear statement of  the  Respondent's
    policy in force at the time the  decision  was  made.   It  is  clearly
    relevant for any Article 8 assessment.

11. Although the Judge states that "the policy is effective to  assist  the
    appellant in his article 8 claim provided  that  the  family  unit  was
    formed BEFORE the claim of asylum",  which  is  what  occurred  in  the
    Appellant's case, he then places an extra requirement on the Appellant,
    which is that the family unit must have been formed in China.  There is
    no dispute that the Sponsor had been granted asylum after his  marriage
    to the Appellant.  There is no issue that he is a "sur place"  refugee.
     The policy in place at the time stated that as long as the family unit
    was formed before the claim of asylum, it  will  be  treated  as  pre-
    flight.  I asked Ms. Isherwood whether there was any authority for  the
    proposition that a married couple was  not  a  family  unit.   She  was
    unable to point to any  authority  which  indicated  that  the  Judge's
    approach to "family unit" at [42] was correct.

12. At [44] the Judge repeats the error stating that the Appellant does not
    qualify as a pre-flight spouse "because no family unit  was  formed  in
    China before the claim of asylum based Sur Place  considerations"  (the
    Judge's italics).   The Appellant and Sponsor have not  lived  together
    in China, but that it is not what is required by the policy  at  [2.4].
    There is nothing in [2.4] which stipulates that the family unit has  to
    have been formed in any particular country.  The Judge has  added  this
    requirement, but it is not what the policy requires.   Essentially  the
    finding at [42] is that the Appellant and Sponsor's marriage  does  not
    involve the formation of a family unit due to the fact  that  they  did
    not live together in China.  I find that this is an error of law.


13. I find that the decision involves the making of an error of law as  the
    Judge has placed an extra requirement on the  Appellant  which  is  not
    found in the Respondent's policy.  I find that this error  is  material
    as it affects the Judge's consideration under Article 8.


14. I find that the Judge has further erred in his consideration of Article
    8.  He has found that the Sponsor can speak Mandarin, but the  evidence
    of the Sponsor was that, although he had worked in China,  he  was  not
    able to speak Mandarin, and that  he  had  not  told  the  Judge  this.
    Further, the Judge has erred in failing properly to consider  that  the
    Sponsor has refugee status and that China is not a  signatory  to  the
    1951  Refugee  Convention.   The  Sponsor  provided  evidence  of   the
    difficulties he had encountered trying to obtain  visas  to  visit  the
    Appellant due to his status.  Evidence was provided  of  email  contact
    between the Sponsor and the Chinese Embassy regarding his inability  to
    travel to China on a Travel Document, and the  fact  that  his  Iranian
    passport had been handed in to the Respondent.  He was in  a  different
    position when he was working in China, as he was  an  Iranian  national
    using his Iranian passport.  He is now a refugee, not in possession  of
    his Iranian passport.  I find that this is relevant to the  finding  at
    [52] that the Sponsor could go and live in  China.   I  find  that  the
    Judge  has  failed  to  give  proper  consideration  to  the  Sponsor's
    circumstances.


15. I find that the decision involves the making of  a  material  error  of
    law.  I set the decision aside.

Remaking

16. I have  found  above  that,  under  a  correct  interpretation  of  the
    Respondent's policy in place at the time,  the  Appellant  should  have
    been  treated  as  a  pre-flight  spouse.   I  find  that   the   other
    requirements of paragraph 352A of the immigration rules are  met.   The
    application was not refused by the Respondent on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant did not meet the other requirements of paragraph 352A.  Going
    through this paragraph, there is no  dispute  that  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor are married (352A(i)).  352A(ii) and 352A(iii) are  covered  by
    the policy, which indicates that the family unit should be  treated  as
    pre-flight as it was formed before the claim of asylum.


17. There has been no suggestion that the Appellant would be excluded  from
    protection if she were to seek asylum in her own right (352A(iv)).  The
    Appellant and Sponsor intend to live permanently  with  the  other  and
    their relationship is genuine and subsisting (352A(v)).  They  are  not
    within the prohibited degree of relationship (352A (vi)).


18. I have considered the Appellant's appeal under Article  8  outside  the
    immigration rules in accordance with the steps set out in Razgar [2004]
    UKHL 27.   The  application  was  not  refused  on  the  basis  of  the
    relationship requirements.  I find that the Appellant and Sponsor  have
    a family life between them.  I find that that Article 8(1) is  engaged.




19. Continuing the steps set out  in  Razgar,  I  find  that  the  proposed
    interference would be in accordance with the law, as  being  a  regular
    immigration decision taken by UKBA in accordance with  the  immigration
    rules.  In terms of proportionality, the Tribunal has to strike a  fair
    balance between the rights of the individual and the interests  of  the
    community.  The public interest in this case  is  the  preservation  of
    orderly and fair immigration control in the interests of all  citizens.
    Maintaining the integrity of the immigration rules is self-evidently  a
    very important public interest.  In practice, this will  usually  trump
    the  qualified  rights  of  the  individual,  unless   the   level   of
    interference is very significant.  I find that in this case, the  level
    of  interference  would  be  significant  and  that  it  would  not  be
    proportionate.


20. With reference to the factors set out in section 117B of the 2002  Act,
    insofar as  they  are  relevant,  section  117B(1)  provides  that  the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the   public
    interest.  While the Appellant does not meet the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules, by reference to the Respondent's policy in place  at
    the time, she is to be treated as if she met the immigration rules.   I
    therefore find that there will be no compromise to the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls by allowing her appeal.

21.  In  relation  to  section  117B(2),  there  are  no  English  language
    requirements under paragraph 352A.

22. In relation to financial independence, again  there  are  no  financial
    requirements to be satisfied under paragraph 352A  (117B(3)).   I  find
    that the Sponsor is employed, although he gave  evidence  that  he  has
    found it difficult to find permanent employment due to his status,  and
    the fact that he travels to China to see the Appellant for three months
    every year, which is the maximum period that he can be absent from  the
    United Kingdom.  He gave evidence that his  status  has  prevented  him
    from getting employment with the Home Office and also HMRC.   The  visa
    that he has managed to obtain to visit China  does  not  allow  him  to
    work.

23. Sections 117B(4) to (6) are not relevant.

24. In assessing proportionality, I give particular weight to the fact that
    the Respondent's policy in place at the time that the decision was made
    provides that the Appellant should have been  treated  as  meeting  the
    requirements of the immigration rules as the family  unit  formed  with
    the Sponsor should have been treated as pre-flight.  The  circumstances
    of the case are not straightforward, given  the  nationalities  of  the
    Appellant and Sponsor, the  fact  that  the  Sponsor  is  a  sur  place
    refugee, and the fact that China is not  a  signatory  to  the  Refugee
    Convention and therefore does not recognise the Travel Document  issued
    by the Respondent to the Sponsor.  Although the Sponsor has spent  some
    time in China, which is where he met the Appellant, that  was  when  he
    was working for  an  Iranian  company  and  travelling  on  an  Iranian
    passport, something he can no longer do.   The  first  application  was
    made over five years ago.  There  is  evidence  of  the  mental  health
    problems which the delay in resolving the situation has caused for  the
    Sponsor.

25. Taking into account all of the above, and giving particular  weight  to
    the fact that the Respondent's policy in place at  the  time  indicates
    that the family unit  should  have  been  treated  as  pre-flight,  and
    therefore the  Appellant  should  have  been  treated  as  meeting  the
    requirements of the immigration rules, I find that  the  Appellant  has
    shown on the balance of probabilities that the Respondent's decision is
    a breach of her rights, and those of the  Sponsor,  to  a  family  life
    under Article 8 ECHR.

Notice of decision

26. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set it aside.


27. I remake the Appellant's appeal allowing it on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 5 August 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a  fee  award.   Had  the  Respondent  applied  her
policy correctly, the Appellant should have been  treated  as  a  pre-flight
spouse.  In the circumstances I make a fee award for the entire fee paid.


Signed                                  Date 5 August 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


