
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11430/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 February 2019                           |On 14 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              Arshadul hussain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett of Counsel, instructed by Miya
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the  Appellant,  with  permission,  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rodger (the  judge),  promulgated
    on 20 September 2018,  whereby  he  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent, dated 19 April 2016.

 2. The judge proceeded in  the  Appellant's  absence  and  indeed  in  the
    absence of any representative on his behalf.   This  was  done  on  the
    basis that the notice of hearing had been sent out to  the  Appellant's
    previous solicitors Malik Law Chambers and to his home address.

 3. The judge was aware that the previous solicitors had been intervened by
    the Solicitor's Regulatory Authority but was satisfied that because  of
    the service to the home address the Appellant would have been aware  of
    the hearing and there was no good reason for his  non-attendance.   The
    specific consideration of this issue is set out in [16] through to [23]
    of the judge's decision.

 4. His decision was challenged on procedural  fairness  grounds.   It  was
    asserted that the issue of the previous  solicitor's  intervention  and
    subsequent instruction of new solicitors had caused problems in respect
    of attendance at the hearing. More importantly,  it  was  claimed  that
    following two accidents at  home  in  March  2018,  the  Appellant  had
    suffered catastrophic injuries resulting in  him  becoming  tetraplegic
    and being confined to a wheelchair. He had been in hospital at the time
    the notice of hearing was sent out and received at the home address and
    indeed, as it transpires, all the way through until after  the  hearing
    itself.

 5. Unfortunately, and perhaps due to the  change  in  representation,  the
    judge does not seem to have been aware of the Appellant's injuries  and
    subsequent hospitalisation.

 6. There is no reason for me  to  doubt  the  assertions  put  forward  in
    respect of either the change of representation issue or the Appellant's
    time in hospital.

 7.  In  my  view,  there  has  been  a  material  procedural   unfairness,
    particularly on the basis that the judge was unaware of material facts.
     I am satisfied that the Appellant was indeed in  hospital  from  March
    2018 all the way through to late September 2018.  Thus, I am  satisfied
    that the Appellant was unaware of the hearing  date  as  were  his  new
    representatives who, whilst coming on record just prior to  that  date,
    were only aware of it a day later.

 8. In light of my conclusion, the judge's decision must be set aside.

 9. By way of disposal this matter clearly needs  to  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for  a  complete  rehearing.   The  effect  of  the
    judge's error is that the Appellant has effectively not had  a  hearing
    at all.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete  rehearing
with no preserved findings.

No anonymity direction is made.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

   1. The remitted appeal shall be heard at the Taylor House hearing centre;



   2. The remitted appeal shall not be heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Rodger;



   3. It would be useful for this matter to be set down  for  an  oral  case
      management hearing. There are several strands to the Appellant's case,
      including deportation.  Further,  the  consequences  of  the  injuries
      suffered in  2018  may,  if  relied  on  in  support  of  his  appeal,
      constitute a "new matter" within the meaning of section 85(6)  of  the
      NIAA 2002.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 12 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
