
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/11756/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On May 13, 2019                         |On May 22, 2019                    |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                             Mr gurwinder singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Raza, Counsel instructed by Simman Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, an Indian national, arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on
    October 8, 2010 as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  and  was  subsequently
    granted  leave  to  remain  in  that  capacity  until  July  31,  2016.
    Applications for leave to remain on family and private life grounds was
    lodged on June 11 and September 18, 2015 but these  were  rejected  and
    refused respectively.  There was an appeal against the latter decision,
    but both the First-tier Tribunal and the  Upper  Tribunal  refused  the
    appellant's appeal.

 2. There was a fresh decision taken by the  respondent  on  September  21,
    2017 and the appellant appealed that decision under  Section  82(1)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on  October  4,  2017.
    That appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chana who in a
    decision dated August 8, 2018 dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought  on  the  basis  that  there  had  been
    procedural unfairness.  Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Hanson on April 1, 2019 on the basis as  set  out  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.

 4. No anonymity direction is made.

 5. The matter came before me on the above date and I  was  handed  witness
    statements from former Counsel, Mr Rees, and the appellant's father, Mr
    Jarmail Singh.

 6. This was a case where the Judge applied the principles of Devaseelan  v
    SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702 and effectively found there was no new evidence
    and upheld the original decision.  There were issues at the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing regarding the appellant's medical  condition  and  his
    subsequent removal to hospital by the ambulance service  and  the  fact
    that his father had accompanied him to the  hospital.   The  Judge  had
    found that there was no good reason to adjourn the case  and  proceeded
    to deal with it in the absence of both the appellant and his father and
    effectively followed the previous decision.

 7. The First-tier Judge had been invited for  her  comments  but  had  not
    provided any material response to the grounds of appeal save  that  she
    relied on her decision and Record of Proceedings.

 8. Mr Tarlow, on behalf of the respondent, considered the  statements  and
    indicated that subject to anything the Tribunal had to say he  did  not
    oppose the grounds brought by the appellant.

 9. I am satisfied  that  there  was  a  perceived  unfairness  and  whilst
    ultimately the decision may have been the same there was no testing  of
    the new evidence provided by the appellant and his father and there was
    no consideration of any of that evidence by the First-tier Judge.

10. For these reasons I find that there was an error in law and I remit the
    matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal  under  Section  12(1)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the original decision and remit the matter back  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date May 21, 2019


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
