
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11444/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 April 2019                     |On 3 May 2019                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                         Janet Chidinma Olenki Orji
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. R. Roberts, Global Immigration Solutions
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Walker, promulgated on 22 November  2018,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse entry clearance on human rights grounds.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:-

         "It is arguable that the judge erred in failing to attach  decisive
         weight, when conducting  the  proportionality  assessment,  to  the
         appellant's ability  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  relevant
         Immigration Rules.  TZ  (Pakistan)  appears  to  have  been  wholly
         disregarded."

 3. The Sponsor attended the hearing.

 4. In his submissions, Mr. Walker accepted that the decision involved  the
    making of a material error of law.  He accepted that, having found that
    the immigration rules had been met, the appeal should have been allowed
    with reference to the case of TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109.

 5. Given this concession, I set the decision aside, and remade the  appeal
    allowing the Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

Error of Law

 6. The Judge states at [29]:

         "I therefore find that the Appellant  has  shown  to  the  required
         standard that she and the Sponsor could meet all  the  requirements
         of Paragraph 297 as of the date of the decision."

 7. The Judge then moved on to deal with the proportionality exercise,  and
    found that the decision was proportionate.   TZ  (Pakistan)  states  at
    [34]:-

         "That has the benefit that where  a  person  satisfies  the  Rules,
         whether or not by reference to an article 8  informed  requirement,
         then this will be positively determinative of that person's article
         8 appeal, provided their case engages article 8(1),  for  the  very
         reason that it would then be disproportionate for that person to be
         removed."

 8. This clearly states that, where a person meets the requirements of  the
    rules, that is positively determinative of her Article  8  appeal.   In
    the proportionality assessment conducted by  the  Judge,  there  is  no
    reference to the fact that the Appellant met the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules.  Having found that the immigration rules  were  met,
    weight should have been given to this, yet there is no reference to it.
     TZ (Pakistan) makes the situation even clearer.


 9. It was accepted by Mr. Walker that this was a material error of law and
    that, having found that the immigration rules were  met,  following  TZ
    (Pakistan) the Judge should have allowed the appeal.


10. I thank Mr. Walker for the approach taken to the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision


11. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.


12. I remake the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal on  human  rights
    grounds.

13. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 1 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award.  I have decided to make no  fee  award
as it appears from the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  further
evidence was provided for the appeal.


Signed                                  Date 1 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
