

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/11349/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 3 December 2018                     |On 6 December 2018                  |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     BP
                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

       1. The appellant has appealed against  a  decision  dated  17  August
          2018 in which the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') refused  to  adjourn
          the hearing and dismissed his appeal on Article 8 grounds.


       2. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to the circumstances of his children and an order  made  in
          family proceedings concerning them.

Background

       3. The appellant is a citizen of India.  He has three  children  with
          his former partner ('B'), born  in  2004  (twins)  and  2007.   He
          arrived in the United Kingdom as a student in  2010.   His  family
          visited him in the UK but on each occasion, they returned to  live
          in India.


       4. The FTT decision refers to B and the children arriving in  the  UK
          in 2014 and then refusing to return to India.  I invited Mr  Ahmed
          to  clarify  B's  immigration  history   from   2014.    He   took
          instructions  and  was  able  to  clarify  the  following:   after
          visiting her husband in 2014,  B  and  the  children  returned  to
          India; they returned  as  visitors  in  June  2015  and  have  not
          returned to India since this time.  Mr  Ahmed  was  unable  to  be
          precise as to whether they overstayed  their  leave  but  accepted
          this was likely.


       5. On 9 January 2015 the SSHD informed  the  appellant  that  he  had
          revoked the sponsorship licence for his college and  as  such  his
          CAS was no longer  valid.   The  SSHD  invited  the  appellant  to
          submit a fresh application within 60 days.  By 2  April  2015  the
          appellant's solicitors confirmed that he  solely  relied  upon  an
          application to remain on the basis of Article 8,  dated  11  March
          2015.  This appears to have been based upon his  private  life  in
          the UK.  It could not be based upon his  family  life  because  at
          the relevant time, B and the children were  in  India.   By  April
          2016, the appellant's relationship with B had broken down.   In  a
          child arrangements order dated 8 May 2017 it was ordered that  the
          children reside with their mother but  that  the  children  should
          spend  time  with  their  father  every  weekend  overnight  on  a
          Saturday, with  provision  made  for  contact  on  the  children's
          birthdays.  The order records the parties agreeing to be civil  to
          each other.  Mr Ahmed confirmed  that  at  the  date  of  the  FTT
          hearing (and continuing) the appellant  and  his  wife  have  been
          able to organise dropping off and  picking  up  the  children,  in
          order  for  the  Saturday   staying   contact   to   take   place,
          effectively.

       6. The appellant's human rights application was  refused  over  three
          years after the date it was made, in a decision dated 8 May  2018.
           By this time, B and the children were living in the  UK  but  has
          separated.

       7. The  appellant  appealed  against  the  respondent's  decision  to
          refuse him leave in grounds of appeal dated 10  May  2018.   These
          focussed their attention on the fact that his children  with  whom
          he has regular contact will remain in the UK, if he is removed  to
          India, and this state of  affairs  would  not  be  in  their  best
          interests and would constitute a breach of Article 8.

       8. At the hearing before the FTT on 9 August 2018 the  appellant  was
          represented by Mr Ahmed.  The appellant only became aware  that  B
          had made an asylum claim relying upon  domestic  violence  on  the
          part of the appellant at that hearing.  Mr Ahmed  applied  for  an
          adjournment on the basis that the appellant's  appeal  should  not
          be determined until after  the  SSHD  had  considered  B's  asylum
          claim.   This  was  refused  by  the  FTT,  which  dismissed   the
          appellant's appeal.

       9. FTT Judge Keith granted permission to appeal in a  decision  dated
          17 September 2018.  He observed that it was arguable that the  FTT
          failed to  consider  the  scenario  of  the  appellant's  children
          remaining  in  the  UK  with  the  benefit  of  contact  with  the
          appellant.

Issues before the Upper Tribunal

      10. Mr Ahmed agreed that although the  grounds  of  appeal  criticised
          the substantive decision reached by  the  FTT,  he  solely  relied
          upon the  ground  challenging  the  fairness  of  the  adjournment
          refusal.  The single issue for me  to  determine  is  whether  the
          FTT's hearing is tainted by procedural  unfairness  by  reason  of
          the failure to adjourn the  hearing.   Mr  Ahmed  maintained  that
          this was unfair and pre-determined  the  outcome  of  the  pending
          asylum claim.  Mr McVeety invited me to conclude  that  there  was
          no  unfairness  in   refusing   to   adjourn   given   the   known
          circumstances of B's asylum claim and the  evidence  available  to
          the FTT.

      11. After hearing from both representatives, I reserved  my  decision.



Error of law discussion

      12. The FTT has not erred in law in concluding that  it  could  fairly
          determine  the  appeal  without   an   adjournment   pending   B's
          protection claim.  The FTT considered at  [5]  that  whatever  the
          outcome  of  the  protection  claim  it  would   make   "no   real
          difference" to the appellant's appeal.  As  Judge  Keith  observed
          when granting permission to appeal, the FTT clearly addressed  two
          scenarios: if B's asylum claim failed, the whole family  would  be
          returned to India [7] and if it  succeeded  it  would  be  on  the
          basis of the appellant's  violence  toward  the  appellant,  which
          would undermine his case to remain in  the  UK  on  the  basis  of
          Article 8 [8].  When the decision is read as a whole, it  is  also
          sufficiently  clear  that  the  FTT  turned  its   mind   to   the
          possibility that the children might remain in the  UK  with  their
          mother and thus be separated  from  their  father  (and  therefore
          unable to have weekly contact with him).  The FTT considered  that
          such a scenario would mean  that  the  SSHD  accepted  B's  asylum
          claim.  The FTT was mindful that this would necessitate a  finding
          that  this  appellant  is  untruthful  and  prone   to   violence.
          Although the FTT did not say so in terms,  when  the  decision  is
          read as a whole, the FTT was of  the  view  that  the  appellant's
          Article 8 appeal would be most unlikely to be successful  in  such
          circumstances.  The FTT acknowledged  that  possibility  expressly
          at [29] wherein it found that if permitted to  remain  in  the  UK
          with their mother, the  children  could  visit  the  appellant  in
          India.


      13. The FTT was entitled to be sceptical  that  an  adjournment  would
          make any meaningful difference  when  all  the  circumstances  are
          considered.  I invited Mr Ahmed to explain how on  any  legitimate
          view B's asylum claim could succeed when it is based upon  a  fear
          of this appellant, yet he  and  B  are  able  to  effectively  and
          civilly manage contact arrangements.  Mr Ahmed  acknowledged  this
          was the correct factual matrix before the FTT but  submitted  that
          the asylum claim should not be  pre-judged  prior  to  the  SSHD's
          consideration of it.  The FTT was entitled to consider the  likely
          position if an adjournment was granted and entitled to  reach  the
          conclusion that fairness did not require  an  adjournment  of  the
          hearing.  There  is  a  prima  facie  strong  public  interest  in
          removing the appellant given his immigration history and the  fact
          that he cannot meet the Immigration Rules.  That  public  interest
          would be even stronger if he is found to  be  the  perpetrator  of
          domestic violence  that  is  sufficiently  serious  to  support  a
          successful  international  protection   claim   by   his   spouse.
          Although the best interests of the children cannot  be  determined
          by reference  to  the  immigration  status  of  the  parents.  The
          children  are  not  "qualifying"  children.   Their  prospects  of
          remaining  in  the  UK   turn   entirely   upon   their   mother's
          international protection claim.  For the reasons already  provided
          this appears to be very  weak  indeed.   When  every  scenario  is
          considered, the FTT has not acted unfairly in refusing to  adjourn
          the hearing.

Decision

      14. The decision of the FTT did not involve the making of an error  of
          law and I do not set it aside.




Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
3 December 2018
