
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11619/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th January 2019                  |On 29th January 2019                 |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                             Mr MD Shiful Islam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Basith, Solicitor, Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      0. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant, with a
         very peculiar grant of permission.  The grant of permission states
         that there is no disclosable arguable error of law and nevertheless
         appears to grant permission.

      0. The whole matter is somewhat confused.  The situation is that in
         fact the appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal on human
         rights grounds.  It was a human rights appeal and it could only be
         allowed on human rights grounds.  The Appellant's disagreement
         seems to be about the nature of the grant from the Secretary of
         State which followed the appeal being allowed.  The Secretary of
         State, noting that the Appellant succeeded under Ex.1, granted
         leave under the ten-year route.  Had the Appellant met the
         requirements of the substantive Rule without having to rely on Ex.1
         he would have been within the five-year route and that is the
         complaint made by the Appellant in this case.

      0. However, the judge in considering the matter noted that the
         Secretary of State had first of all refused the application on
         suitability grounds which ground was withdrawn by the Secretary of
         State prior to the hearing.  Once the suitability ground was
         removed the judge then went on to consider the requirements of
         Appendix FM.  The Secretary of State refused the substantive
         requirements due to a lack of all the required specified evidence
         to confirm the relevant amount of income.  The judge looked at the
         additional documents that had been put before him and found that in
         fact they did meet the threshold minimum income requirement.
         However, that did not mean that the Appellant met the requirements
         of the Rules because the Rules require that specified evidence to
         be lodged with the application, which it had not been.

      0. The judge then went on to consider the requirements of Ex.1, which
         now that the suitability requirement had gone he was permitted to
         do.  He found that the Appellant did meet the requirements of Ex.1
         and, taking all matters into account, allowed the appeal on Article
         8 grounds, relying on the fact that he met Ex.1 and considering
         proportionality under Article 8, taking into account the
         requirements of Section 117B.

      0. The judge could have done nothing else on the basis of those
         findings.  The fact that the Secretary of State has granted him
         leave under the ten-year route rather than five-year route is a
         Decision to be taken by the Secretary of State and cannot be
         dictated by the Tribunal.  If the Appellant feels aggrieved by that
         grant then his recourse would have been to judicially review that
         Decision.  Alternatively, he may feel that he could in fact succeed
         under the five-year route if he made a fresh application with the
         requisite documents this time.

      0. However, none of that means that the First-tier Tribunal made a
         material error of law. An error that the First-tier Tribunal did
         make was in thinking that the Appellant had no valid leave at the
         time he made his application.  In fact, he did have valid leave but
         that still would not mean that he met the substantive requirements
         of the Rules. The judge did allow the appeal and thereafter it was
         a matter for the Secretary of State to grant such leave as he saw
         fit. I find that there is no material error of law in the First-
         tier Tribunal's conclusions and findings.




    Notice of Decision

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    There was no anonymity direction made in the First-tier Tribunal, no
    application for one and I see no reason to make one.


Signed [pic]                            Date 18th January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin





