
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/11117/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th December 2017                         |On 13th February 2018         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                             Athmane En Nassiri
                       (anonymity direction Not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Caisford, Counsel, Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. The Appellant is a Moroccan citizen who appeals  a  decision  of  Judge
    Walters dismissing her appeal against a refusal of leave to  remain  on
    Family and Private life grounds. The  Judge  made  significant  adverse
    credibility findings.  I can deal with this matter summarily because Mr
    Wilding has properly conceded before me that  the  evidence  supporting
    the   application   for   permission   to   appeal    establishes    an
    incontrovertible error  of  fact  underlying  Judge  Walter's  decision
    dismissing the Appellant's appeal.  In short, the judge found that  the
    Appellant had lied to him about the reason as to why his witnesses were
    not called to support their written statements. The Appellant had  said
    it was because he had not been told that it was  possible  to  ask  the
    witnesses  to  come  to  court.  The  judge  found  that  that  was  an
    unreasonable and inexplicable explanation.

 2. In the event evidence from the solicitors instructed has revealed  that
    the position was entirely as described by him.  The solicitors had  not
    told him that the witnesses could or should be called.  The  solicitors
    had taken the view that the case was strong enough without the  witness
    evidence and so had not discussed the position with  him.  The  judge's
    conclusion as to the credibility of  the  Appellant  was  significantly
    affected by that adverse credibility finding to  the  point  that  once
    that error is corrected it is agreed that the whole decision is unsafe.



 3. By consent I have set the decision aside and the appeal is remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to reach a new decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First -tier Tribunal reveals a  material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.
The matter is remitted to be heard de-novo  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
Walters.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

