
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/11795/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd May 2019                               |On 16th May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                           mr hassan ali mohammed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Jegede, Ashton Ross Law, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a national of India, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against the decision of the Secretary of  State  dated  16th  May  2018
    refusing his application for leave to remain  in  the  UK  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  The application was considered on the basis of  his
    private life in the UK under  Article  8.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Randall dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 21st  January
    2019.  The Appellant now  appeals  to  this  Tribunal  with  permission
    granted by Judge P J M Hollingworth on 13th March 2019.

 2. The background is that the Appellant entered the  UK  on  18th  October
    2009  with  entry  clearance  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student.   His
    application for further leave to remain on that basis was granted until
    February 2015.  His subsequent application for leave to remain to  find
    a new educational Sponsor was refused and, following judicial  reviews,
    that decision was maintained in March 2016 and February 2018.  However,
    the reconsidered application of 20th February 2015 was refused  on  the
    basis that the Appellant had used deception in the application on  20th
    April 2011 by submission of a TOEIC certificate  from  the  Educational
    Testing Service in relation to which  there  was  significant  evidence
    that it had been obtained fraudulently by use of a proxy test taker.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal.

The grounds of appeal

 4. On behalf of the appellant three grounds of  appeal  are  put  forward.
    The first ground is that the judge applied the wrong standard of  proof
    to the issue of the allegation of fraud in relation to  the  ETS  TOEIC
    certificate.  It is contended in the second ground that the  judge  put
    forward no  reasons  for  finding  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    discharged the legal burden of proof.  It is  contended  in  the  third
    ground that a proper assessment of the Respondent's  evidence  was  not
    sufficient to discharge the burden of proof.

 5. In the grounds and at the hearing before me it was contended  that  the
    judge applied the wrong standard of proof  to  the  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's evidence.  It is accepted in the Grounds of Appeal that the
    judge identified the "evidential pendulum" at paragraphs 13  to  14  of
    the decision where he set out the requirement on the Secretary of State
    to  discharge  the  evidential  burden,  then  looked  to  whether  the
    Appellant had provided an innocent explanation and then considered  the
    legal burden having shifted back to the  Respondent.   It  is  accepted
    that  the  judge  noted  properly  at  paragraph  15  that,  after  the
    Appellant's explanation  of  innocence,  which  reaches  the  level  of
    minimum plausibility, the legal burden shifts back to the Respondent.

 6. However, it is contended that the judge  erred  in  then  applying  the
    standard of the balance of probabilities at paragraphs 15 and 16 to the
    assessment of the Appellant's evidence.  It is contended that the judge
    scrutinised  the  Appellant's  evidence  in  detail   criticising   the
    Appellant for not requesting ETS for  a  recording  of  his  interview,
    looking at his English language results from India and failing to  have
    regard to the detailed explanation given by the Appellant as to  where,
    how, why and when he sat his English  language  test.   Mr  Jegede  put
    forward some examples of the judge's application of too high a standard
    of proof, for example at paragraph 12 where the judge  noted  that  the
    Appellant's  account  was  vague  but  failed  to  give   evidence   or
    illustrations as to how he reached that conclusion.  Mr Jegede  pointed
    to the  documents  within  the  Appellant's  bundle  which  showed  the
    Appellant's competence in the English language.   Mr  Jegede  submitted
    that the judge had failed to consider that, because of the  passage  of
    time since the test was undertaken, the Appellant's account could  have
    been vague.  In response Ms Jones contended  that  the  judge  made  no
    error in relation to the test, he considered all of the evidence.

Error of law

 7. In SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  (ETS  -
    Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 the Tribunal set out  the
    correct approach to  assessing  the  evidence  in  cases  involving  an
    allegation of fraud in terms of the ETS TOEIC test.

 8. The judge in this case set out the appropriate approach as paragraph 10
    in a citation from Abbas [2017] EWHC 78 (Admin).  There  it  is  stated
    that the Secretary of State must first adduce  sufficient  evidence  to
    raise the issue of fraud, the Appellant then has a burden of raising an
    innocent explanation which satisfies the minimum level of  plausibility
    and if that burden is discharged the Secretary of State must  establish
    on a balance of probabilities that this innocent explanation is  to  be
    rejected.

 9. I accept that at paragraph 11 the judge talked about  the  standard  of
    proof being the balance of probabilities.  However, it  is  clear  from
    the citation above that he  was  there  referring  to  the  balance  of
    probabilities in terms of the standard of proof for  the  Secretary  of
    State's case.  The judge set out the three steps at paragraphs  13,  14
    and 15.  At paragraph 13, which has  not  been  challenged,  the  judge
    accepted that the Respondent  had  provided  prime  facie  evidence  of
    deception by providing the generic evidence and the look up tool  which
    was sufficient to discharge the initial evidential burden.

10. The judge considered the Appellant's innocent explanation at  paragraph
    14 with reference to paragraph 12.  At paragraph  12  the  judge  found
    that the Appellant was not a credible  witness  about  the  test.   The
    judge found that the Appellant was able to provide only a  few  details
    about the test, about the bus journey and the length of  time  it  took
    him and this was evidence which  the  judge  considered  the  Appellant
    could have put forward. The judge found that the Appellant's account of
    the actual test was very vague as was his account as to why he  decided
    to use ETS in the first place.  At paragraph 14  the  judge  considered
    the Appellant's explanation as to  why  his  name  was  linked  to  the
    reports.  At paragraph 15 the judge proceeded on the  basis  that  this
    amounted to an explanation of innocence which reached the minimum level
    of  plausibility  and  that  the  legal  burden  shifted  back  to  the
    Respondent.  In these circumstances the Appellant has not made out  the
    first ground because the judge proceeded on the basis that the  minimum
    level of plausibility had been made  out  and  that  the  legal  burden
    shifted back to the Respondent. In these circumstances  the  judge  was
    looking at the case on the balance of probabilities as to  whether  the
    Respondent had established his case on the balance of probabilities.

11. In this context the judge looked at all of the evidence in the round at
    paragraphs 15 and 16.  At paragraph 15 the judge took into account  the
    fact that the Appellant had not  provided  a  satisfactory  alternative
    explanation as to how his test came to be identified as valid and  that
    the Respondent's methodology  as  to  how  the  appellant  cheated  was
    sufficiently robust.  The judge took into account  that  the  Appellant
    had not complained to ETS and had not taken the opportunity  to  listen
    to the audio recording.  The judge took into  account  the  Appellant's
    assertion that his English was sufficiently good to ensure that he  did
    not need to cheat on a test but considered that  this  would  not  have
    been a sufficient reason.

12. It is clear reading particularly the  beginning  of  paragraph  15  the
    judge did not apply too high a standard of  proof  to  the  Appellant's
    innocent explanation.  Accordingly Ground 1 has not been made out.

13. In Ground 2 it is contended that the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for finding that the legal burden on the Secretary of State had
    been discharged.  At the hearing Mr Jegede  submitted  that  the  judge
    applied the wrong standard of proof here.  Ms Jones submitted that  the
    complaint in relation to Ground 2 had  not  been  particularised.   She
    referred to paragraph 101 of SM  and  Qadir.   She  submitted  that  at
    paragraph 12 the judge set out why he  rejected  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant.  In her submission the judge gave proper reasons for finding
    that the evidential  burden  had  been  discharged,  why  the  innocent
    explanation had been addressed  and  the  evidential  burden  had  been
    discharged.   In  her  submission,   unless   the   errors   could   be
    particularised, no error had been established.  In her  submission  the
    judge had given adequate reasons in accordance with MK  (duty  to  give
    reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641.  In my view the judge  dealt  with
    all of the reasons at paragraphs 15 and 16 and  gave  adequate  reasons
    for finding that the legal burden had been discharged.

14. It is contended in the third ground  that  a  proper  analysis  of  the
    Respondent's evidence was not enough to discharge the burden of  proof.
    It is contended that the evidence submitted in this case was largely of
    a generic nature and that the ETS look-up tool was the Respondent's own
    evidence rather than being evidence directly from ETS itself.   At  the
    hearing Mr Jegede accepted that a look-up tool  had  been  produced  in
    this case, but submitted that this had been provided by the  Respondent
    and not by ETS.  Ms Jones submitted that  the  look-up  tool  had  been
    correctly assessed against the Appellant's case.  In her submission  Mr
    Jegede had put forward nothing in particular to suggest that the  look-
    up tool should not be accepted.  In her submission the  grounds  amount
    to a disagreement with the judge's findings.

15. In my view it  is  clear  from  paragraphs  9  to  17  that  the  judge
    considered all of the evidence in accordance with the  guidance  in  SM
    and Qadir and reached a decision that the Respondent had discharged the
    legal burden upon him having considered all of  the  evidence.   In  my
    view the grounds have not been made out and amount  to  a  disagreement
    with the judge's findings.



Notice of Decision

16. The Grounds of Appeal have not been established.  The decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal does not contain a  material  error  of  law.   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal will stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 14 May 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 14 May 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
