
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: HU/11053/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                  |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 9 August 2017                     |On: 10 August 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                MOHAMED SLITI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



For the appellant:     Ms Barton, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Tunisia, has appealed against a decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal dated 18 November 2016 in which it dismissed an
    appeal against the  decision  of  the  respondent  refusing  him  entry
    clearance as the spouse of a British citizen ('the sponsor'), on  human
    rights grounds.


 2. In a decision  dated  1  June  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Froom
    considered it arguable, inter alia, that no specific allegation of  the
    parties being involved in a marriage of convenience was made and in all
    the circumstances the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in  making  this
    finding.

Genuine and subsisting marriage

 3. It is clear from the respondent's decision dated 12 April 2016 that the
    sole reason for refusing the appellant entry clearance was because  she
    was not satisfied that the relationship is genuine and subsisting.  The
    respondent was  satisfied  that  all  the  other  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules were met, including the financial requirements.


 4. The First-tier Tribunal acknowledged that the sponsor  was  a  frequent
    visitor to Tunisia but made the following relevant findings of fact  at
    [19] to [20]: the evidence of  communication  between  the  parties  is
    limited; no documentation to support the claim that they are building a
    home in Tunisia was provided; there was insufficient evidence as to how
    the relationship developed given the 27-year age difference between the
    parties.  The First-tier Tribunal then said this at [21]:


           "Taking all of this evidence into account I  am  satisfied  that
           the relationship is not genuine  and  the  marriage  is  one  of
           convenience entered into simply to allow the appellant to  enter
           into the UK."


 5. Mr McVeety accepted that the First-tier Tribunal was  not  entitled  to
    find the relationship  to  be  a  marriage  of  convenience  when  that
    allegation was never made by the respondent.  The  respondent  did  not
    seek to rely upon any evidence to establish a marriage  of  convenience
    and only contended the marriage not to be genuine.  Mr McVeety accepted
    that  a  marriage  of  convenience  is  to  be  distinguished  from   a
    relationship that is found not to  be  genuine.   In  Sadovska  v  SSHD
    [2017] UKSC 54  the  Supreme  Court  considered  the  definition  of  a
    'marriage of convenience' at [24].   This  term  is  found  in  EU  law
    whereas the definition of a 'sham marriage' is set out at section 24 of
    the Immigration Act 2014.


 6. Although the  First-tier  Tribunal  properly  directed  itself  to  the
    Respondent having the burden of establishing that the marriage  is  one
    of convenience at [6] and [7], the First-tier Tribunal has not  applied
    this when making its findings of fact.  It is difficult to discern  why
    the First-tier Tribunal was satisfied that the  respondent  established
    that the marriage was one of convenience, the  predominant  purpose  of
    which must be abusive conduct.  The respondent made no  such  assertion
    in her decision and the decision was made on the papers.  In so finding
    I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.


 7. It is difficult to separate the  error  of  law  in  finding  that  the
    marriage is one of convenience from the finding that  the  relationship
    is not genuine and impossible to know to what extent the  finding  that
    the marriage is one of convenience played a role in the conclusion that
    the relationship is not genuine.

Article 8

 8. The First-tier Tribunal  went  on  to  address  Article  8  taking  the
    evidence at its highest from [26] onwards.  In so doing the  First-tier
    Tribunal has taken into account an irrelevant  consideration  at  [35],
    [40]  and  [44]:  the  sponsor  would  relocate  to  Tunisia   if   the
    relationship is genuine and subsisting.   The  real  question  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal, taking the evidence at its highest, is whether  or
    not it is proportionate to expect this British citizen sponsor with  an
    established home and employment in the UK to forego this by  moving  to
    Tunisia, in order to have family life with her husband,  when  all  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules are  met.   It  follows  that  in
    failing to ask itself the correct question the First-tier Tribunal  has
    erred in law when determining Article 8.

Disposal

 9. Both representatives agreed that the decision should be remade  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I have had regard to para  7.2  of  the  relevant
    Senior President's Practice Statement and the nature and extent of  the
    factual findings required in remaking the decision, and I have  decided
    that this is an appropriate case to remit to the First-tier Tribunal.


10. Ms Barton acknowledged that the appeal proceeded on the papers but that
    the parties now accept that an oral hearing is more appropriate, and as
    such the necessary fee for an oral hearing will be paid.

Decision


11. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.


12. The appeal shall be remade by First-tier Tribunal de novo.


Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 9 August 2017
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
