
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12274/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2020                    |On 07 December 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            arash khaniparashkooh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For Secretary of State:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer
For Mr Khaniparashkooh:    Miss Longhurst-Woods, Counsel instructed by way
                        of Direct Access


For the sake of clarity, I will refer to the appellant as the  Secretary  of
State  and  I  will  refer  to  the  respondent  in  this   appeal   as   Mr
Kahniparashkooh.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Beg ("the judge") sent on 4 December 2019,  allowing  Mr
    Kahniparashkooh's appeal against the refusal of his human rights claim.
     Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant on
    23 April 2020.

 2. The hearing was held remotely.  Neither party objected to  the  hearing
    being held by video link.  Both parties participated by UK court Skype.
     I am satisfied that a face-to-face hearing could not be  held  because
    it was not practicable due to the current COVID-19 situation  and  that
    all of the issues could  be  determined  fairly  by  way  of  a  remote
    hearing.  Both parties confirmed at the end of the hearing that it  had
    been conducted fairly.

    Background

 3. Mr Kahniparashkooh is a national of Iran born  on  23  July  1982.   He
    entered the UK on 27 April 2007 on a  student  visa.   He  was  granted
    further periods of leave as a student and  then  as  a  Tier  1  Highly
    Skilled Post-study Migrant until 14 November 2013.  He  claimed  asylum
    on 18 December 2012.  His claim for asylum was refused and  his  appeal
    against  that  decision  was  dismissed  ("the  2014  decision").    He
    subsequently submitted an application for leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom based on his family and private  life.   That  application  was
    refused on 15 December 2015 and the appeal against  that  decision  was
    dismissed ("the 2017 decision"). Permission to appeal was  refused.  Mr
    Kahniparashkooh then made a further application for leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom on the basis of his family life with his partner  Xu
    Yang on 25 September 2017. On 3 July 2019 the Secretary of State took a
    decision to refuse Mr Kahniparashkooh's human rights  claim  which  was
    the decision before First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg.

    Mr Kahniparashkooh's case

 4. Mr Kahniparashkooh asserts that it would be a  disproportionate  breach
    of Article 8 ECHR to remove  him  from  the  UK.  He  asserts  that  he
    satisfies the provisions of Appendix  FM  because  he  is  in  a  long-
    standing, genuine and subsisting relationship with Miss  Yang  who  has
    indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside  the  United
    Kingdom in accordance with EX.2 of Appendix FM.  This is because he  is
    in fear of being persecuted as a Christian convert, his  partner  is  a
    Buddhist, and the couple would be unable to  marry  or  practise  their
    religion in Iran.  Further, his partner has a business in the UK and is
    unfamiliar with the language and culture in  Iran.  Mr  Kahniparashkooh
    additionally has a private life with his brother in the United Kingdom.
    His brother has mental health problems and requires support. There  are
    very significant obstacles to his integration to Iran and it  would  be
    unduly harsh to remove him there.

    The decision on the human rights claim

 5.  Although  it  is  accepted  by  the  Secretary  of   State   that   Mr
    Kahniparashkooh's partner, Miss Yang, might  not  wish  to  uproot  and
    relocate to Iran because she has indefinite leave to remain in  the  UK
    where she has established a business, and that it  might  be  difficult
    for her to do so; it is considered  that  the  degree  of  hardship  or
    inconvenience  faced  by  her  does  not  amount   to   "insurmountable
    obstacles".  There  are   no   very   significant   obstacles   to   Mr
    Kahniparashkooh returning to Iran because he lived there until  he  was
    24 years old, speaks Farsi and English and has family members in  Iran.
    Mr Kahniparashkooh previously claimed  asylum  based  on  his  fear  of
    mistreatment for political reasons.  His claim  was  refused,  and  his
    appeal dismissed because he lacked credibility. Mr Kahniparashkooh  has
    not made any further submissions in respect of his  claim  for  asylum.
    Further, he has failed to provide evidence that his  relationship  with
    his brother extends beyond that between adult siblings.  There  are  no
    exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave  outside  of  the
    immigration rules.

    The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The judge heard evidence from both Mr Kahniparashkooh and his  partner.
    A third witness attended the appeal to give evidence on  behalf  of  Mr
    Kahniparashkooh and adopted his witness statement.

 7. The judge's starting point was the 2017  decision  in  accordance  with
    Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702.   The  judge  noted  that  in  the  2017
    decision it was not accepted that Mr Kahniparashkooh  and  his  partner
    were in a genuine and subsisting relationship. It has now been accepted
    by the Secretary of State that this is the case.

 8. The judge considered that the situation had moved  on  since  2017  and
    turned to the issue of whether there were insurmountable  obstacles  to
    Mr  Kahniparashkooh  and  his  partner  continuing  their  family  life
    together in Iran.  The judge found that Miss Yang  has  never  been  to
    Iran and does not speak Farsi.   She  accepted  that  Miss  Yang  is  a
    Buddhist.

 9. The judge took into account that Mr Kahniparashkooh's  previous  asylum
    claim was based on his political activities and that the issue  of  his
    Christian conversion was not considered in the  2014  decision  because
    his conversion post-dated the appeal.  She took into account  that  the
    previous judge in 2014 found that Mr Kahniparashkooh was not a truthful
    witness.

10. Mr Kahniparashkooh adduced evidence of his conversion  to  Christianity
    in the appeal bundle and was not cross-examined  in  relation  to  this
    issue  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   The   judge   found   that   Mr
    Kahniparashkooh is  a  Christian  convert   and  that  there  would  be
    insurmountable obstacles to him  living  in  Iran  on  this  basis.  Mr
    Kahniparashkooh would not be able  to  marry  Miss  Yang  in  Iran  and
    neither of the couple would be able practise their  faith  there.   The
    judge took into account that Miss Yang has set up a beauty business  in
    the United Kingdom which she has been running  for  several  years  and
    that if she moved to Iran, she would need to start up again  in  a  new
    country where she does not speak the language. She  took  into  account
    that Mr Kahniparashkooh's brother who suffers from schizophrenia  lives
    in the United Kingdom and that Mr Kahniparashkooh  would  lose  contact
    with his brother if he is removed  to  Iran.   The  judge  accepted  Mr
    Kahniparashkooh's evidence that the fact that his brother knows  he  is
    in the UK and comes to see him from time to time is a form  of  healing
    and support.  Taking the evidence as a  whole,  the  judge  found  that
    there were insurmountable obstacles to  the  couple  continuing  family
    life in Iran.

11. The judge then turned to consider Article 8 ECHR outside of  the  Rules
    taking into account s117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 in respect of the public interest considerations.   The  judge
    noted that the couple entered into a relationship in the full knowledge
    that Mr Kahniparashkooh's immigration status was  precarious  and  that
    both  Mr  Kahniparashkooh  and  his  partner   were   aware   that   Mr
    Karniparashkooh could be removed from the UK.  The judge  repeated  her
    findings that there would be significant difficulties for the couple to
    establish family life in Iran for the reasons set out already.   Taking
    the evidence in the round, she found on the  balance  of  probabilities
    that the interference in Mr Kahniparashkooh's Article 8 ECHR rights  is
    disproportionate and would result in unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
    for Mr Kahniparashkooh and his partner.  The judge allowed the appeal.

    Grounds

12. The grounds of challenge are muddled and apart from the assertion  that
    there has been a "material misdirection of law", do  not  particularise
    any other specific errors of law.  As conceded by  Mr  Diwnycz  at  the
    outset of the hearing, this may well be because the Secretary of  State
    did not have the papers before her when the grounds  were  pleaded.   I
    extract the following from  the  grounds.  Mr  Diwnycz  clarified  that
    Ground 1 is a 'reasons challenge'.

    Ground 1 - Inadequate reasons

13. The judge gave inadequate reasons for her findings in  relation  to  Mr
    Kahniparashkooh's inability to  marry  his  partner  and  practice  his
    faith.  There was no evidence before the judge of the  difficulties  Mr
    Kahniparashkooh's partner would face in Iran  as  a  Buddhist  nor  was
    there any evidence before the judge of Mr  Kahniparashkooh's  Christian
    conversion. There was no evidence that they would not be able to  marry
    in Iran. The judge did not adequately explain why she accepted that  Mr
    Kahniparashkooh is a Christian convert  when  he  had  previously  been
    found to be lacking in credibility.

    Ground 2 -Material misdirection of law

14. The judge failed to give sufficient weight to the precariousness of  Mr
    Kahniparashkooh's immigration  status  in  accordance  with  Ruppiah  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA  Civ  803.   The
    fact that Mr Kahniparashkooh's partner has a business  in  the  UK  and
    cannot speak Farsi are not sufficiently compelling factors on their own
    to amount to  insurmountable  obstacles.   The  partner  as  a  Chinese
    national has previously moved to a new and unfamiliar country and built
    a business and there is no suggestion that she could not do so again.

    Grant of permission

15. First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant granted permission on  the  basis  that
    the judge arguably erred in law by  not  taking  into  account  Ruppiah
    where the Court of Appeal found it is  not  unreasonable  to  expect  a
    person who obtains leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  a  student
    to be prepared to leave at the end of their  period  of  study  and  to
    organise their life accordingly, and that it was also arguable that the
    judge had not given adequate reasons for finding Mr Kahniparashkooh  to
    be credible.

16. At the outset of his submissions,  Mr  Diwnycz  informed  me  that  the
    grounds of challenge had  been  prepared  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    without having sight of the original appeal bundle or  documents.  Miss
    Longhurst-Woods pointed to the fact that  Mr  Kahniparashkooh  had  not
    been aware that the Secretary of State had sought permission to  appeal
    against the decision allowing his appeal, until five months  after  the
    event.  Mr Kahniparashkooh ultimately received the grant of  permission
    from the Tribunal on 28 May 2020 at the  same  time  as  receiving  the
    grounds of challenge.

    The Respondent's Rule 24 Response

17. The Rule 24 response  submits  that  the  grounds  are  misleading  and
    contain significant errors.  It is asserted that there was  a  plethora
    of evidence in Mr Kahniparashkooh's bundle relating to  his  conversion
    to Christianity including his baptism certificate.  A  church  official
    was called as a witness at the appeal to attest to his  conversion  and
    regular  church  attendance.   Since  2016,  the  fact   of   religious
    persecution of Christians in Iran is  the  subject  of  a  Home  Office
    country guidance report which is in the public domain.  The  judge  was
    entitled to take judicial notice of this material.  Further  the  judge
    took into consideration that Mr Kahniparashkooh's  previous  claim  was
    not accepted because it  was  not  believed  that  he  was  politically
    active. The judge was entitled to find that that previous asylum appeal
    was not based on Mr Kahniparashkooh's conversion to Christianity.   The
    Presenting Officer failed to cross-examine Mr  Kahniparashkooh  or  his
    witness on this issue and it is not appropriate to raise objections  at
    this stage.  The judge was plainly entitled to  find  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles and very significant obstacles to  integration
    taking  into  account   in   the   round   taking   into   account   Mr
    Kahniparashkooh's  religious  conversion,  his  partner's  faith  as  a
    Buddhist, their inability to practise their  respective  faith  and  to
    marry each other and Mr Kahniparashkooh's close relationship  with  his
    brother who has paranoid schizophrenia and who had been granted  asylum
    in the UK.  The judge gave proper consideration to the factors  of  the
    public interest consideration in Section  117B  where  it  is  said  in
    Rupphiah that Section 117B may be overridden in an exceptional case  by
    particularly strong features of private life in question.

    Analysis and Discussion

18. At the outset of the appeal Mr  Diwnycz  attempted  to  argue  that  Mr
    Kahniparashkooh had not claimed asylum on the basis  of  his  Christian
    conversion and that the issue was not therefore live before the  judge.
    He confirmed that he had not had sight of either  Mr  Kahniparashkooh's
    bundle or the original  respondent's  bundle  prior  to  attending  the
    hearing.

19. I took him to the original Secretary of State's bundle which enclosed a
    copy of Mr Kahniparashkooh's human rights application. At page 28 of 61
    of the application it is said:

         "My partner Xu Yang's life and career and her relationship with  me
         is established in the United Kingdom.  She has been working in  the
         UK for more than ten years as  a  registered  beauty  therapist  in
         London Westminster.  She has been running her  own  business  since
         2014 and received her settlement in 2017.  I have studied in the UK
         and graduated with a first-class degree and  worked  for  the  same
         university.  My payslips attached.  I was promoted to head chef  of
         Yo Sushi in 2013.  I joined Wagamama and established my career as a
         corporate hospitality manager in 2013.  I have been responsible  to
         train people and run different branches and receive two  promotions
         and became head chef again in 2017.  This is what I have been doing
         and what I know for living.  I have my job secured in the UK, it is
         subject to my work permit status.  My partner Xu is a Buddhist  and
         I am a Christian.  We have no prospect of life living  outside  the
         UK  considering  the  issues  I  will  face  back  home   and   its
         consequences for our relationship and the rest of my  family.   The
         issues will arise from my internet blog which is known by Fata  and
         my religious conversion.  We Xu and I both speak and communicate in
         English.  Xu cannot speak Farsi.  I cannot speak Chinese.  We  have
         lots of friends and people who know us in the UK through the  years
         we have lived together as a couple.  We have no prospect of life as
         a couple outside the UK."

20. Later in the  application,  Mr  Kahniparashkooh  points  out  that  his
    brother was granted asylum in the United Kingdom on  the  same  factual
    basis as Mr  Karniparashkooh's  original  claim  for  asylum.  He  also
    states:

         "I wish I would be able to live freely and practise my religion.  I
         have to hide my faith and live the rest  of  my  life  in  fear  of
         execution  as  a  converted  Christian  if  I  am  to  return.   My
         relationship with Xu also would diminish since  we  are  both  non-
         Muslims and there is no prospect of life for us in a Muslim country
         who does not recognise the rights of other  religions  and  belief.
         We would not even be able to get married as we will not be  allowed
         by Sharia law."

21. At section 11 Mr Kahniparashkooh states:

         "I am a converted Christian.  I am a member of my church  which  is
         Kensington Temple in Notting Hill Gate.  I am also a  member  of  a
         cell group in my church.  Christianity is not just  a  religion  to
         me.  It is the way I will live for the rest of  my  life.   I  will
         practise my religion openly and freely  in  the  UK  and  it  is  a
         blessing for me."

22. In support of his application Mr Kahniparashkooh also provided a signed
    statement in which he referred to his Christian  conversion,  a  letter
    from his partner referring to Mr Kahniparashkooh's religion,  a  letter
    from Kensington Temple dated  18  September  2017  and  a  letter  from
    Stephen David who is the leader of a cell  group  based  at  Kensington
    Temple dated 24 September 2017.

23. Having now had sight of these documents, Mr Diwyncz conceded that there
    was evidence  of  Mr  Kahniparashkooh's  Christian  conversion  in  the
    original application and that the assertion that there was no  evidence
    of his Christian conversion falls away.

24. When the Secretary of State came to address the  'Christianity  aspect'
    in the decision refusing the human right's claim dated 3 July  2019  it
    is said:

         "It is noted that on 18 December 2012 you made an asylum  claim  on
         the basis that if you return to Iran you  would  face  mistreatment
         due to your political opinions.  You claim you would  face  a  real
         risk of unlawful killing and  torture  or  degrading  treatment  or
         punishment.  However, your asylum claim was refused on 22 May  2013
         with the  right  of  appeal.   This  First-tier  hearing  was  then
         dismissed on 24 November 2014."

25. It is then said:

         "While you claim this fear of return to your country of  origin  it
         is noted that no further submissions have been  made  in  terms  of
         your failed asylum claim of which you have the right to  make.   As
         such it is not accepted that a protection claim has  been  made  in
         this application.  This decision relates  to  the  application  you
         have made on  the  basis  of  your  private  life  and  exceptional
         circumstances in the United Kingdom only."

26. Mr Diwyncz accepted that the Secretary of State did not address in  the
    decision  letter  why  Mr  Kahniparashkooh's  claimed   conversion   to
    Christianity did not constitute an insurmountable obstacle  to  he  and
    his wife living together in Iran or a  very significant obstacle to him
    living in Iran, apart from the assertion that he had been found  to  be
    lacking in credibility in an earlier appeal.

27. Mr Kahniparashkooh produced a bundle of  evidence  in  support  of  the
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal which included witness statements
    from himself, his partner and the church witness Mr Stephen David.   He
    also produced a certificate of  baptism,  a  welcome  letter  from  the
    Kensington Temple dated 15 June 2016, a letter dated 8  September  2017
    and various further letters.

28. It is agreed by all parties in this  appeal  that  in  determining  the
    original human rights appeal, that the  issue  of  whether  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to Mr Kahniparashkooh and his  partner  living
    together in Iran was a live issue in the appeal.

29. I am satisfied that it would have manifestly been an error of  law  for
    the judge not to have made findings in relation to Mr Kahniparashkooh's
    assertion raised in the original application and his grounds of  appeal
    that there were obstacles to continuing life  in  Iran  with  his  wife
    because of his conversion to Christianity and because of her religion.

30. In the decision, the judge records  that  Mr  Kahniparashkooh  was  not
    cross-examined in relation to  his  Christian  conversion  nor  was  Mr
    Kahniparashkooh's partner. A church witness, who attended  the  appeal,
    adopted   his   witness   statement   in   which   he   explained    Mr
    Kahniparashkooh's involvement in his church and confirmed  his  regular
    attendance in his  church  cell.   The  witness  was  also  not  cross-
    examined.

31. Mr Diwyncz then stated that he was in difficulty arguing that the judge
    should not have dealt with the issue of the  Christian  conversion  and
    further that he was in difficulty arguing that the  judge's  acceptance
    of the evidence in relation to the Christian conversion was  flawed  or
    irrational given that the Secretary of State did not  cross-examine  Mr
    Kahniparashkooh or any of the witnesses in relation to  this  issue  at
    the hearing.

32. Mr Diwyncz did not seek to further persuade me that the judge had given
    inadequate reasons for finding that Mr Karniparashkooh is  a  Christian
    convert or that his findings in respect of this issue were irrational.

33. I am satisfied that that there was evidence  before  the  judge  of  Mr
    Kahniparashkooh's baptism, his attendance at Kensington Temple and  his
    involvement and commitment to the church cell in the form  of  his  own
    evidence and that of his partner as well as the  witness  evidence  and
    documentary evidence. I am satisfied  that  the  judge  despite  giving
    brief reasons was entitled to find on the balance of  probabilities  on
    the evidence  before  her  that  Mr  Kahniparashkooh  was  a  Christian
    convert. Her reasons are tolerably clear. I am also satisfied that  the
    judge  was  fully  aware  and  took  into  account  the  fact  that  Mr
    Kahniparashkooh had not been found  to  be  credible  in  his  previous
    asylum appeal which  she  explicitly  refers  to  at  [20].  The  judge
    correctly noted at [21] that the previous appeal related to a different
    basis for the claim for asylum and that Mr Kahniparashkooh's conversion
    to Christianity had not been an issue in that appeal.

34. The judge was entitled to give weight to the evidence  before  her  and
    chose to accept the evidence of Mr  Kahniparashkooh  and  his  partner.
    There was no indication that the Secretary of State submitted  that  Mr
    Kahniparashkooh and his partner were not credible or that their account
    was not to be believed.  The judge's reasons may be succinct, but  they
    are adequate, particularly in  circumstances  where  the  Secretary  of
    State chose not to test the evidence  or  attack  Mr  Kahniparashkooh's
    account.

35. Having found that Mr  Kahniparashkooh  is  a  Christian  and  that  his
    partner is a Buddhist the judge was then entitled to take into  account
    as a matter of judicial note  the  current  country  guidance  case  on
    Christian converts in which it is accepted  that  a  genuine  Christian
    convert  would face  difficulties  in  Iran  and  would  be  unable  to
    practice his faith openly.

36. Although the judge does not specifically set out the test in respect of
    'insurmountable obstacles' in the decision, it is not asserted  in  the
    grounds that the judge erred in applying the incorrect test.

37. The case of R (Agyarko) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] UKSC 11  indicates  that  insurmountable  obstacles  are  to  be
    understood in a practical  and  realistic  sense  and  the  test  is  a
    stringent one.  In CL v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2019] EWCA Civ 1925 it is  said  that  the  judge  must  first  decide
    whether there is an alleged obstacle to family life continuing  outside
    the United Kingdom and whether  this  amounts  to  a  very  significant
    difficulty.  If the threshold  is  met  the  question  is  whether  the
    difficulty is one which would make it impossible for an  applicant  and
    their partner to continue family life together outside  of  the  United
    Kingdom.  If not, the decision make has to consider taking any  account
    of any steps which could be reasonably be taken to  avoid  or  mitigate
    the difficulty but nevertheless entail very serious  hardship  for  the
    applicant or their partner or both.  It is relevant  and  necessary  to
    have regard  to  the  particular  characteristics  of  the  individuals
    concerned.

38. At [24] the  judge  makes  a  clear  finding  that  the  insurmountable
    obstacles test has been met. She states:

         "However, in taking the evidence as  a  whole  on  the  balance  of
         probabilities, I find that there is  credible  evidence  before  me
         that there are insurmountable obstacles to  the  couple  continuing
         family  life  in  Iran.  Consequently,  the  appellant  meets   the
         requirements of EX.2 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules".

39. I am  satisfied  that  the  judge  did  not  err  in  finding  that  Mr
    Kahniparashkooh's status as a Christian convert, his  partner's  status
    as a Buddhist  together  with  the  difficulties  Mr  Kahniparashkooh's
    partner would face in respect of language and culture in Iran  and  the
    care that Mr Kahniparashkooh gives  to  his  mentally  ill  brother  in
    total,  cumulatively  amounted  to  insurmountable  obstacles.   I   am
    satisfied that the reasons challenge is not made out.  The  judge  gave
    adequate reasons for her  findings  and  was  entitled  to  make  those
    findings on the evidence before  her.  The  judge's  findings  are  not
    irrational.

    Misapplication of the law

40. I am satisfied that in carrying out the balancing exercise,  the  judge
    did take into account section 117B factors. She took  into  account  at
    [27] that the couple entered their relationship in the  full  knowledge
    that the appellant's immigration status was precarious and at [30] that
    little weight should be attached to his private life. She  nevertheless
    concluded that having taken into  account  the  difficulties  that  the
    couple  would  face  in  Iran  in  conjunction  with  the   appellant's
    relationship with his brother that the interference in his  family  and
    private life would have unduly harsh consequences for the appellant and
    his partner. Rhuppiah is not support the proposition that no appeal can
    succeed where a private and family life has been  established  when  an
    individual  has  a  precarious  immigration  status.   The  judge   was
    manifestly entitled to give weight to the strength and  quality  of  Mr
    Karniparashkooh's family and private life. The  judge  noted  that  the
    appellant was in the UK lawfully for 6 years as a  student  and  highly
    skilled migrant and had an impressive work and study history  including
    completing a BA in accounting from Middlesex University. He has been in
    a long-term relationship with his partner who has a business in the UK,
    has a supportive  relationship  with  his  brother  and  is  a  genuine
    Christian convert who would face problems  in  Iran.  I  am  satisfied,
    given these factual findings, that the judge's decision that the public
    interest in removal was outweighed by Mr Kahniparashkooh's  family  and
    private life was manifestly rational and lawful.

41. Even had I been satisfied that there was an error in  the  approach  to
    section 117B because the judge did not give sufficient  weight  to  the
    precarious nature of Mr Kahniparashkoor's immigration status,  I  would
    have found that  this  was  immaterial.  The  Secretary  of  State  has
    accepted  that  there  are  no  suitability  objections,  and  that  Mr
    Kahniparashkooh is in a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  his
    partner. The  judge  lawfully  found  that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to Mr Kahniparashkooh's family life  taking  place  in  Iran.
    These cumulative findings have the effect that Mr Karniparashkoor meets
    the requirements of EX.2 of Appendix FM. Mr Dymwytz conceded  that  the
    effect of this is that Mr Kahniparashkooh was able to demonstrate  that
    he  met  the  requirements  of  E-LTRP  2.1.   Mr  Karniparashkoor  was
    therefore able to satisfy Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

42. In TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109, at [34] it is said:

         "That leaves the question of whether the tribunal  is  required  to
         make a decision on article 8 requirements  within  the  Rules  i.e.
         whether there are insurmountable obstacles, before or in  order  to
         make a decision about article 8 outside the Rules.  The  policy  of
         the Secretary of State as expressed in  the  Rules  is  not  to  be
         ignored when a decision about article 8 is to be made  outside  the
         Rules.  An  evaluation  of   the   question   whether   there   are
         insurmountable obstacles is a relevant factor because  considerable
         weight is to be placed  on  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy  as
         reflected in the Rules of the  circumstances  in  which  a  foreign
         national partner should be granted leave  to  remain.  Accordingly,
         the tribunal should undertake an evaluation of  the  insurmountable
         obstacles test within the Rules in order to  inform  an  evaluation
         outside the Rules because  that  formulates  the  strength  of  the
         public policy in immigration control 'in the case before it', which
         is what the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali (at [50]) held was to  be
         taken into account. That  has  the  benefit  that  where  a  person
         satisfies the Rules, whether or not by reference to  an  article  8
         informed requirement, then this will be positively determinative of
         that person's article 8 appeal, provided their case engages article
         8(1), for the very reason that it would  then  be  disproportionate
         for that person to be removed".

43. I am satisfied that the fact  that  Mr  Kahniparashkoor  could  satisfy
    Appendix FM of the immigration rules should have informed  the  outcome
    of the proportionality exercise. It was not necessary for the judge  to
    go on to consider Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules  in  any
    event. Therefore, any error in the approach to  Section  117B  was  not
    material to the outcome of the appeal.

    Conclusion

44. It follows that none of the grounds of appeal  are  made  out  and  the
    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.   I  am  not  satisfied  that
    there was a material error of law in the judge's decision.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law.

The decision is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   R J Owens     Date 27 November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Owens

