
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/12380/2015
     HU/12382/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th January 2018                          |On 14th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                            (1) bhim devi gurung
                               (2) beju gurung
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Rai (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Housego, promulgated on 3rd May  2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 25th April  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeals  of  the  Appellants,  whereupon  the  Appellants
    subsequently applied for, and were granted, permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellants

 2.  The  Appellants  are  citizens  of  Nepal,  and  sister  and   brother
    respectively, who were born on 25th November 1984 and on 17th  November
    1985.  They appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  Entry
    Clearance Officer, dated 3rd November 2015 refusing  their  application
    for leave to enter the UK in order  to  join  their  father,  a  former
    Gurkha soldier in the British Army.  He had  been  in  the  brigade  of
    Gurkhas on 12th November 1974 and had been discharged from the  British
    Army on 10th January 1994.  He was granted settlement in the UK on  7th
    March 2005, and arrived in this country on 21st June 2006.  The  reason
    given in the  refusal  decision  of  3rd  November  2015  is  that  the
    Appellants were said not to have a family life  with  their  sponsoring
    father.  It was said that they had lived apart from their  Sponsor  for
    more than two years and so did not meet the requirements  of  paragraph
    9(8) of Annex K to the IDI on HM Forces resettlement.

The Findings of the Judge

 3. The judge found that the Appellants remained in Nepal when their father
    came to the UK in 2005.  It was only ten  years  thereafter  that  they
    wished to join him.  Their mother and elder sister were already in this
    country.  Both Appellants were a month short of 29 and 30 years of  age
    when they applied to join their father.  Given the well-known case  law
    on "historical injustice", the judge held  that  the  jurisprudence  on
    historical injustice only applies when  considering  whether  there  is
    justification for interference with Article 8 rights to a family  life.
    It does not apply when considering whether there is family life or not.
     These Appellants were both approaching 30 when the  applications  were
    made (see paragraph 36).  The judge held that  the  Appellants  do  not
    meet the requirements of Annex K by reason  of  being  apart  from  the
    Sponsor for over two  years.   The  discretion  exercised  by  the  ECO
    informing the view that there was no emotional or financial  dependence
    within Annex K was not a matter to be challenged  in  this  appeal.   A
    feature of this appeal was  that  the  Appellants  were  declining  job
    offers in Kathmandu.  The judge held that they  were  clearly  able  to
    live independent lives.  The sponsoring  father  had  only  made  three
    visits to Nepal in the last ten years.  The Appellants also  wished  to
    marry other Gurungs, but to have the approval of their  father,  before
    doing so.  The judge held that there was no reason provided as  to  why
    there were no Gurungs in Nepal suitable for the  Appellants  to  marry.
    It was held that, "There must be many more suitable pretentious spouses
    in Pokhara than in Aldershot, where the parents of the Appellants live"
    (paragraph 37).

 4. One aspect of the judge's reasoning was precisely on  the  question  of
    the Appellants wishing to marry and to set  up  their  own  independent
    lives.  The judge held that if there was family life had in Article  8,
    it must be proportionate to interfere with that family  life  when  the
    Appellants actually wish to end that family life  with  their  parents.
    They had wished to do so as soon as possible when marrying out  of  the
    family. This, the judge held, was a "factor  that  would  outweigh  the
    historical injustice in the proportionality assessment" (paragraph 41).

 5. The appeals were dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in  finding  that
    the Appellants did not meet the requirements of Annex K of the  IDI  of
    5th January 2015.  The judge was drawn moreover in  his  assessment  of
    family life between the Appellant and the Sponsor.

 7. On 6th December 2017 permission to appeal was granted by  the  Tribunal
    on the basis that it was arguable that the judge erred in  finding  the
    time living away from the Sponsor by the student Appellants meant  that
    they could not meet Annex  K.   It  was  also  argued  that  the  judge
    attached too little weight to  the  "historic  injustice"  suffered  by
    Gurkha families in his proportionality assessment.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me  on  26th  January  2018,  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Mr Rai of Counsel and the Respondent was represented  by
    Ms  Everett,  a  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.    In   his
    submissions, Mr Rai stated that the  judge  below  had  erred  for  the
    following four reasons.  First, at paragraph 39, the judge states  that
    the Appellants do not meet the requirements of Annex K because they had
    lived apart from their parents for more than two  years.   The  reasons
    for this conclusion is given at paragraph 31 where it  is  stated  that
    because the applications postdated 1st April 2015  the  Appellants  had
    limited appeal rights.  However, HC 194 came into  force  on  9th  July
    2012.  GEN 1.1 of Appendix FM states that the intention behind the  new
    Rules was to codify the Strasbourg case on Article  8  rights  in  this
    area.  Article 8 claims can  be  made  under  different  paragraphs  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  If an application is made  under
    EC-DR.1.1 of the Immigration Rules as adult dependent relatives,  of  a
    person or persons settled in the  UK,  such  an  application  would  be
    considered as a human rights claim.  The Appellants made an application
    under Annex K of Chapter 15, Section 2A of the IDI, which  allows  them
    to apply for settlement in the UK  with  their  parents.   Second,  the
    judge had stated that the Appellants lived away from their  father  for
    more  than  two  years.   However,  this  ignores  the  fact  that  the
    Appellants were forced to  live  apart  because  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's discretionary policy.  The Appellants' father was  not  allowed
    to settle in the UK at the end of his military service.  This  was  the
    entire background to these Gurkha cases, and hence the reference to the
    "historic injustice" doctrine in  these  cases.   Had  the  Appellants'
    father been allowed to settle in the UK at  the  end  of  his  military
    service the Appellants would have been able to settle in the UK as  his
    children.   By  the  time  that  the  Appellants'  father  was  granted
    settlement in this country the Appellants were over the age of  18  and
    it was not until 5th January 2015 that the Secretary of State published
    her policy to allow adult dependent children to apply  for  settlement.
    Accordingly, it could not be said that the Appellants had  lived  apart
    from their parents for more than two years as if this was  a  mandatory
    requirement.  While the Appellants had lived away from their father for
    more than two years  they  were  students  in  Nepal.   They  lived  in
    property  owned  by  their  father.   They  were  living   with   their
    grandmother, and this was clearly family property  and  a  family  life
    unit.  Fourth, with respect to financial and emotional dependency,  the
    judge  accepts  (at  paragraph  36)  that  the  Appellants  were  being
    supported and maintained by the sponsoring father.  The Appellants were
    living with their elderly grandmother in the  family  home.   This  was
    owned by their father.  In addition, he  was  making  visits  with  the
    Appellants' mother.  There was  frequent  contact  between  them.   The
    family unit was being maintained at their family home in Pokhara  where
    they lived with their elderly grandmother.  This was a case  until  she
    passed  away.   It  cannot  be  said  that  the  Appellants  were   not
    emotionally or financially dependent upon the sponsoring father.

 9. For her part, Ms Everett  submitted  that  the  doctrine  of  "historic
    injustice" goes to the proportionality of the decision.  The judge  did
    not err in relation to his  findings  of  fact.   However,  Ms  Everett
    conceded that, "I accept that the judge's decision in relation to Annex
    K is at best not helpful".  Nevertheless, the judge did  leave  himself
    alive to the issues before him.  The fact that  family  life  had  been
    disrupted by the "historic  injustice"  did  not  help  in  identifying
    whether or not there was family life in the first place.   The  reasons
    given  by  the  judge  were  not  perverse.   However,  she  ended  her
    submissions by stating that, "But I do accept  that  the  findings  are
    relatively brief on the key issues".

10. In his reply, Mr Rai submitted that the judge  did  not  read  Annex  K
    properly at all.  Moreover, in relation  to  family  life,  the  recent
    judgment in Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320, saw  Lindblom  LJ  state  that  an
    emphasis on the sponsoring father having chosen to settle in the UK  in
    the Gurkha "historic injustice" cases was misconceived.   To  focus  on
    settlement in the UK was

         "Not to confront the real issue under Article 8(1)  in  this  case,
         which  was  whether,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Appellant  had
         demonstrated that he had a family life with his parents, which  had
         existed at the time of  the  departure  to  settle  in  the  United
         Kingdom and had endured beyond  it,  notwithstanding  their  having
         left Nepal when they did" (see paragraph 39).

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

12. First, as Ms Everett conceded the judge's determination in relation  to
    Annex K "is at best not helpful"  and  there  are  findings  which  are
    "relatively  brief  on  key  issues".   For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,
    paragraph 19 of Annex K is headed "living apart" and  states  that  the
    applicant must not normally have lived apart from  the  Gurkha  Sponsor
    for more than two years at the date of the  application.   However,  it
    then goes on to state in the same breath, "Unless the family  unit  was
    maintained albeit the applicant lived away, for example time  spent  at
    boarding school, college or  university  as  part  of  their  full-time
    education ...".  This is precisely the position in which the Appellants
    find themselves.  They were full-time students.

13. Second,  the  question  then  is  whether  a  family  life  was  indeed
    maintained, despite the fact that the Appellants had been living  apart
    for two years from their sponsoring father.  It is plain that  it  was.
    They were living with their grandmother in the family home,  which  was
    maintained by their sponsoring father.   The  judge  had  accepted  (at
    paragraph  36)  that  they  were  supported  and  maintained  by  their
    sponsoring father.  They were also emotionally dependent  upon  him  in
    that he made periodic visits to them with the Appellants' mother  to  a
    family home in Pokhara.

14. Third, the judge failed to take into account the latest case law in Rai
    [2017] EWCA Civ 320 where Lindblom LJ considered significant  the  fact
    that the "Appellant had demonstrated that he had a family life with his
    parents which had existed at the time of their departure to  settle  in
    the United Kingdom and had endured  beyond  it,  notwithstanding  their
    having left Nepal when they did" (paragraph 39).  This is  the  essence
    of the "historic injustice" remedy because it shows  that  even  though
    there is a separation, which would not have occurred if the  sponsoring
    Gurkha father had been  allowed  to  settle  in  the  UK  earlier,  the
    Appellants would also have settled earlier with the  father  and  would
    have stayed together as a family unit.  This was  expressly  recognised
    by Lindblom LJ in Rai who observed that "His parents would have applied
    upon the father's discharge from the army  had  that  been  possible:".
    His lordship went on to say that "The stark choice they had to make was
    either to remain with the Appellant  ...  or  to  take  up  their  long
    withheld entitlement to settle in the United Kingdom"  (paragraph  41).
    In that case also the Court of Appeal was critical of the fact that

          "Those circumstances of the Appellant and his family, all of  them
         uncontentious, and including - perhaps crucially - the fact that he
         and his parents would have applied at the same time  for  leave  to
         enter the United Kingdom and would have come to the United  Kingdom
         together as a family unit had they been able to afford to do so, do
         not appear to have been grappled with by the Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         under Article 8(1).   In  my  view  they  should  have  been"  (see
         paragraph 42).

15. In this appeal, Judge Housego, simply stopped short  at  a  superficial
    reading of Annex K observing that, "The Appellants do not meet Annex  K
    by reason of being apart from the Sponsor over  two  years"  (paragraph
    39).  This overlooks the fact that Annex K at paragraph 19 goes  on  to
    state that, "Unless the  family  unit  was  maintained  or  indeed  the
    applicant lived away, for example by time  spent  at  boarding  school,
    college or university ...".  That was the position here.  Second, it is
    also difficult to understand  the  reasoning  that,  just  because  the
    parties wish to marry because "they so state" that this  is  "a  factor
    that would outweigh the historical  injustice  in  the  proportionality
    assessment" because "the Appellants actively wish to  end  that  family
    life with their parents" (see paragraph 41).  Whatever they may wish to
    do or not to do, in circumstances  where  getting  married  is  not  an
    unusual course of conduct for most people in life, the fact was that at
    the relevant time in question the Appellants enjoyed family  life  with
    their  sponsoring  father,  because  they  had  not   started   leading
    independent lives, by stopping their studies,  taking  employment,  and
    moving away from the  family  home.   The  conclusion  arrived  at  (at
    paragraph 41) is therefore irrational.



Remaking the Decision

16. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal for the reasons that I have  set  out
    above.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the regional judge.  I remake the decision as follows. This  appeal  is
    allowed.

18. No anonymity direction is made.

19. This appeal is allowed.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th March 2018


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have decided to make a whole fee award of any fee which has been  paid  or
may be payable.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th March 2018


