
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12789/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 9 January 2018                             |On 12 January 2018           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                    G O E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on [ ]  1991.   He  appealed
    against a decision of the respondent on 17 November 2015 to refuse  his
    application for leave to remain on human rights  grounds.  That  appeal
    was dismissed by First Tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan ("the FTTJ")  in  a
    decision promulgated on 27 February 2017.

 2. Given my references to the appellant's daughter and the court order for
    contact with her, an anonymity  direction  is  appropriate.  I  make  a
    direction accordingly.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal and this was granted by Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kebede on 15 November 2017 in the following terms:

         "2.      Whilst I find no arguable merit in the  grounds  asserting
             that the respondent was not entitled to request a DNA test and
             ought  simply  to  have  accepted  the  birth  certificate  as
             evidence of paternity, there is some  arguable  merit  in  the
             assertion that the judge arguably failed to  take  account  of
             all the evidence when assessing the relationship  between  the
             appellant and the child [...] and the relationship between the
             appellant and his claimed current partner  and  her  daughter.
             Although not raised in the grounds it seems to  me  that  such
             arguable concerns about the judge's consideration of  relevant
             matters are compounded by the apparent inclusion at  [41]  and
             [43] of facts not related to this appellant.

         3. To the extent stated, the grounds are arguable."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me.

 5. I indicated at the outset of the hearing that I had noted there was  no
    reference at all, in the FTTJ's assessment  of  the  evidence,  to  the
    existence of the court order  under  the  Children  Act  1989  dated  3
    November 2016; this order referred to the appellant as being the father
    of his claimed daughter with his former partner.

 6. Mr Tufan, for the respondent, acknowledged this omission. He  submitted
    he would leave it to me to decide whether this  had  given  rise  to  a
    material error of law. He made no substantive submissions on the issue.
    The appellant's counsel considered it also relevant that there  was  no
    reference in the Article 8 assessment to s117B(6) of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 7. The court order was in the appellant's bundle and his counsel  referred
    to it in her skeleton argument which was  before  the  FTTJ.   This  is
    highly material evidence and supports the appellant's claim to  be  the
    father  of  his  daughter  and  to  have  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with her, pursuant to Appendix FM and s117B(6). It attests
    to the nature  of  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
    daughter. It ordered that there be contact between  the  appellant  and
    his daughter three times a week and on other dates to be agreed between
    the child's parents.  It is an important document yet the FTTJ makes no
    reference to it in his assessment of the evidence. This suggests he did
    not take it into account.  Irrespective of  the  FTTJ's  findings  with
    regard to the suitability of the appellant pursuant to Appendix FM, the
    FTTJ, in making his assessment pursuant to Article 8 outside the Rules,
    should have taken that document into account in considering the  nature
    of the appellant's  relationship  with  his  daughter  and  the  public
    interest factors at s117B(6). His failure to do so amounts to an  error
    of law.

 8. The FTTJ found  "the  appellant's  family  ...  life  can  continue  in
    Nigeria".  In making that finding the FTTJ makes no  reference  to  the
    appellant's daughter or the impact on her of  the  appellant's  removal
    from the UK. Her best interests and welfare are not addressed.

 9. The FTTJ refers at paragraph 41 to "appellants"  and  facts  which  are
    unrelated to the appeal before the FTTJ. Furthermore, at [43] the  FTTJ
    refers to the appellant having entered the UK as a visitor when he  did
    not.

10. I am satisfied that the FTTJ's assessment of the evidence is tainted by
    error: the FTTJ has failed to take into account a document,  the  court
    order, which attests to the nature of the appellant's relationship with
    his child. This, together with the  manner  in  which  the  last  three
    paragraphs of the decision  have  been  drafted,  suggests  a  lack  of
    appropriate  scrutiny  and  consideration  of  the  evidence.  Had  the
    relevant evidence and provisions of s117B(6) been taken  into  account,
    the outcome of the appeal might have been different.

11. I find that the FTTJ has erred in his consideration  of  the  evidence,
    having failed to take into account evidence material to the  issues  to
    be decided, namely whether Article 8 was engaged outside the  Rules  as
    regards the appellant's family  life.  The  FTTJ's  assessment  of  the
    evidence as a whole is tainted by error of law and cannot stand.

12. All parties were agreed that, in the circumstances, it was  appropriate
    for all issues in the appeal to be decided  afresh  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, without any findings  of  fact  being  preserved,  not  least
    because the appellant now claims that he and his current partner have a
    child born in May 2017  (after  the  hearing  before  the  FTTJ).   The
    interests of that child need to be addressed, as well as those  of  the
    appellant's elder daughter, who is the subject of the court order.

Decision

13. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside in its
    entirety. No findings of fact are preserved.  The appeal is remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh, pursuant  to  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of  the  Tribunal  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
    Practice Statement 7.2(v), before any judge aside from Judge M A Khan.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge       Dated:  9 January 2018


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge       Dated:  9 January 2018
