
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12998/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 3rd August 2017                    |On 16th August 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                               SACHIN BUSAWON
                       (Anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Karim, Counsel instructed by AWS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Nath, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Mauritius born on the 13th December 1980.
    He appeals with permission, against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal who, in a determination promulgated on  the  21st  March  2017
    dismissed his appeal against the decision of the Respondent  to  refuse
    leave to remain on grounds of his long residence.

 2. No anonymity direction was made  by  the  First  Tier-Tribunal  and  no
    application has been made on behalf of the Appellant or any grounds put
    forward to support such an application.

The background:

 3. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on the 21st  July  2004  on  a
    student Visa valid until 30th September 2009. His leave to remain as  a
    Tier 4 student was extended on two occasions until  February  2013.  On
    the 9th May 2012 his leave was curtailed to expire on the 29th  October
    2012. On the 1st September 2012 he submitted an application  for  leave
    to remain as a Tier 4 student which was  granted  until  30th  December
    2013. On the 21st June 2013 he submitted an application  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 student which was granted until the 27th July  2015.
    On the 19th January 2015 he was served with form IS151A.

 4. On the 27th July 2015 he applied for leave to remain on long  residence
    grounds.


 5. The Respondent refused the application on the 25th November 2015 under
    paragraphs 276B(ii) and Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE (1) of the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that the Appellant had, in an earlier
    application for leave to remain as a student on the 4th October 2013,
    submitted an English language test certificate from ETS which was
    false. The Respondent referred to the Appellant's test scores having
    been cancelled by ETS and in reliance on generic witness evidence about
    such fraudulent tests and was satisfied that the Appellant's
    certificate was fraudulently obtained and that he had used deception in
    his application. The Appellant's presence in the United Kingdom was not
    therefore considered conducive to the public good and it was
    undesirable to allow him to remain in the United Kingdom. It was
    refused under paragraph 276B (ii).


 6. It was however accepted that for the purposes of paragraph 276B (i) of
    the Immigration Rules, that the Appellant had resided continuously
    lawfully in the United Kingdom since 21st July 2004.


 7. Separately, the Respondent considered the Appellant's circumstances on
    the basis of his private and family life established in United Kingdom.
    There was no suggestion in the application mde by the Appellant that
    the he had any family life (partner or children) and no reference was
    made to any family relatives in the United Kingdom.

 8. The application was refused on private life grounds under paragraph
    276ADE (1) of the Immigration Rules. It was concluded by the respondent
    that the Appellant failed to meet the suitability requirements in S-
    LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules because, he having
    submitted a TOEIC certificate from Educational Testing Service (ETS),
    ETS had undertaken a check of his test and confirmed to the respondent
    there was significant evidence to conclude that his certificate was
    fraudulently obtained by the use of a proxy test taker. His scores from
    the test taken on 18th October 2011 at Westlink College had been
    cancelled by ETS.

 9. It was further refused on the grounds that there were no very
    significant obstacles to his return to Mauritius where he had resided
    for the majority of his life and where he has retained knowledge of
    life, language and culture. There were no exceptional circumstances
    found to warrant a grant of leave to remain outside of the Immigration
    Rules.

10. The Appellant appealed that decision on the 7th December 2015.  In  the
    grounds he  asserted  that  he  had  not  received  the  IS151A  notice
    (paragraph 7). The rest of the grounds can be  described  as  "generic"
    grounds in which it was argued that the decision  was  "unfair"  and  a
    violation of his humanitarian rights under Article 8 of the  ECHR"  and
    the respondent had "overlooked the Appellant's personal  circumstances"
    and should have "exercised differently a discretion  conferred  by  the
    immigration rules." The grounds do not give any details personal to the
    Appellant concerning the allegation made by the SSHD that he  had  used
    deception. What was said at paragraph 3 was that " the  respondent  had
    misjudged has the Appellant is a  qualified  Tier  4  student  who  has
    studied the major part of studies in English and  he  can  converse  in
    English."



11. On the 14th March 2017 his appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal.
    In a determination  promulgated  on  the  21st  March  2017  the  judge
    dismissed his appeal on all grounds.



12. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and on the 14th
    June 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrews granted permission for  the
    following reasons:



         "Having seen the letter and fax transmission verification report of
         31 March 2017 I am satisfied that this application is in time.

         I am further satisfied that there is an arguable error  of  law  in
         the decision in that  the  judge  did  not  consider  the  evidence
         referred to at paragraph 5 of the application. Further,  he  failed
         to address whether it was undesirable for the Appellant not  to  be
         given leave. It is also  arguable  that  the  judge's  findings  in
         relation to article 8 are flawed  given  the  length  of  time  the
         Appellant has been in United Kingdom."




13. The Secretary of State responded to the grounds of  appeal  under  rule
    24. That document opposed  the  appeal  observing  the  judge  directed
    himself appropriately. The judge had sight of a significant  number  of
    documents and the fact that the Appellant had given an explanation that
    he did not need to cheat because of his  earlier  English  certificates
    did not detract from the fact that there may be a number of reasons why
    the Appellant would use a proxy. The judge had regard  to  the  English
    language certificates and  was  entitled,  having  considered  all  the
    relevant evidence to find that the Appellant had used deception.  Given
    that the judge found that the Appellant had used deception,  whilst  he
    may not explicitly refer to  whether  or  not  a  grant  of  leave  was
    undesirable, it is submitted that it would  be  in  the  light  of  the
    deception the judge found. As to relationships with family members,  it
    was noted that family life was not pursued before the Tribunal  and  in
    any event, the judge did consider these  relationships  and  there  was
    nothing to suggest anything over and above normal emotional ties.

14. At the hearing, Mr Karim relied upon the grounds. He submitted that the
    judge failed to engage with the three stage process which he  described
    as  the  "boomerang  approach".  He  referred  the  Tribunal   to   the
    determination and in particular paragraph 22 where  the  judge  recited
    the burden and standard of proof as follows; "the burden  of  proof  is
    upon the Appellant and the standard of  proof  is  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities. However, there is an initial burden upon the  respondent
    to show that there is a prima facie case against the Appellant."

15. He submitted that this  was  not  an  accurate  representation  of  the
    correct burden and standard of proof and there was no reference to  the
    respondent having the legal burden to demonstrate  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the Appellant had used deception.

16. At paragraph  26,  he  submitted  that  the  judge  again  had  wrongly
    characterised the burden of proof as stating that "the burden of  proof
    was on the Appellant to rebut the evidence" of the Secretary of  State.
    He submitted that the judge had not qualified this  and  in  particular
    whether the Appellant had demonstrated any innocent explanation at  the
    minimum level of plausibility. The judge had approached the case on the
    basis that there was a burden on the respondent and then  a  burden  on
    the Appellant and had gone no further. At paragraph 30 the  judge  made
    reference to having been  "quite  satisfied  that  the  respondent  has
    provided specific evidence in this case to establish the Appellant used
    deception" and also stated "the Appellant has  failed  to  rebut  these
    assertions on the balance of probabilities. Quite simply he has adduced
    no evidence other than  a  number  of  English  language  certificates,
    which, in isolation proves nothing as  there  is  no  evidence  of  the
    standard of English achieved compared to the ETS  standard."  Mr  Karim
    submitted that that was not in accordance with the decision of  SM  and
    Qadir at [57].

17. He submitted that at paragraph 33, the judge again fell into  error  by
    stating that "on the totality of the evidence before me, and bearing in
    mind the burden of proof  lies  on  the  Appellant,  I  find  that  the
    respondent's decision was in accordance with the law."

18. In summary he submitted the judge did not appreciate the correct burden
    of proof at the various stages did not  appreciate  the  issue  of  the
    minimum level of plausibility of  the  innocent  explanation  and  also
    reversed the burden which he placed on the Appellant. Thus he submitted
    the judge had not carried out the legal exercise as necessary.

19. He also submitted that the judge had failed to make clear  findings  on
    the evidential aspects of the case, for example,  not  considering  the
    Appellant's account of how he had taken the test  as  set  out  in  the
    witness statement and the other matters relevant to whether or  not  he
    had provided and innocent explanation and to be placed in  the  overall
    balance. It was for the judge to make an assessment  of  those  matters
    but the judge does not give any reasons for rejecting that evidence nor
    does he explicitly say he does reject that evidence. The judge had  not
    appreciated the relevance of this and therefore had  not  approach  the
    matter in the correct way.

20. Mr Karim accepted that paragraph 5d of the grounds was factually  wrong
    as the project Fa�ade report did cover the period  when  the  test  was
    undertaken.

21. Further submissions concerned the failure  to  consider  an  assessment
    under paragraph 276B (ii) and that the judge had not  considered  those
    factors and that the public interest references paragraph 31 related to
    S117 factors.

22. Mr Nath for the Secretary of State accepted  that  there  was  a  three
    stage process in establishing the  deception.  He  submitted  that  the
    burden did move to the Appellant and this was an assessment made by the
    judge. He submitted that paragraph 30 of the  determination  the  judge
    having previously set out  at  paragraph  26  considered  the  innocent
    explanation and there was no evidence that he had contacted the college
    and therefore his decision was open to him. Paragraph 30 was  therefore
    a summary. He submitted that the determination could have been  clearer
    upon the approach used to determine the issue of deception but  overall
    the Appellant had not shown an innocent explanation and the  judge  was
    right to say at paragraph 30 that the Appellant had not "rebutted"  the
    evidence.

23. As to the point raised in relation to paragraph 276B (ii) paragraph  31
    dealt adequately with this. The public interest factors identified with
    those relevant to an assessment under paragraph 276B (ii) and  are  the
    same as  the  suitability  grounds  and  therefore  was  sufficient  to
    demonstrate that it was undesirable that he be granted leave.

24. By way of reply Mr Karim submitted that it was incumbent on  the  judge
    to set out the correct approach given the  grave  consequences  of  the
    findings made for this Appellant and that it is not  possible  to  read
    "between the lines". The decision plainly did not  sufficiently  engage
    the oral evidence provided. He submitted the determination be set aside
    and remitted for a de novo hearing.

25. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my  decision  which  I  now
    give.







    Discussion:



26. There is no dispute between the parties of the correct approach that
    should be taken in cases involving the issue of deception.  The key
    decisions relevant to determining whether the Appellant has used
    deception in this context are SM & Qadir (ETS -Evidence - Burden of
    Proof) [2016 UKUT 229 and Sharif Ahmed Majumder and Ihsan Qadir v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 1167. The
    respondent's evidence in SM and  Qadir was found by the Upper Tribunal
    to suffice to meet, albeit by a narrow margin, the initial evidential
    burden of showing deception. The burden then shifted to the Appellants
    to raise an innocent explanation. In the cases of Mr Majumder and Mr
    Qadir, in the context of the explanations and evidence given by them,
    the respondent could not satisfy the legal burden to show that their
    TOEIC certificates were procured by dishonesty and so their appeals
    were allowed by the Upper Tribunal. The respondent initially appealed
    to the Court of Appeal but then settled those appeals by consent.


27. The question for me to consider is -has the judge approached the matter
    in the manner directed by the Court of Appeal in SM and Qadir [2016]
    EWCA Civ 1167? That involves considering, first, whether the Secretary
    of State has met the burden on her of identifying evidence that the
    TOEIC certificate was obtained by deception; second whether the
    claimant satisfies the evidential burden on him of raising an innocent
    explanation for the suggested deception; and third, if so, whether the
    Secretary of State can meet the legal burden of showing, on the balance
    of probabilities, that deception in fact took place.

28.  I have considered this question in the light of the  submissions  made
    by the parties and by reference to the determination of the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Having done so I am satisfied that the submissions made by Mr
    Karim are made out. I shall give my reasons for reaching that view.

29. It is plain from the determination that the judge  did  not  apply  the
    correct burden and standard of proof as set out in  the  case  law  and
    referred  to  above.  There  are  a  number  of   points   within   the
    determination where the test is not applied or is referred to  wrongly.
    The judge began at a paragraph 22 by making reference to the burden  of
    proof being on the Appellant. He did, however, recognise that there was
    an initial burden upon the respondent to show "that there  is  a  prima
    facie case against  the  Appellant".  Whilst  the  first  part  is  not
    strictly accurate, the judge did identify  albeit  in  confusing  terms
    that there was an evidential burden  on  the  Secretary  of  State.  At
    paragraph 26, the judge made reference to  the  "generic  and  specific
    evidence" and that in the light of that being produced "the  burden  of
    proof is clearly upon the Appellant to rebut that evidence."   He  then
    stated that he had failed to do so. At paragraph 30 he  made  reference
    to "I am therefore quite satisfied that  the  respondent  has  provided
    sufficient generic and specific evidence in this case to establish  the
    Appellant used deception.... And the  Appellant  has  failed  to  rebut
    these assertions on the balance of probabilities."  In  the  notice  of
    decision at paragraph 33 the judge once again refers to the  burden  of
    proof lying upon the Appellant stating "bearing in mind the  burden  of
    proof lies on the Appellant, I find that the response decision  was  in
    accordance with the law."

30. Whilst Mr Nath submitted that in general terms the judge did apply  the
    correct test even though as he submitted the determination was  unclear
    as to this, I am not satisfied that the correct approach was  followed.
    As Mr Karim submitted in a case like this and  the  grave  consequences
    that flow from a finding of deception require the correct  approach  to
    be adopted by the  Tribunal.  The  determination  demonstrates  at  the
    different  paragraphs  that  have  been  identified  that  the  correct
    approach and the analysis set out in the decision of SM and  Qadir  was
    not followed and it is unclear as to which  party  had  the  burden  of
    proof at which stage and importantly, what the judge made  of  all  the
    evidence at each stage.

31. There can be no dispute on the evidence before the judge that that  the
    generic evidence taken together  with  the  ETS  spreadsheet  providing
    specific details relating to the Appellant is sufficient to  allow  the
    Secretary State to discharge  the  evidential  burden  of  the  use  of
    deception in the taking of an English language test. ( see Shezhad  and
    Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615 at [26],28] [43] and SM and Qadir  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 1167 at [4]).

32. However there does not seem to have been any appreciation of  the  next
    stages whereby there was a burden,  again  an  evidential  one  on  the
    Appellant of raising an innocent explanation. This required the minimum
    level of plausibility as Mr Karim submitted. Thereafter the  judge  was
    required to consider whether the Secretary of State had discharged  the
    legal burden of proof in relation to dishonesty which remains with  the
    Secretary of State.

33. In reaching a decision on this issue and addressing the  legal  burden,
    the factors that the Upper Tribunal noted  at  paragraph  69  of  their
    decision in SM and Qadir as being relevant to considering an allegation
    of dishonesty in this context: "include (in exhaustively, we would add)
    what the person accused has to gain from being dishonest; what  he  has
    to lose from being dishonest; what is known about  his  character;  and
    the culture or  environment  in  which  he  operated.  Mr  Dunlop  also
    highlighted the importance of three further considerations, namely  how
    the  Appellants  performed  under  cross   examination,   whether   the
    Tribunal's  assessment  of  their  English  language   proficiency   is
    commensurate  with  their  TOEIC  scores  and  whether  their  academic
    achievements are such that it was unnecessary or illogical for them  to
    have cheated."

34. The Court of Appeal in SM and Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167 endorsed  that
    approach.

35. At paragraph 89 the Upper Tribunal in SM and Qadir stated as follows

         "the final question is whether the Secretary of State is  discharge
         the legal burden of establishing on the  balance  of  probabilities
         that this Appellant procured his TOEIC certificate by  deceit.  The
         answer to this question requires a balancing of all of the findings
         and the evaluative assessments rehearsed above."

36. In this context findings of fact were necessary on the  evidence  given
    by the Appellant to demonstrate that he had not  engaged  in  deception
    but had sat the test. Whilst the judge made reference to the  Appellant
    adducing no evidence to rebut the respondents evidence  "other  than  a
    number of English-language certificates" (see paragraph  30)  that  was
    not the position. The Appellant had given a detailed account as to  how
    he had sat the examination, why he  had  chosen  the  college  and  the
    format of the examination (see witness statement). In the  case  of  SM
    and Qadir, one of the Appellants had given details of how  he  sat  the
    test (see  paragraph  45)  although  I  accept  in  impressive  detail.
    Therefore the judge was required to consider that aspect of his account
    along with the other factors set out in paragraph 69  relevant  to  the
    issue of dishonesty; in this case what was known about the  Appellant's
    character (there being character references), what  he  would  have  to
    lose by using deception along with his  level  of  English  (which  the
    judge did consider) and any other relevant factors.  Whilst  the  judge
    made reference to the English-language certificates, it does not appear
    that this was analysed in  any  detail  as  to  the  level  of  English
    necessary for the certificates he obtained all the qualifications  that
    he has obtained whilst being in United Kingdom. There is no  record  in
    the determination of the oral evidence given on this issue  and  it  is
    not clear to me whether that evidence was given or not.  However  those
    were relevant matters.

37. The judge did record that the Appellant produced no evidence  from  the
    college itself but did not appear to weigh in the balance the  evidence
    that the college had its licence revoked in 2014 (as supported  by  the
    document in the bundle) and therefore,  as  the  Appellant  claimed  he
    could not obtain such information.

38. As the case law identifies, each case is fact sensitive and requires  a
    balancing of findings and an evaluative assessment to be made and  this
    is to be determined on all the evidence adduced by the parties (see  SM
    and Qadir at paragraph 102).

39. Consequently I am satisfied that the grounds in this respect  are  made
    out. In the light of that conclusion it is  not  necessary  for  me  to
    consider the other ground relating to  paragraph  276B(ii)  although  I
    would observe that if the judge had applied the correct legal test  and
    deception demonstrated, the findings at paragraph 31  would  have  been
    sufficient to discharge any consideration of  paragraph  276B(ii).  The
    fact that the judge  did  not  appreciate  that  there  was  a  factual
    assessment to make in relation  to  the  paragraph  276B  (ii)  factors
    underlies the submissions made by Mr Karim that the correct legal  test
    was not applied in the earlier part of the determination.

40.  Nonetheless, for the reasons I have given  I  have  found  a  material
    error of law and therefore I set aside the determination.

41. As to the remaking of the decision, Mr Karim submitted that the correct
    course to adopt in a case of this nature was for the appeal to be heard
    de novo and thus remitted to the First-tier Tribunal because  it  would
    enable the judge to consider the applicant's evidence and  his  account
    and for findings to be made on all the evidence.

42. In the light of those submissions, I am  satisfied  that  that  is  the
    correct course to take and therefore I set aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and it will be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to hear afresh.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and is set aside; it shall be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a hearing.

Signed [pic]
                                Date: 15/8/2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds






