
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12179/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 July via Skype for Business    |On 03 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  NI YAYUN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L. Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been not been objected  to  by  the
parties.  The form of remote hearing was V (video). A face to  face  hearing
was not held because  it  was  not  practicable  and  all  issues  could  be
determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to are in an  application  for  permission
to appeal by the Secretary of State, the grant of permission to appeal,  and
the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  contents  of  which  I  have
recorded.  I also had access to the full file from the FTT.

The order made is described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said this about the process: they were content that the  hearing
had been fair in its remote form.

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Bircher promulgated on 11 December  2019  in  which
    she allowed an appeal by the  respondent  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated  1  July  2019  to  refuse  her  human  rights
    application.

 2. I will refer to the parties using the terminology from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. Judge Bircher made an anonymity order in favour of the  appellant.   Ms
    Brakaj, who appeared below, informed me that she did not apply  for  an
    anonymity order in the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  could  not  see  any
    reason for one to be made  or  maintained.   I  agree.   There  are  no
    special considerations in this case such that the normal  principle  of
    open justice may be displaced.  I lift the order.

Factual background

 4. The appellant, Ni Yayun, is a citizen of China born on 21 August  1975.
    She claims to have entered the United Kingdom  clandestinely  in  2006.
    Her husband,  who  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  by  the
    respondent in July 2010, entered clandestinely some years before  that.
    Together they have two adult children in China who were brought  up  by
    their grandparents. On 14 January 2019, the appellant applied for leave
    to remain on the basis of her private and family life with her husband.
    That application was refused, and it is that refusal decision which was
    under challenge before the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The judge  outlined  the  background  of  the  appellant's  immigration
    history and her earlier, unsuccessful, applications to the  respondent.
    She had applied for  asylum  in  October  2013;  that  application  was
    refused in April 2015, and an appeal brought by  the  appellant  before
    the First-tier Tribunal was dismissed in July  2016,  with  the  result
    that the appellant became appeal-rights exhausted on 20 July 2016.

 6. Addressing the appellant's family circumstances, the judge  noted  that
    the appellant's husband was granted indefinite leave  to  remain  as  a
    result of a legacy programme at the time, and that  the  appellant  had
    lived here for approximately 14 years. Her  husband  runs  a  takeaway,
    which employs four people. The business has generated enough income  to
    support the appellant and her husband without recourse to public funds.
    The appellant has some minor health conditions, and stress and  anxiety
    arising from her concern for the future.

 7. The judge heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  her  husband  and
    outlined the reasons for refusal relied upon by the Secretary of  State
    in some depth.

 8. At [25], the judge outlined the requirements of the Immigration  Rules,
    insofar as they applied to the appellant: paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix
    FM provided that the appellant would  only  be  entitled  to  leave  to
    remain if there were "insurmountable obstacles" to her and her  husband
    continuing their relationship in China. At  [27],  the  judge  directed
    herself concerning the Supreme Court's  approach  to  what  amounts  to
    "insurmountable obstacles",  in  light  of  the  jurisprudence  of  the
    European Court of human rights: see Agyarko v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11.  At [29], the judge noted that  the
    "ultimate question" was whether a decision  concerning  an  application
    for leave to remain on human  rights  grounds  struck  a  fair  balance
    between  the  interests  of  the  applicant  under  Article  8  of  the
    convention, and the public interest in immigration control.  She  noted
    that:

         "Although leave to remain might be granted  outside  the  rules  in
         exceptional circumstances, such circumstances, while not  'unusual'
         or  'unique',  had  to  be  compelling,  such  as  produced   [sic]
         unjustifiably   harsh   results   which    would    make    removal
         disproportionate."

 9. At [31] and following, the judge noted the requirements of Part  5A  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"),  and
    the need to conduct  a  balancing  exercise  when  deciding  whether  a
    proposed interference  with  a  person's  article  8  rights  would  be
    proportionate. At  [35],  the  judge  noted  that  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control is necessary in order to "preserve or to foster the
    economic well-being of the country" and also  to  protect  "health  and
    morals and for the protection of the rights  and  freedom  of  others",
    reconciling  the  domestic   policy   objectives   behind   controlling
    immigration with the permitted derogations under article  8(2)  of  the
    Convention. At [37], the judge set out the five Razgar questions.

10. The judge accepted that the appellant and her husband were in a genuine
    marriage, finding that they have  two  adult  children  who  reside  in
    China. It was "reasonable to conclude" that the  appellant  had  worked
    illegally alongside her husband.  The  judge  was  satisfied  that  the
    appellant and her husband suffered  from  physical  and  mental  health
    problems. They had each been prescribed with medication  to  cope  with
    anxiety and stress, and the appellant had been prescribed inhalers  and
    steroid cream due to her asthma and eczema. She found that  the  couple
    provided mutual  support  for  each  other  while  working  long  hours
    together in their business and living together.

11. At [42], the judge noted that the appellant's husband had been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain, despite being an illegal  entrant  himself,
    due (in the words of the respondent at the time) "to  the  strength  of
    connections in the United Kingdom, length of residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom and compassionate circumstances".

12. At [45], the judge commenced her analysis of  whether  there  would  be
    "insurmountable obstacles" to the couple returning to China. She  found
    that they would not experience insurmountable obstacles. They have  two
    adult children there and their own elderly parents, and would  be  able
    to secure temporary accommodation with them until  they  were  able  to
    secure employment and establish themselves in their own  home.  Despite
    the drop in living standards that a return to China  would  necessarily
    entail, they would not experience "very  significant  difficulties"  in
    the event of their return. As such, the judge found that the  appellant
    could  not  succeed  in  her  appeal  by  reference  to  Article  8  as
    articulated by the Immigration Rules.

13. The judge allowed the appeal because,  she  stated  at  [49],  she  was
    satisfied that  the  interference  in  the  Article  8  rights  of  the
    appellant and her husband would not be proportionate to the pursuit  of
    a legitimate aim.  At  [50],  the  judge  noted  that  the  appellant's
    husband had lived here for 19 years and reiterated the basis upon which
    the respondent granted him indefinite leave to remain, as  outlined  at
    paragraph EX.1, above. She added that the appellant had lived here  for
    13 years, and that it was reasonable  to  conclude  that  she  and  her
    husband had connections in this country, formed over the 13  years  (at
    the date of the hearing) for which the appellant  had  lived  with  her
    husband in this country. She considered  those  factors  to  amount  to
    compassionate circumstances. She observed that there was a disparity of
    approach between the appellant and her  husband  on  the  part  of  the
    respondent, although observed that neither had  attempted  to  disclose
    the appellant's  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  at  the  time  her
    husband's legacy application was successful.

14. The judge noted, and was clearly aware of, the fact that the  appellant
    had a poor immigration history, and, together with her husband,  had  a
    long-term plan to re-establish themselves in  this  country.  The  high
    point of the judge's reasoning for allowing the appeal was  the  length
    of time the appellant's husband had lived in the country, coupled  with
    the longevity of his relationship with his  wife.  An  application  for
    entry clearance, where the appellant  to  leave  with  a  view  to  re-
    entering, would be unlikely to be successful; although the  appellant's
    husband's business provides a "modest income" which  is  sufficient  to
    support them both, it is unlikely to  generate  an  income  capable  of
    satisfying the requirements of the Immigration Rules. They  can  manage
    on the funds they generate in this country, but the appellant's husband
    would struggle to generate sufficient funds for him to live off, and to
    remit to the appellant, in the event that she were to return  to  China
    without him.

15. At [59], the judge  found  that  the  appellant  and  her  husband  are
    integrated into the  United  Kingdom,  having  established  a  takeaway
    business, which will serve the local community. They have many  friends
    and supporters, as demonstrated by  the  numerous  letters  of  support
    included in the appellant's bundle. In the same  paragraph,  the  judge
    continued with a reference to Chikwamba v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2008] UKHL 40:

         "...the House of  Lords  had  to  address  the  question  of:  when
         determining an appeal under section 82  of  the  2002  act  on  the
         ground   that   to   remove   the   appellant    would    interfere
         disproportionately with his Article 8  right  to  respect  for  his
         family life, when, if ever, is it appropriate to dismiss the appeal
         on the basis that the appellant should be  required  to  leave  the
         country and seek leave to enter  from  an  entry  clearance  office
         [sic] abroad? The answer was "comparatively  rarely,  certainly  in
         family cases involving children, should  an  article  8  appeal  be
         dismissed on the basis that it  would  be  proportionate  and  more
         appropriate for the appellant reply fully from the board."

16. At [60], the judge outlined her global conclusion that refusal  of  the
    appellant's application for leave  to  remain  in  this  country  would
    result in "unjustifiably harsh consequences" for the appellant and  her
    husband. She allowed  the  appeal  on  article  8  grounds,  considered
    outside the Immigration Rules.

Grounds of appeal

17. The Secretary of State appeals on the basis that the judge  "failed  to
    apply adequate weight to the public interest in maintaining a fair  and
    just system of immigration [control]", by failing to identify  anything
    exceptional about the appellant's circumstances which would be  capable
    of meriting a grant of leave to remain outside the rules, and that  her
    reliance on Chikwamba was irrational. The judge should not, contend the
    grounds of appeal, have given the weight to the appellant's  case  that
    she did when performing the balancing exercise.

18. Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  E.M.
    Simpson.

Discussion

19. I accept that the  judge's  apparent  reliance  on  Chikwamba  at  [59]
    appears to be an  error.  However,  I  can  deal  this  point  shortly.
    Although the judge mentioned the authority,  and  quoted  from  it,  it
    appears that she did so in a way which had no impact on  her  operative
    analysis of the Article 8 balancing exercise, which had primarily  been
    conducted in the preceding paragraphs. It is clear from [55]  that  the
    judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  would  be  unable  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, were she to attempt to  make  an
    application for entry clearance from overseas,  so  her  discussion  of
    Chikwamba cannot have been intended to apply to the facts of the  case.
    It is also clear from the judge's detailed self-direction, set  out  in
    my summary of her decision, above, that the Article 8 principles  which
    lay at the heart of her decision did not relate to Chikwamba reasoning.
    Nor does the appellant have any minor children, which was the focus  of
    the excerpt from Chikwamba. At the heart of the  judge's  analysis  lay
    her concerns about the length of  the  appellant's  residence  in  this
    country, the (unchallenged) reasons she considered were adopted by  the
    respondent when granting indefinite leave to remain to her  husband  in
    similar circumstances, and her operative conclusion, at [60],  that  it
    would be "unjustifiably harsh"  to  expect  her  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom. The judge's mention of Chikwamba was an unfortunate error, but
    an error which  did  not  have  an  operative  impact  on  her  overall
    findings.  It is necessary to read the decision as a whole;  when  read
    it that way, it is clear that the erroneous reference to Chikwamba  did
    not infect the judge's overall reasoning.

20. That leaves the remaining grounds of appeal advanced by  the  Secretary
    of State. They are, in the terms relied upon by the Secretary of State,
    disagreements of weight.  Barring irrationality, weight is a matter for
    the judge.  In Durueke (PTA: AZ applied, proper approach)  [2019]  UKUT
    00197 (IAC), this tribunal held that:

         "(ii)    Permission should only be granted on the  basis  that  the
         judge  who  decided  the  appeal  gave  insufficient  weight  to  a
         particular aspect of the case if it can properly be said that as  a
         consequence the judge who decided the appeal has arguably  made  an
         irrational decision. As the Court of Appeal  said  at  para  18  of
         Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA  Civ  412,  it  is  necessary  to  guard
         against the temptation to characterise as errors of law what are in
         truth no more than disagreements about the weight to  be  given  to
         different factors, particularly if the judge who decided the appeal
         had the advantage of hearing oral evidence.

         (iii)    Particular care should be taken before granting permission
         on the ground that  the  judge  who  decided  the  appeal  did  not
         "sufficiently consider" or "sufficiently analyse" certain  evidence
         or certain aspects of a case. Such complaints often turn out to  be
         mere disagreements with the reasoning of the judge who decided  the
         appeal because the implication is that the  evidence  or  point  in
         question was considered by the judge who decided the appeal but not
         to the extent desired by the author of the  grounds  or  the  judge
         considering  the  application  for  permission.  Permission  should
         usually only be granted on such grounds if it is possible to  state
         precisely how the assessment of the judge who decided the appeal is
         arguably lacking and why this is arguably material."

21. The Secretary of State did not advance a rationality-based challenge to
    the overall findings  of  the  judge.   While  the  grounds  of  appeal
    disagree in strong terms with the judge's overall conclusion, I do  not
    consider that the judge's overall decision was not rationally  open  to
    her on the evidence before her.  I accept  that  this  was  a  generous
    decision, and one which a great many judges  would  not  have  reached.
    However, the judge noted the public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control, and the  need  to  consider  the  public  interest
    factors in Part 5A of the 2002 Act.  She was well aware of the  defiant
    attitude to immigration control previously exhibited by the  appellant.
    She took those factors into account.  It was, in principle, open to the
    judge to find that the longevity of the appellant's residence, combined
    with the reasons the respondent had previously given when granting  the
    appellant's   husband   indefinite   leave   to   remain   in   similar
    circumstances, amounted to exceptional circumstances.   The  respondent
    did not challenge the judge's summary of why  the  appellant's  husband
    was granted indefinite leave to remain in 2010, so those  findings  are
    unchallenged findings of fact with which I cannot interfere.

22. Indeed, while not conceding the appeal and maintaining  his  attack  on
    the weight ascribed  by  the  judge  to  the  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of immigration control, Mr Walker did note that he saw  the
    force in the approach of the judge, given the length of  her  husband's
    residence here, and that of her  own.   That  Mr  Walker  realistically
    accepted that some of the judge's concerns were  valid  highlights  how
    this was a decision which, albeit it at the most generous  end  of  the
    spectrum, was nevertheless within the range of decisions that the judge
    was entitled to reach.

23. While the judge's analysis could have been clearer had it not  featured
    the erroneous citation of Chikwamba, and while it would have aided  the
    parties' scrutiny of her  decision  had  she  adopted  the  frequently-
    recommended "balance sheet" approach when assessing the public interest
    in the appellant's removal, I consider that she  gave  tolerably  clear
    reasons for reaching  her  findings.   The  grounds  of  appeal  are  a
    disagreement of weight with a decision which featured the correct self-
    directions, and which took into account the correct  factors.   As  the
    Court of Appeal noted in Jose Herrera v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2018] EWCA Civ 412 at [18],

         "Appellate tribunals must always guard against  the  temptation  to
         characterise as errors of law  what  are  in  truth  no  more  than
         disagreements about the weight to be given to different factors."

24. This appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  an  error  of  law
such that it need be set aside.

This appeal is dismissed.

The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal is lifted.


Signed   Stephen H Smith                              Date 20 July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

