
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/12426/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 December 2016                |On 03 January 2017                 |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                              TESFABRHAN REZENE
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Evans for Waddell Taylor Bryan Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Thorne promulgated on  28 April 2014 which  dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to  refuse  the
   Appellants application for entry clearance under  paragraph  297  of  the
   Immigration Rules as the child of Rezene Hedru..
Background


4. The Appellant was born on 16 December 1999 and is a national of Eritrea.
5. The Appellant applied for entry clearance as  the  son  of  Rezene  Hedru
   'the Sponsor'.
6. On 9 November  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:
   a)  There  was  insufficient  evidence  that  the   sponsor   had   sole
      responsibility for the Appellant.
   b) There was inadequate evidence of the whereabouts  of  the  Appellants
      mother.
   c) Given that the sponsor had been in the UK since  2004  there  was  no
      explanation as to why he had waited so long before making the present
      application.
   d) There was no basis for a grant of leave outside the rules.


The Judge's Decision
7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Thorne ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the  Respondent's
   decision. The Judge found:
   a) He accepted that the appellant and sponsor was father and son and that
      the entry clearance officers decision failed to give  respect  to  the
      putative family life and the possibility of it flourishing.
   b) He considered that the best interests of the child lay in  maintaining
      the status quo and given that the Appellant had spent most of his life
      in Eritrea or Sudan the decision maintained status quo.
   c)  He  considered  the  proportionality  of  the  decision  against  the
      framework of the immigration rules while acknowledging that there  was
      no right of appeal against the refusal under the rules.
   d) He found that the sponsor did not  have  sole  responsibility  at  all
      material times for the Appellants upbringing.
   e) He found that the sponsor had only been  involved  in  the  Appellants
      life since 2012 and that they had only met on a very few occasions and
      the  majority  of  their  interactions  had  been  by  long   distance
      communication.
   f) He accepted that the sponsor sent money and clients  and  other  items
      two the appellant spoke a lady Nome are saint  using  his  school,  no
      interaction with his teachers, no part in his decision  to  travel  to
      Sudan or subsequently leave the refugee camp.  He  made  no  decisions
      about the appellants medical care either in Eritrea or Sudan.
   g) He found that there were no serious  or  compelling  family  or  other
      considerations which a the exclusion of the appellant  undesirable  or
      that  suitable arrangements have been made for his  care  because  the
      appellant was living in Khartoum and with a family  to  care  for  him
      like their own son.
   h) There was insufficient  evidence  of  suitable  arrangements  for  the
      Appellants care in the  UK  in  the  form  of  evidence  of  available
      accommodation  or  schooling  or  evidence  of  the  Sponsors  present
      financial circumstances in order to establish his ability to  maintain
      the Appellant.  He found that the failure to meet  these  requirements
      weighed against the Appellant in favour of the public interest.
   i) He considered those public interest factors that he  was  required  to
      under section 117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
      noting that there was inadequate evidence  that  the  Appellant  could
      speak English or that  he  could  be  financially  maintained  by  the
      Sponsor.
   j) He found that the Appellants best interests are met by preserving  the
      status quo.
8. Grounds of appeal were lodged.
9. First tier Tribunal Judge Kelly gave permission to appeal.

10. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Ms  Evans  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that:

   a) She relied on the grounds of appeal which were detailed.

   b) The starting point was the  ability  of  the  Appellant  to  meet  the
      requirements of the rules and having accepted that family life existed
      and would be interfered with the issue was one of proportionality.

   c) It was unfair for the Judge to make findings against the appellant  in
      relation to accommodation maintenance as these  had  not  been  points
      raised by the entry clearance officer and the sponsor  was  not  given
      the opportunity in the hearing to address them.

   d) The Judge's assessment of the issue of sole responsibility was  flawed
      as he failed to consider who had responsibility  if  the  Sponsor  did
      not.  If he found that the family in  whose  care  he  was  placed  in
      Khartoum shared responsibility he did not make finding to that effect.
       There were factual errors in relation to family in Khartoum two where
      at best very distant relatives but effectively friends who  agreed  to
      care for the Appellant in exchange for the Sponsor supporting  all  of
      them.

   e) There was evidence to the from and the sponsor that if the only reason
      the appellant had remained in Sudan when his friend is left was saying
      but the sponsor could make the necessary application for him  to  join
      him in the UK and the Judge made no finding about that at all.

   f) The Judge made adverse findings in relation to the Sponsor not  making
      decisions about the Appellants education or health care where no  such
      decisions were ever required.

   g) The Judges reference to the Sponsor not having sole responsibility  at
      all material times was wrong in law.

   h) The Judge's finding that it was in the best interest of the  child  to
      live as a refugee in a refugee camp in Sudan  without  either  of  his
      parents was flawed.

   i) The Judge made no findings in relation to the sponsor as  evidence  of
      his concerns that his son's well-being.

11. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Bates submitted that:

   a) Although he accepted that the HOPO did not raise issues of finance  or
      accommodation and that the Judges findings in relation to this were  a
      procedural error.

   b) He accepted that the judge also made no findings about credibility  of
      either the sponsor of all his wife and that this was an error.

   c) He suggested that in referring to' all material times 'the  judge  was
      not talking about the period from the Appellants birth to 2012 the but
      was suggesting that since 2012 the Sponsor had been unable to evidence
      that he had had sole responsibility  for  the  Appellant  although  he
      conceded that there was never a suggestion that In Sudan any decisions
      were required in relation to education or health care .

   d) The Judge's findings at Paragraph 60 inferred that the Sponsor  shared
      responsibility with family in Khartoum there were distant relatives.

   e) He maintained that there was no  clear  evidence  as  to  the  sponsor
      having sole responsibility for the Appellant.

   f) Given that the  findings  as  to  sole  responsibility  would  be  the
      starting-point of the Article 8 assessment the  Judge  would  have  to
      have found that there were other compelling factors not  addressed  by
      the Rules why refusal was disproportionate.

   g) He suggested that the Immigration Rules applied to children as well as
      to adults.

12. In reply Ms Evans on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

   a) In relation to Mr. Bates last comment none of  the  Immigration  Rules
      for children required them to speak English  so  the  absence  of  any
      evidence that the Appellant could speak English  should  not  be  held
      against him.

   b) In relation to the argument that he  shared  responsibility  could  be
      inferred in paragraphs 60 such a finding would have been an  error  as
      he had failed to address whether these were simply the people  on  the
      ground that made day-to-day decisions rather  than  those  who  shared
      responsibility.

Legal Framework
13. On the issue of sole  responsibility  I  have  taken  into  account  TD
    (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006]  UKAIT  00049
    from which I have drawn the following guidance:


     . "A central part of the notion of "sole responsibility" for a child's
       upbringing  is  the  UK-based  parent's  continuing   interest   and
       involvement in the child's life, including making or being consulted
       about  and  approving  important   decisions   about   the   child's
       upbringing." (paragraph 13)
     . "the core issue in "sole responsibility", namely the idea that it is
       important  to  identify  the  person,  if  any,  who   alone   makes
       significant  decisions  about  the  child's  upbringing  and   whose
       obligation it is to make those decisions." (paragraph 15)
     . "Financial support, particularly sole financial support, of a  child
       is relevant since it may be an indicator of obligation stemming from
       an exercise of  "responsibility"  by  a  parent  but  it  cannot  be
       conclusive.   There  may  be  other  reasons   why   an   individual
       financially supports a child and so it can only be a  factor  to  be
       taken into account along with all the other facts."(paragraph 16)
     . "Where one parent has disappeared  from  the  child's  life  and  so
       relinquished or abdicated his (or her) responsibility for the child,
       the starting point must be that it is the  remaining  active  parent
       who has "sole responsibility" for the  child.   The  fact  that  the
       remaining active parent is in the UK makes no  difference  to  this.
       Of course, the geographical separation of the parent from the  child
       means that the day-to-day care of  the  child  will  necessarily  be
       undertaken by others - relatives or friends abroad - who look  after
       the child." (paragraph 49)
14. In Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 88(IAC) (Blake J)  the
    Tribunal held that
      i) the exercise of the duty by the Entry Clearance Officer  to  assess
         an application under the Immigration Rules as to whether there  are
         family  or  other  considerations  making  the  child's   exclusion
         undesirable inevitably involves an assessment of what  the  child's
         welfare and best interests require;
     ii) Where an immigration decision engages Article 8 rights, due  regard
         must be had to the UN Convention on the Rights  of  the  Child.  An
         entry clearance decision for the admission of a child under  18  is
         "an  action  concerning  children...undertaken  by...administrative
         authorities" and so by Article 3 "the best interests of  the  child
         shall be a primary consideration";
    iii) Although the statutory duty under s.55 UK  Borders  Act  2009  only
         applies to children within  the  UK,  the  broader  duty  doubtless
         explains why the Secretary of State's IDI invites  Entry  Clearance
         Officers to consider the statutory guidance issued under s.55.

The Law

15.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

16. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is  untrue.  If  a  point  of  evidence  of
   significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take
   into account a material consideration. In Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ
   367 Buxton LJ said this in relation to challenging such findings:

   "Where, as in this case,  complaint  is  made  of  the  reasoning  of  an
   adjudicator  in  respect  of  a  question  of  fact  (that  is   to   say
   credibility), particular care is necessary to ensure that  the  criticism
   is as to the fundamental approach of the adjudicator, and does not merely
   reflect a feeling on the part of the appellate  tribunal  that  it  might
   itself have taken a different view of the matter from that that  appealed
   to the adjudicator."
17. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC),  it  was
   held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination disclosed clearly the
   reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal found oral evidence
   to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document to be worth  no
   weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in  the  determination  and
   for such findings to be supported by reasons. A  bare  statement  that  a
   witness was not believed or that a document was afforded  no  weight  was
   unlikely to satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

Finding on Material Error

18. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

19. I am satisfied that there are a number of errors both factual and  legal
   made out in the grounds of appeal in relation to  the  Judges  assessment
   under Article 8 such that the decision should be set aside to be remade.
20. I am satisfied that in his assessment under  Article  8  the  Judge  was
   required to assess to what extent  the  Appellant  met  the  requirements
   under the immigration rules  given  that  that  these  were  intended  to
   promote consistency, predictability and transparency  in  decision-making
   where issues under Article 8 arose, and to to  reflect  the  Government's
   and Parliament's view of how, as a matter of public policy,  the  balance
   should be struck between the right to respect for private and family life
   and the public interest.
21. The Judge had erred in his consideration of sole responsibility in  that
   there was no adequate and clear assessment of who had sole responsibility
   for the Appellant from  when  he  arrived  in  Sudan  as  he  claimed  or
   acknowledge that sole responsibility may be exercised over  a  relatively
   period short period of time.  The Judge did not make any findings  as  to
   the credibility of the Sponsor and his wife on this  issue,  specifically
   in relation to the assertion that the appellants remain to  in  Sudan  at
   the sponsors request said that an application could be made for  reunion,
   nor did he make clear findings about who had responsibility if it was not
   the Sponsor.
22. I am satisfied that the Judge's assessment of the best interests of  the
   child which must be a starting point  were  inadequate.   The  Judge  has
   failed to give adequate reasons why,  contrary  to  the  normal  starting
   point as set out in Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 88(IAC)
   (Blake J) that it is in the best interest of a child to be brought up  by
   one or both of its parents, in this case the Judge found it  was  in  the
   child's best interest to continue to live in a country other than that of
   his nationality in a refugee camp with a family who  were  at  best  very
   distant relatives.
23. The judge's assessment of proportionality was flawed  in  that  he  took
   into account and a number of factors that either  should  not  have  been
   taken into  account(  he  could  not  speak  English)  or  that  had  not
   previously been taken against him and he was not alerted that this was  a
   matter that the Judge was  considering  (maintenance  and  accommodation)
   This was, I am satisfied a proecural unfairness.
24.  The  Judge  made  a  factual  error  in  relation  to  the   Appellants
   circumstances in Khartoum in that the reference to him being ''cared  for
   like their own child' referred to the Appellants grandparents  when  they
   had cared for him in Eritrea.  The evidence  was  that  in  Khartoum  the
   Appellant was in the temporary care of a family and  there  had  been  no
   cross-examination in the hearing as to the quality and that  care  either
   from the HOPO or from the Judge.

25. These are errors I consider  to  be  material  since  had  the  Tribunal
   conducted this exercise the outcome could have been different. That in my
   view is the correct test to apply.




26. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that  the
   Judge's determination cannot stand and must be set aside in its entirety.
   All matters to be redetermined afresh.

27. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First  Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

28. In this case I have determined that the case should  be  remitted  as  I
   have found there was an error of law because the Appellant did not have a
   fair hearing due to procedural unfairness and failure to make findings in
   relation to the evidence of  the two witnesses who gave evidence. In this
   case none of the findings of fact are to stand and the matter will  be  a
   complete re hearing.

DECISION

29. I set the decision aside having found errors of law.

30.  I  remit  the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
   Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed before me.

31. I made the following directions for the resumed hearing

    . 2 hours

    . Tigrinyan interpreter.


Signed                                                              Date
2.1.2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
