
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/12629/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 3 November 2017                        |  On 17 November 2017             |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 bina gurung
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Dieu, N C Brothers & Co, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is a citizen of Nepal aged  26.
     She applied for entry clearance as the dependent daughter of a  former
    Gurkha soldier.  Her application was refused on 10  November  2015  and
    she appealed under s. 82 of the NIAA 2002 on human rights grounds.  The
    case came before Judge Thomas of the First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT).   The
    judge heard evidence from the sponsor, Mr Sun Gurung.   He  joined  the
    British army in 1969 and retired in September 1984  with  full  pension
    and an exemplary service record.  His evidence was that he returned  to
    live in Nepal but would have settled in the UK if he had been given the
    opportunity at the time of his retirement.  When he eventually  applied
    for settlement in the UK he had been  advised  that  the  discretionary
    policy for former Gurkha soldiers only applied to  children  under  18.
    The appellant was 18 at the time.  Had he known he could have  included
    her then, he would have.  He has been settled in the UK since 2010.  He
    supported the appellant financially and emotionally and it  had  always
    been the  intention  to  live  together  as  a  family  unit  with  the
    appellant.  At paragraphs 13-16 the judge stated:

         "13. I found the Sponsor to be a credible witness.   I  accept  his
             account of the  relationship  and  contact  he  has  with  the
             Appellant.  She is his only unmarried daughter and  has  until
             now been in full time education.  The phone  cards  and  viber
             records go to prove ongoing contact.  I  accept  his  evidence
             that he left money with  his  friend  for  the  Appellant  and
             regularly remitted money to her since 2012.   The  remittances
             produced, go to prove financial support.  I accept that he has
             visited annually since 2012, as is supported by stamps in  his
             passport.  He came to settle in the United  Kingdom  in  2010,
             when permitted under the policy.  At that time, the  Appellant
             was 18.  He bought his wife and two younger children with him.
              I accept his account that he was advised that  the  Appellant
             would not qualify for entry at that time because she was  over
             18.  He arranged for her to go into full time education  which
             he funds.


         14.  I accept the Sponsor's evidence that if he had  been  able  to
             settle in the United Kingdom when he retired in 1984, he would
             have done so.  Had that happened, this  Appellant  would  have
             been born in the United Kingdom.  Her mother  passed  away  in
             1995.


         15.  I find that the Appellant is single and in full time education
             in Nepal.  Whilst she has brothers  living  nearby,  I  accept
             that she lives in separate accommodation to  have  daily  easy
             access to transport to Pokhara where she is studying a  degree
             course.   She  is  not  employed  and  has  not  developed  an
             independent life.  I accept that she has  daily  contact  with
             the Sponsor, and I acknowledge his evidence  that  culturally,
             she will remain his  financial  responsibility  until  she  is
             married.  I find that she is part of his family unit  and  her
             dependence on the Sponsor is based on necessity.


         16.  I have considered the appeal in line with the case  of  Razgar
             [2004] UKHL 27.  I find that there is a level of emotional and
             financial dependency between the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor
             that go beyond normal emotional ties  between  adult  children
             and their parents.   Family  life  was  established  from  the
             Appellant's birth in 1991 and continued throughout,  including
             the period after her mother  passed  away  in  1995,  and  her
             father remarried.  The family  has  always  been  a  unit  and
             remain so.  There is family life that engages Article  8  ECHR
             and deserves respect thereunder."





2.   At paragraph 19 the judge stated that:

     "[G]iven my findings in paragraphs 12-14 above it  is  likely  that  if
         considered now, the [claimant] would satisfy the substance of Annex
         K, the relevant policy that permits the entry  of  adult  dependent
         relatives of former Gurkha soldiers".

     At paragraphs 20-21 the judge concluded:

         "20. In assessing proportionality, I  have  taken  account  of  the
             public interest and the factors in sections in 117B  and  117C
             of the 2002 Act, starting with the  statutory  principle  that
             effective immigration control is in the  public  interest.   I
             balance that against my finding in paragraph  18  above,  that
             effective immigration control in line with the policy, permits
             entry clearance in certain circumstances.


         21.  The Appellant does not  speak  English,  which  could  have  a
             bearing on her ability to integrate in this country.  However,
             she is a student, and I  believe  would  learn  English.   The
             Sponsor financially supports her, and there is no evidence  of
             recourse to public funds.  She has sought to secure employment
             in Nepal, and I believe will seek to do the same in the United
             Kingdom.  She is in good health.   There  is  no  evidence  to
             indicate that she would be a burden on the  taxpayer.   It  is
             said that the Sponsor chose to settle in  the  United  Kingdom
             and could return to Nepal to live with  the  Appellant.   That
             would however, in my view, negate the significance of the  law
             which sought to right  an  historical  wrong,  by  giving  the
             Sponsor the right to settle in this country, in recognition of
             exemplary service to the British Crown,  which  he  exercised.
             There is nothing  in  the  Sponsor's  immigration  history  or
             character  to  weaken  that  right.   Balancing  all  relevant
             factors, I find in this case that the counterveiling features,
             including the historical wrong, outweighs the public  interest
             in effective immigration control, and amounts  to  exceptional
             and compelling circumstances that justify  leave  outside  the
             Immigration Rules.  I therefore  find  that  the  Respondent's
             decision is not proportionate and breaches Article 8 ECHR."

3.   I have set out significant  passages  from  the  judge's  determination
    because they provide an  important  backdrop  to  my  reasons  for  the
    conclusion I have reached which is to reject the appellant's (hereafter
    the Secretary of State or SSHD's) grounds  of  appeal.   These  grounds
    contend that the  judge  erred  in  allowing  the  appeal  because  the
    "limited  evidence"  concerning  regular  financial   remittances   and
    frequent communication does not demonstrate dependence according to the
    Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 standard-  as this evidence "does not  show
    elements of dependency beyond the normal emotional ties between  adults
    ...".  The grounds go on to highlight case law stating  that  financial
    dependency is not enough: AAO v Entry Clearance Officer [2011] EWCA Civ
    840.

4.   The second ground raised by the SSHD concerns  the  judge's  giving  of
    significant weight to his finding that were it not for the  "historical
    injustice" of Ghurka settlement policy, the sponsor would have  settled
    in the UK upon retirement and the appellant would have been born in the
    UK.  The grounds assert that "this is pure speculation on the  part  of
    the judge".

5.   The grounds finally argue that the judge's treatment  of  the  s.  117B
    [of the NIAA 2002] consideration concerning financial independence  was
    not a proper assessment.

6.   There is a fundamental difficulty with  these  grounds.   They  do  not
    raise any challenge to the judge's findings of fact and  in  particular
    those set out in paragraphs 13-16 cited earlier.  The evidence on which
    those findings were  based  was  not  confined  to  evidence  regarding
    financial remittances and frequent communication.  It also embraced the
    claimant's evidence regarding her circumstances in Nepal and  the  fact
    that the sponsor  had  visited  annually  and  the  sponsor's  evidence
    regarding the cultural reality  that  the  claimant  would  remain  his
    financial responsibility until she married.  In any event  the  judge's
    clear finding at para 16 was that the degree of financial and emotional
    dependency  between  the  sponsor  and  appellant  was  sufficient   to
    establish family life between them within the meaning of Article  8(1).
    The factual foundation for that finding was ample.  If the SSHD grounds
    intended to argue that  in  order  to  come  within  Article  8(1)  the
    relationship with a parent and an adult child in her  mid-20's  had  to
    exhibit some extraordinary or  exceptional  feature,  that  is  plainly
    contrary to authority: see Rai v Entry Clearance  Officer  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 320 paragraphs 36-37.

7.   It is unnecessary for me to address in any  detail  the  other  grounds
    because Mr Tufan helpfully conceded that if the SSHD could not show  an
    error of law in the judge's finding that there was family  life  within
    the meaning of Article 8(1) the judge was entitled to allow the appeal.
     In my judgement that was a sensible concession in any  event  as  what
    the judge called speculation was  a  feature  of  the  Gurkha  policy's
    application as established by  case  law.  It  was  necessary  to  that
    application for a finding to be  made  on  the  hypothetical  issue  of
    whether a sponsor would have settled in the UK prior to the birth of  a
    child.  As regards s. 117B, the grounds  may  well  be  right  to  have
    expected the judge to  accept  that  there  was  no  present  financial
    independence and perhaps no imminent financial independence either, But
    given the fact that the case was  one  of  a  historic  injustice,  the
    outcome of the proportionality assessment based on the facts  as  found
    was very clearly one that went in favour of the claimant,  the  judge's
    decision that entry clearance was required in order to comply with  the
    claimant's human rights was entirely sustainable: see  Ghising  (family
    life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 160 and Ghising  and  others
    (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC).

Notice of Decision

8.   For the above reasons I find that the SSHD's challenge to the  decision
    of the FtT judge fails  and  accordingly  that  decision  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal on Article 8 grounds is upheld.

9.   No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date: 14 November 2017
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal






