
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/12946/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |          Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On January 2, 2018                    |          On January 4, 2018         |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              MS GIFTY AGYEMAN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Murphy, Counsel, instructed by Clapham Law LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity direction.

 2. The respondent in these proceedings was the appellant before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  From hereon I have referred to the parties as they were
    in the First-tier Tribunal so  that,  for  example,  reference  to  the
    respondent is a reference to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.

 3. The appellant is a Ghanaian national.  The appellant entered the United
    Kingdom as a visitor on December 6, 1998 and remained  here  unlawfully
    when her six months leave expired. On March 3, 2011 and April  5,  2013
    the appellant applied to remain outside of the  Immigration  Rules  but
    was refused with no right of appeal. A judicial  review  challenge  was
    subsequently dismissed and after being served with a section 120 notice
    on September 17, 2015 the appellant applied for leave to  remain  under
    articles 3 and 8 ECHR.  The  respondent  refused  this  application  on
    November 24, 2015 and gave  directions  for  her  removal  pursuant  to
    paragraphs 8 to 10 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  on  December  4,  2015  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Her
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Atreya (hereinafter
    called "the Judge") on March 1, 2017 and in a decision  promulgated  on
    March 30, 2017 the Judge allowed her appeal.

 5. The respondent appealed the decision on April 5,  2017.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Robertson  on
    October 5, 2017. In giving permission Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Robertson found the Judge may have erred by not applying the provisions
    of Section 117B of the 2002 Act. In giving permission, she stated there
    was "little arguable merit" in grounds A and B but did not preclude the
    respondent from arguing the same. She also stated  that  based  on  the
    findings made the outcome may be no different.

 6. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Melvin submitted the findings made under the Rules were made without
    any real  evidence  to  support  the  findings.  The  Judge  found  the
    appellant's partner would be unable to travel but failed to  take  into
    account the fact he had travelled to Ghana on  four  occasions  in  the
    last six years and the Judge failed to give  weight  to  the  following
    facts:

      a) The appellant and  her  partner  came  from  Ghana  and  spoke  the
         language.

      b) Apart from medical records there was no medical evidence to support
         the Judge's findings.

      c) The appellant's husband was financially able to support them.

      d) She had failed to regularise her status.

 8.  Mr  Murphy  opposed  the  application  and  submitted  the  Judge  had
    considered Section 117B factors and the findings made took into account
    both positive and negative aspects of the case. The decision was  well-
    reasoned and the Judge considered the appeal under both the  Rules  and
    outside the Rules. The findings made under the Rules were open  to  the
    Judge who then allowed the appeal on article 8 grounds.  Alternatively,
    the  Judge  found  that  if  the  Rules  were  not  met  then  it   was
    disproportionate to require her to leave the United Kingdom despite her
    poor immigration history. He  submitted  the  respondent's  submissions
    amounted to a mere disagreement.

    FINDINGS ON THE ERROR IN LAW

 9.  At  [3]  of  the  Judge's  decision  it   is   recorded   that   "both
    representatives confirmed that article 8 within  the  Rules  should  be
    considered Appendix FM and Paragraph 276ADE(vi) as well  as  article  8
    ECHR outside of the Rules." In giving permission to appeal Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal  Robertson  made  reference  to  the  appeal  being
    allowed under the provisions of both Section EX.1(b) of Appendix FM and
    paragraph 276ADE HC 395 as well as article 8 ECHR but pointed out  that
    the only ground of appeal available was under article 8 ECHR.

10. This appeal was covered by the Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement  No.4
    Transitional and Saving Provisions and Amendment) Order  2014  No  371.
    This Act introduced the new provisions to  all  decisions  made  on  or
    after 6 April 2015 other than


        i. Decisions on Tier 4 applications ....
       ii. Decisions on Tier 1, 2 or 5 applications ....
      iii. Decisions to refuse leave to enter, to refuse  entry  clearance,
           to refuse a certificate of entitlement and  to  refuse  to  vary
           leave to enter or remain (where the result of that  decision  is
           that  the  person  has  no  leave)  on  applications  where  the
           application was made before 6 April 2015 unless the decision  is
           also a refusal of an asylum/protection or human rights claim  in
           which case the new provisions apply.

11. Having considered the transitional provisions  and  the  application  I
    agree with Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Robertson  that  the  only
    appealable decision was on human rights grounds because the application
    was not submitted until submitted September 17, 2015.

12. The Judge's finding at [82] is incorrect but that still leaves question
    of whether the Judge erred at [83] of the decision.

13. Whilst the Judge had no power to allow the appeal under Section EX.1(b)
    of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE HC 395 he was required  to  consider
    the appeal under those headings before considering the  appeal  outside
    of the Rules. The reason being that the Rules  state  the  respondent's
    approach to such applications and if the appellant could succeed  under
    the Rules then it follows it is likely to be disproportionate to refuse
    the appeal under article 8 ECHR.

14. Accordingly, for the respondent to succeed with her grounds  of  appeal
    she has to demonstrate the decision under article 8 ECHR was materially
    flawed.

15. Mr Melvin submitted the positive findings  in  the  appellant's  favour
    made at [52] to [54], [60] to [65] and [67] to [68] were  made  without
    regard to any supporting evidence.

16. The Judge had before him the appellant's partner's medical records  for
    the period leading up to  February  27,  2017  and  these  referred  to
    ongoing bronchitis problems up to June 2015 and a diagnosis of  Type  2
    diabetes and an annual asthma check up.  His  records  showed  he  took
    daily medication (vitamin D) for bone  deficiency  and  medication  for
    breathing issues including asthma. He also had  prescriptions  for  eye
    drops, antihistamine,  reduce  gout  and  risk  of  heart  disease  and
    diabetes. The notes recorded that he suffered with his  right  hip,  in
    particular.

17. Mr Melvin challenged the Judge's finding at [52]. Having considered the
    records I find nothing in the  finding  at  [52]  that  contradicts  or
    exaggerates what is contained in the  records.  The  Judge  heard  oral
    evidence from both the appellant and her partner that the appellant was
    the main carer for her partner and that whilst he had two sons they had
    their own lives and families and were unable to provide  the  level  of
    care given by the appellant.

18. Having considered the background the Judge quite properly looked at the
    appeal through the prism of both Appendix FM and  paragraph  276ADE  HC
    395. The Judge noted the respondent's position at [57] and went  on  to
    consider the claim in light of the Supreme Court decision of Agyarko  v
    SSHD [2017] UKSC 11. At  [59]  the  Judge  reminded  himself  that  the
    appellant had been here unlawfully since her visa expired and that  her
    relationship with her partner was formed when she was  here  unlawfully
    and when her immigration status was precarious. Mr Melvin suggests this
    paragraph was  a  "throwaway"  paragraph  but  I  disagree.  The  Judge
    specifically made this at  this  juncture  and  later  on  he  reminded
    himself of it at [79] when considering the appeal on article 8 grounds.



19. When considering the appeal under section EX.1 the Judge gave  detailed
    reasons at [62] and [63] as to why  he  felt  the  appellant's  partner
    would face "very significant difficulties". His reasons are  based  not
    only on the medical records but also on what  he  saw  for  himself  in
    court and he at [64] and [65] the Judge gave  his  reason  for  finding
    Section EX.1 would be engaged.

20. The Judge further considered the appeal under paragraph 276ADE  HC  395
    and reached a similar conclusion. The point made by Mr Murphy was being
    able to go on holiday did not equate to being  able  to  transfer  your
    life permanently to another country.

21. Whilst I accept the test is a  high  test  the  circumstances  must  be
    considered under article 8 ECHR where of course the test is lower.  The
    issue under article 8 ultimatley is was one of proportionality and  all
    the factors outlined above are  pertinent  to  the  Judge's  assessment
    under article 8 ECHR. The Judge reminded himself  of  the  approach  in
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027  and  from  [76]  onwards  he  considered  the
    evidence.

22. Whilst the Judge did not mention section 117B of the 2002 Act  at  this
    juncture it is clear from reading the whole decision that the Judge was
    aware of the law as he made reference at [43] to her ability  to  speak
    English, at [54] to the  fact  she  is  financially  supported  without
    recourse to public funds and at [79] to the fact she did not  meet  the
    Rules and had been here unlawfully. The Judge balanced all these issues
    against the positive  findings  he  made  and  concluded  it  would  be
    disproportionate to remove her.

23. I find the finding under article 8 ECHR was one that was  open  to  the
    Judge. The fact another Judge may not have reached  the  same  decision
    does not amount to an error in  law.  Decisions  under  article  8  are
    discretionary and I find nothing in the  decision,  save  allowing  the
    appeal under the Rules, which amounts to an error in law.

    DECISION

24. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law at [82].  I set aside that part of
    the decision as there was no power to allow the appeal under the Rules.



25. However, I uphold the  decision  at  [83]  and  therefore  dismiss  the
    respondent's main grounds of appeal.


Signed                              Date     02/01/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award was made in the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed                              Date     02/01/2018


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis





