
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/12037/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 March 2019                              |On 25 April 2019              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     MBW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Rosemarine of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant
herein is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly
or indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's
family.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of
court proceedings


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                  (Decision given orally on 12 March 2019)

Setting aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision

 1. This is an appeal brought by MBW against the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox) of 24 August  2018,  in  which
    the First-tier Tribunal dismissed an appeal brought  by  the  appellant
    against a decision of the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    dated 16 May 2018 refusing the appellant's human rights application.

 2. The appellant is a national  of  the  Philippines  born  in  1990.  She
    entered  the  United  Kingdom  lawfully  as  a  visitor  in  2017   and
    subsequently applied, in time, for leave to remain on the basis of  her
    family life with her husband ("the sponsor") and children. The  sponsor
    is a British citizen, born in March 1985. He has a diagnosis of  Loeys-
    Dietz Syndrome.  The couple have two British citizen children (born  in
    2013 and 2014  respectively).   The  appellant,  sponsor  and  children
    previously lived together in the Philippines prior to the  sponsor  and
    children coming to the UK in 2016.

 3. The appellant obtained permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  such  permission  being
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul in a decision  of  19  December
    2018. The operative paragraph of that decision reads as follows

         "It is however arguable that the judge erred in concluding that  it
         was reasonable for  the  father  to  relocate  as  it  appears  his
         condition has worsened such that, owing  to  aortic  aneurysms  and
         recent  open-heart  surgery-see  letter  from  MP.   This  arguably
         infects  the  conclusions  with   regards   to   Section   117B(6).
         Permission is therefore  granted  only  in  respect  to  Article  8
         issues."

 4. The  preceding  paragraphs  of  Judge  Rintoul's  decision  reject  the
    contention that the children would be compelled to leave the EU if  the
    appellant were denied leave to remain  and,  consequently,  reject  the
    contention that Zambrano has any application to the instant scenario.

 5. The next relevant event is the 'Rule 24 response' from the Secretary of
    State, dated 17 January 2019, which materially reads as follows

         "2.  The respondent does not oppose the appellant's application for
             permission to appeal.  At paragraph 23 the FTIJ finds that the
             appellant has two British children.  In light of the Secretary
             of State's policy guidance confirming that a British child  is
             not expected to leave the EU it is accepted  that  the  FTIJ's
             findings at 36, that it is reasonable to expect  the  children
             to leave the UK and return to the  Philippines,  constitute  a
             material error of law.

         3.   The Secretary of State respectfully invites  the  Tribunal  to
             set aside  and  remake  the  FtT  determination  allowing  the
             appeal."

 6. On the basis of the above concession which Mr Tan did not demur from at
    the hearing, and with the consent of the parties, pursuant to  rule  39
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Re-making of the decision

 7. On the basis of the  aforementioned  concession,  and  again  with  the
    consent of the parties, I remake the decision on appeal myself allowing
    the appeal on Article 8 grounds on the basis that  the  application  of
    Section 117B(6) leads to the conclusion that it is not  reasonable  for
    the British citizen children to leave  the  United  Kingdom  and  as  a
    consequence there is no public interest in requiring the  appellant  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

Costs

 8. The aforementioned conclusion on the substance of the appeal is not the
    last of the issues  I  must  determine.   In  correspondence  with  the
    Secretary of State and ultimately  with  the  Tribunal,  the  appellant
    seeks orders for costs and compensation.

 9. Dealing with these in turn, the Tribunal's  power  to  award  costs  in
    statutory appeals differs from that in its judicial review capacity  in
    that it is restricted in statutory appeals to certain scenarios set out
    within section 29 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, as
    supplemented by rule 10 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

10. These provisions provide that the Upper Tribunal  (and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in relation to the former) has jurisdiction to award  a  party
    "wasted costs" which is defined, inter alia, as "any costs incurred  by
    a party ...as a result of any improper, unreasonable or  negligent  act
    or omission on the part of any legal or  other  representative  or  any
    employee of such a representative...".

11. The assertion made on behalf of the appellant is that the Secretary  of
    State has acted unreasonably in defending this  appeal  throughout  the
    entirety of the proceedings; indeed,  the  appellant  goes  as  far  as
    saying that it was unreasonable for the Secretary of  State  to  reject
    the appellant's application in the first place.

12. I  consider  only  the  issue  of  wasted  costs  within  the  Tribunal
    proceedings rather than  those  incurred  prior  to  the  appeal  being
    lodged.

13. There are numerous authorities illuminating the  meaning  of  the  word
    unreasonable in the context of  wasted  costs,  the  seminal  authority
    being that of Ridehalgh v Horsefield [1994] CH 205 in  which,  at  [32]
    the court concluded that unreasonable conduct could be described as:

         "Conduct which is vexatious, designed  to  harass  the  other  side
         rather than advance the resolution of the  case  and  it  makes  no
         difference that the conduct is a product of excessive zeal and  not
         improper motive.  But conduct cannot be described  as  unreasonable
         simply because it leads in the event to an unsuccessful  result  or
         because other more cautious legal representatives would have  acted
         differently.  The acid test is whether the  conduct  permits  of  a
         reasonable explanation.  If so the course adopted may  be  regarded
         as optimistic and reflecting on a practitioner's judgment but it is
         not unreasonable."

14. The Tribunal has itself given guidance on the award  of  costs  in  the
    statutory appeal context. The  first  decision  seeking  to  give  such
    guidance is Cancino (costs - First-tier Tribunal - new  powers)  [2015]
    UKFTT 00059. More recently, guidance was  given  by  the  President  in
    Thapa and Others (costs: general principles; s.9  review)  [2018]  UKUT
    00054.

15. Both of these decisions identify that  concessions  have  an  important
    part to play in contemporary  litigation,  and  in  particular  in  the
    overburdened  realm  of   immigration   and   asylum   appeals.   Thapa
    particularly warns that the exercise  of  the  Tribunal's  cost  powers
    should be undertaken with  significant  restraint  and  identifies  the
    difference between the Tribunal's cost powers in  judicial  review  and
    those in its appeal jurisdiction.

16. I have considered and applied the above authorities when coming  to  my
    conclusions.

17. Turning back then to  the  instant  case,  the  appeal  was  ultimately
    allowed as a consequence  of  the  concession  found  in  the  rule  24
    response, which was confirmed by Mr Tan at the hearing.  At the core of
    that concession is the Secretary of State's "policy guidance confirming
    that a British child is not expected to leave the EU". Mr Tan indicated
    that the policy guidance was last issued in December 2018  (i.e.  prior
    to the rule 24 response), however, upon being pressed by  the  Tribunal
    he accepted that the terms of this aspect of the guidance  have  always
    been in place - by which I take Mr Tan to mean that  it  has  been  the
    Secretary of State's policy throughout the life of the  instant  appeal
    proceedings.

18. In defending the application for costs Mr Tan relied upon the terms  of
    the decision letter of May  2018  in  support  of  the  assertion  that
    despite the Secretary of State's policy guidance being  materially  the
    same at all relevant times, it was not guidance which  was  thought  to
    apply to this appeal. The Secretary of State  did  not  engage  in  the
    decision letter with the issue of whether it was reasonable  to  expect
    the British citizen children to leave the United Kingdom.  It  is  said
    that this is because the children are entitled to remain in the  United
    Kingdom in the care of the sponsor as a consequence of  the  fact  that
    they are British citizens.

19. Mr Tan further reminded the Tribunal that section 117B(6) of  the  2002
    Act is not a  provision  that  the  Secretary  of  State  is  bound  to
    consider. The consequence of this is, submits Mr Tan, that any  failure
    by the Secretary of State to consider  and  apply  section  117B(6)  is
    irrelevant for the purposes of deciding whether wasted costs should  be
    awarded.  I do not accept that is so.

20. The statutory provision reflects Parliament's view of where the  public
    interest lies in any given case. The Secretary of State must  take  the
    same view of the public interest whether or  not  this  means  directly
    applying the statutory provisions.   In  any  event,  in  circumstances
    where there is a pending appeal before the Tribunal, the  Secretary  of
    State must be aware that the Tribunal is bound to apply section 117B(6)
    and therefore should address his mind to it at this stage.

21. Given the timeline I have set out above, it is difficult to  understand
    what triggered the change of approach by the Secretary of State in this
    case.  Mr  Tan  drew  attention  to  paragraph  36  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision (as the  rule  24  response  does)  in  attempt  to
    explain this. Therein the  First-tier  Tribunal  engaged  with  section
    117B(6) and concluded that it would be reasonable to expect the British
    citizen children to leave the United Kingdom.  It is  said  by  Mr  Tan
    that the terms of this paragraph triggered  the  Secretary  of  State's
    consideration of this same issue and thereafter required him to  follow
    his policy.

22. If this is so then this in my view this only serves  to  emphasise  the
    fact that the Secretary of State could have considered this issue at an
    earlier juncture and that had he done  so  he  would  have  come  to  a
    conclusion favourable to the appellant.

23. The further explanation provided  by  Mr  Tan  for  the  absence  of  a
    concession at  an  earlier  stage  of  proceedings  is,  as  far  as  I
    understand it, twofold.   First,  it  is  submitted  that  because  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was undertaken on the  papers,  the
    Secretary of State did not have opportunity  to  make  the  concession.
    Second, in any event, it was the Secretary  of  State's  position  that
    that section 117B(6) was not  operative  in  this  appeal  because  the
    British citizen children could remain in the United Kingdom.

24. Neither of these explanations bear scrutiny. The fact  that  an  appeal
    hearing is undertaken on the papers does not absolve the  Secretary  of
    State of the responsibility of considering the appeal and applying  his
    mind  to  the  terms  of  the  policy  guidance.   As  to  the   latter
    explanation, this fails to incorporate a key ingredient,  what  changed
    between the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and the drafting  of
    the Rule 24 response? In any event, the explanation is legally hopeless
    because  section  117B(6)  does  not  on  its  face  differentiate  (or
    discriminate) as between those British citizen children who will remain
    in the UK and those who will not.

25. In the particular circumstances of this case, I conclude that that  the
    Secretary of State's conduct in not making the  concession  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal that was belatedly set out in the Rule 24  response
    was unreasonable, within the meaning given to that term  in  the  cases
    set out above. I therefore conclude that the Secretary of State  should
    pay the costs the appellant accrued in defending the appeal before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal. If necessary, I  sit  as  a
    First-tier Tribunal judge in order to make the decision in relation  to
    the costs in that Tribunal.

Damages

26. In pre-hearing correspondence, and again at the hearing, the  appellant
    put forward a claim for "compensation" for, amongst other things,  loss
    of earnings arising from the failure of the Secretary of State to grant
    her leave earlier.

27. I have carefully considered Mr Rosemarine's detailed skeleton  argument
    on this issue, which separates the issue of liability and jurisdiction.
     Although the skeleton argument  deals  with  the  issue  of  liability
    first, inevitably it is the issue of the Tribunal's jurisdiction  which
    I must first determine.

28. In my conclusion, the Upper Tribunal  does  not  have  jurisdiction  to
    determine the issue of "compensation"/  damages  when  sitting  in  its
    appeal capacity.  In his skeleton argument and at the hearing today  Mr
    Rosemarine  asserts  that  nothing  in  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007 prohibits the Tribunal sitting  in  its  appellate
    capacity  from  awarding  compensation.   He  asserts  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal has the powers of the High Court and can  quash  decisions  of
    governmental bodies. Emphasis is put on the well-known decision of  the
    Court of Justice in Francovich

29. As alluded to already, I reject Mr Rosemarine's submissions.  Whilst  I
    accept there is nothing in the  2007  Act  which  explicitly  bars  the
    Tribunal from considering the issue of compensation, the Tribunal is  a
    creature of statute and the 2007 Act is its founding father.  The  2007
    Act does not provide the Upper  Tribunal  with  jurisdiction  to  award
    damages/compensation when sitting its appellate capacity, this being in
    direct contrast to the jurisdiction the 2007  Act  provides  the  Upper
    Tribunal when it is sitting in its judicial review capacity.    Reading
    the 2007 Act in context with the Rules I do  not  accept  that  it  was
    Parliament's intention to provide the Upper Tribunal with  jurisdiction
    to award compensation and damages in its appellate  jurisdiction.   The
    decision  in  Francovich  cannot  provide  the  Upper   Tribunal   with
    jurisdiction. Insofar as that decision suggests  that  damages  may  be
    available for a  breach  of  EU  law,  it  is  a  matter  for  domestic
    legislation as the form  any  remedy  will  take.  Parliament  has  not
    entrusted the Upper Tribunal with such  a  task  when  sitting  in  its
    appellate capacity.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside

The decision is re-made allowing the appellant's appeal on  the  basis  that
the Secretary of State's decision leads to a breach of Article 8 ECHR

I award the wasted costs of  the  proceedings  to  the  appellant  -  to  be
payable by the Secretary of State in a sum to be assessed by a Costs  Judge,
if not agreed.

The application for damages/compensation is refused.


Signed

Mark O'Connor
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

