
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  HU/12130/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd July 2020                     |On 27th July 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                  LOIS [B]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Directions were issued by Upper Tribunal Judge Keith on 30  April  2020
    indicating  the  provisional  view,  in  light  of  the  need  to  take
    precautions  against  the  spread  of  Covid-19  and   the   overriding
    objective, that this case was suitable to determine whether  there  was
    an error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and  if  so,
    whether that decision should be set aside, on  the  papers  without  an
    oral hearing.

 2. The Appellant opposes the determination of these issues on  the  papers
    on the basis that a hearing is required to  adequately  deal  with  the
    issues, particularly given the matter involves a  child.   No  detailed
    reasons are given beyond that as to why oral submissions over and above
    detailed written submissions are required as a matter  of  fairness  or
    otherwise.

 3. The Respondent has made no submissions as to whether the error  of  law
    stage of this appeal could or should be determined on the papers,  such
    that there has been no objection in  proceeding  with  the  provisional
    view of Judge Keith.

 4. In my view, this is a case in which it is suitable for  the  issues  of
    whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision materially erred in law  and
    if so, whether the decision should be set aside, to  be  determined  on
    the papers on the basis of the written submissions made.   This  is  in
    light of the unprecedented circumstances surrounding Covid-19  and  the
    need to take precautions to prevent the spread of the  disease;  is  in
    accordance with the overriding objective for the Upper Tribunal to deal
    with cases fairly and justly in rule 2(1), (2) and (4) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and in circumstances where on the
    facts; there are comprehensive written submissions  from  both  parties
    covering all of the relevant issues.  This decision has therefore  been
    made under rule 34.

 5. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judges O'Brien and  Clarke  promulgated  on  11  November
    2019, in which the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision
    to refuse her human rights claim in the context of deportation dated  4
    July 2019 was dismissed.

 6. The Appellant is a national of Zambia, born  on  27  January  1985  who
    first entered the United Kingdom as a dependent of  her  mother  on  27
    August 1999 and who was granted indefinite leave  to  remain  in  2003.
    The Appellant had a daughter on 13 December  2013,  who  is  a  British
    citizen through her father, whom the Appellant married on  5  September
    2015.

 7. On 4 April 2019, the Appellant was convicted of theft from her employer
    and on 25 April 2019, sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment.   In  light
    of that conviction, the Respondent decided to make a deportation  order
    against the Appellant on 13 May 2019, subsequent to which  she  made  a
    human rights claim.

 8. The Respondent refused the  application  the  basis  that  it  was  not
    accepted that the Appellant had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with her daughter and in any event it would not be unduly harsh  either
    for them to relocate to Zambia together or for the Appellant's daughter
    to remain in the United Kingdom without her.  Nor was it accepted  that
    the Appellant had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  her
    husband; or that in any event it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  him  to
    relocate to  Zambia  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
    Appellant.  The Respondent also found that the Appellant did  not  meet
    the private life exception to deportation,  although  it  was  accepted
    that she had been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for  most  of
    her life, it was not accepted that  she  was  socially  and  culturally
    integrated here because of  her  conviction  nor  that  she  could  not
    reintegrate  on  return  to  Zambia.   Finally,  no   very   compelling
    circumstances  were  found  to  outweigh   the   public   interest   in
    deportation.

 9.  Judges  O'Brien  and  Clarke  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a   decision
    promulgated on 11 November 2019 on all grounds.  Whilst the  First-tier
    Tribunal accepted that the Appellant was in a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with both her husband and daughter, it  was  not  accepted
    that it would be unduly harsh for either to relocate to Zambia with the
    Appellant nor that it would be unduly harsh for them to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom without the Appellant.  As such neither  of  the  family
    life exceptions to deportation were met.  The First-tier Tribunal found
    that the Appellant had lived most of her life in the United Kingdom and
    was socially and culturally integrated here;  but  did  not  find  that
    there were any very  significant  obstacles  to  her  reintegration  in
    Zambia such that she  did  not  meet  the  private  life  exception  to
    deportation.  Finally,  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  to
    outweigh the public interest in deportation.

The appeal

10. The written grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  accompanying  the
    application for permission made on 14 January 2020 were that the First-
    tier Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  in  its  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's  daughter's  best  interests  and  whether  the  impact  of
    deportation on her would be unduly harsh.  Specifically, the  Appellant
    highlighted the letter from the Appellant's daughter's school about the
    significant adverse impact of the Appellant's imprisonment, from  which
    it can be expected  that  the  Appellant's  deportation  and  therefore
    permanent removal from the  family  home  would  adversely  affect  her
    daughter.  The Appellant states that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in
    law in failing to give sufficient weight  to  this  piece  of  evidence
    undermining  its  assessment  of  her  best   interests   and   thereby
    undermining the Article 8 assessment.

11. In the final paragraph of the grounds it is said that there is  a  duty
    to give reasons which has not  been  followed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hatton, with reference to the  failure  to  give  weight  to  the
    evidence before him.  It is not clear if this  is  a  typographical  or
    copy and paste error in relation to the name of the Judge, but  in  any
    event, there is no  further  particularisation  of  this  ground  which
    appears to add little of substance to the primary point.

12. The original grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal submitted  on
    19 November 2019 were different.  In that  application,  three  grounds
    were identified that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in
    (i) its assessment of whether  the  Appellant's  deportation  would  be
    unduly harsh on her daughter; (ii) failing to  adequately  engage  with
    the assessment of the best interests of the Appellant's  daughter,  and
    (iii) failing to give adequate reasons for  rejecting  the  Appellant's
    claim to have no family in Zambia to assist her with reintegration.

13. The first ground is essentially the same as  the  main  ground  in  the
    application to the Upper Tribunal.  The second  ground  in  essence  is
    that the First-tier Tribunal failed to identify what the best interests
    of  the  Appellant's  daughter  were  and  engage  with  the  potential
    consequences of relocating to Zambia away from substantial family  ties
    in the United Kingdom or remain here without  her  mother.   The  third
    ground is said to undermine the findings that the Appellant would  face
    no very significant obstacles to reintegration in Zambia as it was  not
    inherently implausible that she would nave  not  family  support  there
    which is said to be fundamental when seeking  to  re-establish  herself
    there.

14. Although there was only a single ground  of  appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal  (subject  to  the  reasons  point  in  the  final  paragraph)
    permission appears to have been granted by the Upper  Tribunal  on  the
    basis of  the  earlier  three  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal; with specific reference to it being arguable that the  First-
    tier Tribunal failed to properly carry out an assessment of the child's
    best interests and failed to give adequate reasons for finding no  very
    significant obstacles to reintegration.

15. The written submissions made on behalf of the Appellant in response  to
    the directions issued on 30 April 2014 repeat in substance the  matters
    raised in the first application for permission to appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal with the addition of a  conclusion  about  the  means  by
    which the Upper Tribunal proceeds with the error of law issues.

16. In her written submissions,  the  Respondent  opposes  the  appeal  and
    submits that the Appellant's written  submissions  go  wider  than  the
    grounds upon which permission to appeal was sought to include  a  novel
    ground three.  Although technically correct,  as  set  out  above,  the
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was made  on
    much more limited grounds, it would appear that the Upper Tribunal  has
    granted permission more widely by reference to the grounds submitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal and I do not therefore exclude reliance on this
    ground by the Appellant; to which the Respondent has  made  submissions
    on the substance in any event.

17. In relation to the first and second grounds of appeal,  the  Respondent
    submits that the Appellant accepts that all relevant material has  been
    taken  into  account  about  the  Appellant's  daughter,  with  express
    reference to the letter from the school.  There is nothing  to  suggest
    that the First-tier Tribunal applied the wrong standard of proof and it
    reached conclusions which were open to it on  the  evidence  available.
    There was  sufficient  consideration  of  the  best  interests  of  the
    Appellant's daughter and without more was not dispositive of the appeal
    due to the need for the effects of deportation to be unduly harsh.

18. In relation to the third ground of appeal, the Respondent submits  that
    the way the ground is formulated shows that the Appellant accepts  that
    reasons have been given by the First-tier Tribunal for finding that the
    Appellant will not face very significant obstacles to reintegration  on
    return and the challenge is therefore essentially put on the  basis  of
    alleged perversity  or  unreasonableness.   The  Appellant's  claim  in
    relation to reintegration relies wholly on her unsupported  claim  that
    she has no wider family there, but, in the context of her propensity to
    dishonesty (shown by her  conviction),  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
    entitled to consider that the Appellant had not  established  that  she
    met all of the requirements of the  private  life  exception.   In  any
    event, the Respondent submits that the absence of family in  Zambia  is
    not alone sufficient  to  demonstrate  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration such that any error could not be material.

Findings and reasons

 1. I consider together the first and second grounds of appeal in  relation
    to the best interests of  the  Appellant's  daughter  and  whether  the
    deportation of the Appellant would be unduly harsh on  her,  either  by
    relocation to Zambia or by remaining in the United Kingdom without  her
    as they are strongly linked.  At the outset it  is  important  to  note
    that the Appellant would have to establish that both options  would  be
    unduly harsh to meet the exception and it is also noted that  there  is
    no challenge to the findings of the First-tier Tribunal that  it  would
    not be unduly harsh on the Appellant's husband to relocate with her  or
    to remain in the United Kingdom without the Appellant.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal correctly sets out the test for unduly harsh in
    paragraph 39 of the decision and then goes on to consider the  evidence
    in relation to the Appellant's husband and daughter, with evidence  and
    findings in relation to the latter primarily from paragraphs 46  to  54
    and the conclusion in paragraph 55 that on the whole,  the  deportation
    of the Appellant would not result in a degree of harshness going beyond
    what would necessarily be involved for  any  partner  or  child  facing
    deportation of a family member.

 3. Whilst the First-tier Tribunal  state  in  paragraph  51  that  it  has
    considered the best interests of the Appellant's daughter as a  primary
    consideration and in isolation without reference to  any  wider  public
    interest  factors  in  removal;  there  is  no  express  statement   or
    conclusion as to what those best interests are.  However, in substance,
    it is clear that the First-tier Tribunal has  taken  into  account  all
    relevant evidence in relation to the  Appellant's  daughter,  including
    her education (paragraph 48);  difficulties  arising  from  the  sudden
    separation from the Appellant caused by  the  Appellant's  imprisonment
    and support for this (paragraph 49 and 52); her medical  condition  and
    healthcare (paragraph 50); her British citizenship (paragraph 43);  and
    her  strong  wider  family  support  network  in  the  United   Kingdom
    (paragraph 54).

 4. In the grounds of appeal, the Appellant focuses in  particular  on  the
    weight attached by the First-tier  Tribunal  to  the  letter  from  the
    school  about  the  impact  of  the  Appellant's  imprisonment  on  her
    daughter.  The letter is relatively brief, without specific details  of
    support and without further evidence by way of an expert report.  It is
    clear from the decision that that evidence was expressly considered and
    taken into account, with sufficient weight being attached to it  and  a
    finding made about the emotional trauma suffered.   The  weight  to  be
    attached to such evidence is primarily  a  matter  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and there is no perversity in its approach to this evidence.

 5. It is common ground in almost every case that a child's best  interests
    are to remain with both parents in the same country, particularly for a
    younger child, and often the case that a British citizen child  who  is
    in the United Kingdom's best interests would be to maintain the  status
    quo and access the benefits of their citizenship and there  is  nothing
    on the facts of this case to suggest otherwise.  Although it would have
    been preferable to have stated this  expressly  having  considered  the
    detail in relation to this child (as set out above), I do not find that
    the failure to do so, in the context of a detailed  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's daughter's circumstances, is a material error of law in the
    First-tier Tribunal's  decision.   This  is  because  even  taking  the
    Appellant's daughter's best interests at  their  absolute  highest,  to
    remain in the United Kingdom with both parents; there was  no  evidence
    that could establish that the impact  of  the  Appellant's  deportation
    would in any event be unduly harsh on  her,  either  by  relocating  to
    Zambia or remaining in the United Kingdom without her.

 6. There was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal nor relied upon in
    the grounds of appeal  or  written  submissions  that  the  Appellant's
    daughter would not have access to education or healthcare in Zambia and
    a finding that her parents could assist her settling in to a  new  life
    in Zambia.  The evidence from the school about the impact of separation
    from her mother would only be relevant to circumstances  in  which  the
    Appellant's daughter would remain in the  United  Kingdom  without  her
    (and not whether relocation to Zambia with her mother would  be  unduly
    harsh) and in any event is brief and does not give details of  anything
    other than the usual consequences on a child  of  a  sudden  separation
    from their primary carer.  That evidence is not on  any  rational  view
    capable of demonstrating unduly harsh consequences on  the  Appellant's
    daughter for the purposes of this family life exception to deportation.
     No other specific matters were relied upon by the Appellant before the
    First-tier Tribunal nor in the grounds of appeal.

 7. Overall, the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal did  not  identify
    any impact on the  Appellant's  daughter,  either  from  relocation  or
    remaining in the United Kingdom without her, that would demonstrate any
    adverse impact beyond what can normally be expected by  the  separation
    of a family member from deportation.  That is not to underestimate  the
    likely detrimental impact on children in particular, of  relocation  or
    separation from a parent, but a recognition which has  been  reiterated
    in numerous cases that a detrimental impact is an accepted  consequence
    of deportation.

 8. In relation to the final ground of appeal, the First-tier Tribunal made
    findings as to the Appellant's education and work experience, including
    her volunteering role; which  taken  together  with  English  being  an
    official language in Zambia;  it  was  found  that  the  Appellant  had
    transferable skills that she could utilise to  find  work  and  support
    herself and her family in Zambia.  The First-tier  Tribunal  recognised
    that the Appellant left Zambia at the age of 11 but that  she  and  her
    family remain close and she would not be returning to a country with an
    unfamiliar language or culture.  In paragraphs 33 and 34 the First-tier
    Tribunal went on to find:

         "33. The Appellant's mother and siblings continue to  live  in  the
         United Kingdom and the United States.  We note that  other  members
         of the family, some now deceased continued to live in Zambia  after
         the family left, first for South Africa and  then  for  the  United
         Kingdom.  We find it implausible  that  there  would  be  no  wider
         family in Zambia to assist the Appellant on relocation.

         34. Taking all these matters into account we  are  unable  to  find
         that there would be very significant obstacles to  the  Appellant's
         integration into Zambia."

 9. The Appellant challenges the lack of adequate  reasons  given  for  the
    finding that there would be no wider family in Zambia  to  support  her
    reintegration which is described as fundamental.  However, the  grounds
    of appeal and written submissions refer to a  lack  of  family  support
    network and the Appellant's evidence that the entirety of her immediate
    family are outside of Zambia.  That is not the same as there  being  no
    wider family in Zambia, which is the finding  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal; with reference to other family  members  having  remained  in
    Zambia when the Appellant and her immediate family left (although  some
    are  now  deceased).   The  finding  made  is  not  necessarily  or  by
    implication  a  rejection  of  the  Appellant's  evidence   about   the
    whereabouts of her immediate  family  but  makes  a  finding  on  wider
    family.  In these circumstances, there are  adequate  reasons  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal finding that it is implausible that  there  are  no
    wider family members left to assist the Appellant on reintegration.

10. In any event, the Appellant has not identified any basis upon  which  a
    family support network would be 'fundamental' to her reintegration  nor
    that the absence of it alone; in the context of  unchallenged  findings
    of transferable skills, employment and familiarity  with  language  and
    culture in Zambia; would amount  to  a  very  significant  obstacle  to
    reintegration.  Even if there were insufficient reasons for the finding
    of wider family in Zambia, these could not be material to  the  outcome
    of the appeal for these reasons.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   G Jackson                           Date         3rd July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

