


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber                          Appeal Number:
HU/12174/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Determination Promulgated              |
|On 24th April 2018                       |   On 3rd May 2018                        |
|                                         |                                          |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                           MD FORHAD HALIM TAPADER
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Khan of Londinium Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The claimant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 10th  January  1981.
       He arrived in the UK on 7th April 2010 as a Tier 4  general  student
       migrant. He then married in the UK, and  was  eventually  (after  an
       appeal) granted leave to remain on the basis of his  marriage  valid
       from 14th March 2012 to 17th  June  2015.  On  15th  June  2015  the
       claimant applied for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of  his
       marriage. This application was refused under the general grounds  of
       refusal on the basis of his presence  not  being  conducive  to  the
       public  good  due  to  his  having  fraudulently  obtained  a  TOIEC
       certificate on 9th December 2011 and presented it  with  his  spouse
       application in March 2012.  His  appeal  against  the  decision  was
       allowed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Telford  in  a  determination
       promulgated on the 23rd February 2017.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of State by First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Lambert on 25th September 2017 on the basis that
       it was arguable that the  First-tier  judge  had  erred  in  law  in
       particular because it was arguable there was a lack of  adequacy  in
       the reasoning that the claimant had not used deception and that  the
       Secretary of State's evidence had been misunderstood.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. The Secretary of State argues, in both written grounds of appeal and
       oral submission from Mr Kotas, that it was an error of law  to  have
       allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  when  this  was  not
       permissible under the current version of s.82  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.  It  was  necessary  to  allow  or
       dismiss the matter only on human rights grounds.

    5. Secondly it is argued that the burden of proof in assessing  whether
       the claimant had used dishonesty to obtain his TOEIC certificate was
       not properly understood and applied by the First-tier  Tribunal.  It
       had been found that the generic evidence of the Secretary  of  State
       did show that the evidential burden was met, see SM & Qadir  (ETS  -
       Evidence -Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT. The question is then whether
       the legal burden is met by looking at whether the evidence from  the
       claimant outweighs that of the Secretary of State, and  whether  the
       appellant has raised an innocent explanation which the Secretary  of
       State cannot counter. The evidence of the  spreadsheet  showed  that
       the test was questionable  and  the  interview  conducted  with  the
       claimant added to this evidence satisfying the evidential burden.

    6. The evidence of an innocent explanation in this case was simply  the
       bare assertion of the claimant that  he  attended  the  test  centre
       without any detail of the test taking; plus the  fact  that  he  was
       able to speak English well  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  years
       later; and a passed English test taken four years later. As set  out
       in MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) Nigeria [2016]UKUT 450  there  are  many
       reasons why a claimant might cheat  including  lack  of  confidence,
       fear of failure, lack of time and commitment  and  contempt  of  the
       immigration system and not simply because his English was  not  good
       enough.

    7. Mr Khan submitted that allowing the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
       Rules was not a material error as what was clearly meant  was  there
       was no public interest in interfering with  the  appellant's  family
       life as he met the Immigration Rules it he had not  cheated  and  so
       the refusal was a disproportionate interference with Article 8 ECHR.

    8. Mr Khan submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had  dealt  with  all
       aspects of the case adequately particularly  if  what  was  said  at
       paragraph 30 of Secretary of State for the Home Department v Shehzad
       and Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615 was considered. In  that  case  it
       was stated that in "questionable cases"  there  may  not  have  been
       deception and so even the initial burden on the Secretary  of  State
       may not have been met.

    9. After the error of law submissions I informed  the  parties  that  I
       found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred materially in law,  and
       that the decision was set aside and would have to be remade.  I  set
       out my reasoning for the finding that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
       erred in law below. We adjourned for half an hour prior to  remaking
       the decision  to  enable  the  representatives  to  formulate  their
       submissions. At the end  of  the  remaking  hearing  I  reserved  my
       decision.

Conclusions - Error of Law

   10. It was an error of law by the First-tier Tribunal  to  have  allowed
       the appeal on the basis  that  the  applicant  met  the  Immigration
       Rules. As Judge Lambert noted, when granting permission  to  appeal,
       this is not necessarily a material error however as if the  claimant
       meets the Immigration Rules then there is no public interest in  his
       removal and so the interference with his  family  and  private  life
       ties which removal represents will not  be  proportionate  and  will
       therefore be a breach of Article 8 ECHR, and  thus  an  appeal  will
       necessarily be allowed on this basis. They key question is therefore
       whether the decision that the claimant did  not  use  deception  was
       lawfully made and so whether the  claimant  did  in  fact  meet  the
       Immigration Rules or not.

   11. The respondent says that the First-tier Tribunal has not  explicitly
       taken account of the guidance decisions made by the  Upper  Tribunal
       and Court  of  Appeal  on  this  issue  that  the  generic  evidence
       generally meets the evidential burden. This is a correct submission:
       there is a failure to place the examination of  this  issue  in  the
       context of the relevant caselaw and to therefore  take  the  correct
       legal steps  in  determining  whether  the  claimant  was  correctly
       refused under the general grounds of refusal.

   12.  There was also  an  error  of  law  by  failing  to  take  relevant
       information into account including the interview notes; the evidence
       regarding the college where the claimant took his test and  his  own
       test results; the claimant's statement; and the  evidence  that  the
       claimant gave evidence in English before a  First-tier  Tribunal  in
       March 2013. It was rational for the First-tier Tribunal to note that
       the claimant's certificate was not annulled  by  ETS  due  to  being
       invalid but simply on the basis it was questionable in  the  context
       of the test  administration  irregularities;  and  to  consider  the
       subsequent English test taken in May 2015 and his  English  language
       performance before the First-tier  Tribunal,  but  this  was  not  a
       complete consideration of all material evidence.

Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

   13. The claimant provided a witness statement and gave oral evidence  in
       support of his appeal. In short summary he says that he came to  the
       UK to study travel and tourism in April 2010.  Before  starting  his
       main course he had to do an  English  course  which  lasted  between
       April and December 2010. He started his travel  and  tourism  course
       but then he met and married his wife in October 2011. At this  point
       he decided that he should cease these studies, and intends to  start
       studies in computing when he has indefinite leave to remain as these
       will be of more use to  him  if  his  future  lies  in  the  UK.  He
       therefore has no certificates for any studies in the UK  other  than
       for English language.

   14. He took the TOEIC test, which the Secretary of  State  contends  was
       fraudulent obtained  in  November  2011,  for  submission  with  his
       marriage application which was made in March 2012. He maintains that
       he did not cheat when he took this test. He had no need to do so  as
       it was only at A1 level in listening and speaking and he was at that
       time studying at NQF course level 4 which required a higher B1 level
       of language. He draws attention to his detailed description  of  how
       he took the tests in his statement which included that he  had  done
       some study sessions first. He did not see anything that looked  like
       cheating by others whilst he was there either, but he was  busy.  He
       points out that he only got 55% in both tests which indicates the he
       took the tests  himself,  although  he  was  disappointed  with  the
       results, and not through a highly proficient proxy  test  taker.  He
       was also able to give evidence at two hearings before the First-tier
       Tribunal in 2013 without an interpreter with no difficulty. He  took
       a further English test with Trinity College in May 2015 which showed
       he obtained a distinction at B1 level, making  it  highly  plausible
       that he had obtained the lower level TOEIC test  as  he  claimed  in
       2011.

   15. The claimant says that he could not remember many details about  his
       TOEIC tests when interviewed almost four years after  the  event  by
       the Secretary of State in September 2015 because he panicked and his
       mind went blank. He had been confused when he told  the  interviewer
       that he did a written test  too,  and  about  the  duration  of  the
       speaking aspect being 1 hour and not 20 minutes.

   16. He was able to provide a full statement about the TOEIC tests to his
       solicitor in February 2017 because he had had time  to  think  about
       them and recover related documents like receipts.

   17. In addition to providing a statement to his solicitor  the  claimant
       said he had tried to return to Opal College where he took the  tests
       to find out what had happened with the allegation  of  cheating  but
       the college was  no  longer  there.  He  checked  another  suggested
       location but it was not there either, and he believed it  no  longer
       existed as  he  had  also  done  some  on-line  checks  He  had  not
       personally tried to contact ETS.

   18. Mr Kotas submitted that he  relied  upon  the  reasons  for  refusal
       letter, the interview record and the supplementary bundle  submitted
       by the Secretary of State. He submitted that the  evidential  burden
       was met in this case as there was not simply an ETS document stating
       the claimant's result was cancelled due to  being  questionable  but
       also the interview record  from  September  2015  during  which  the
       claimant had been unable to answer simple open questions, and during
       which he gave evidence about a written test  he  did  not  take  and
       misremembered the time the speaking test  had  taken  significantly.
       The detailed statement should not be seen  as  credible  as  it  was
       given 6 years after the events. Further it was relevant to  put  the
       questionable result in the context of the other  results  from  Opal
       College which from the look up tool showed that 73% was invalid  for
       the day the claimant took his exams and the remainder (including the
       claimant's ones) were found to questionable  due  to  administrative
       irregularities. The claimant's English ability should not be seen as
       of much significance as there are many reasons  why  he  might  have
       cheated even if it he were proficient in the English  language,  and
       the claimant had not pursued ETS for the voice recording to  try  to
       clear his name.

   19. Mr Kotas therefore submitted that I should find that  the  Secretary
       of State had met the  legal  burden  of  showing  the  claimant  had
       cheated and dismiss the appeal. He accepted  that  if  I  found  the
       claimant had not cheated then I would have to allow  the  appeal  on
       human rights grounds as this was the only matter put in issue  under
       the Immigration Rules.

   20. Mr Khan provided an email from the Londinium Solicitors  file  which
       showed that they had written on behalf of the claimant to ETS in the
       USA  asking  for  further  information   and   reasons   about   the
       cancellation of his test scores. He submitted that if  the  claimant
       had used a proxy test-taker on the evidence from  the  Secretary  of
       state it would be expected  that  he  would  have  got  a  score  of
       something like 85%, where as  in  fact  both  of  his  speaking  and
       listening tests were scored at 55%. His results had only been  found
       to be questionable, which meant that when  his  voice  was  compared
       there was no evidence of cheating by use of a proxy test  taker.  In
       these circumstances not even the evidential burden should be seen as
       having been met in accordance with the Court of Appeal  decision  in
       Shehzad and Chowdhury.

   21. The claimant did not perform well at his interview in  2015  but  he
       has explained he could not remember anything as his mind went blank,
       and it is notable he could not give details  of  his  other  English
       language test taken later either. He was able to give a few  details
       which were correct and consistent with his later statement  such  as
       the location and about the fees. He has shown he had an  appropriate
       level of English to have achieved the result he was awarded by TOEIC
       through his oral evidence in 2013 before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       his later 2015 test from Trinity College  where  he  achieved  a  B1
       level, and his evidence before the Upper Tribunal.

   22. Mr Khan therefore  submitted  that  the  claimant  had  provided  an
       innocent explanation for the evidence of the Secretary of State, and
       the appeal should be allowed on human rights  grounds  as  he  could
       meet the Immigration  Rules  for  his  indefinite  leave  to  remain
       application, and clearly refusal  interfered  with  his  family  and
       private life in the UK.

Conclusions - Remaking

   23. The first question for me is whether the generic  evidence  and  the
       particular  evidence  relating  to  the   claimant   satisfies   the
       evidential burden on the Secretary of State  that  he  procured  his
       TOEIC certificate by  dishonesty,  see  SM  &  Qadir  v  SSHD  (ETS-
       Evidence-Burden  of  Proof)  [2016  UKUT   229.   In   making   this
       consideration I need to consider what was said in the later case  of
       Shehzad & Chowdhury with respect to test  results  which  have  been
       cancelled due to being questionable rather  than  invalid.  What  is
       said at paragraphs 25 and 30  is  that  a  questionable  designation
       means that there may not have been deception  because  unlike  in  a
       case where there was an invalid designation there was not a  matched
       voice with a person who took a test  using  a  different  name.  The
       Court  of  Appeal  concludes  that  the  Secretary  of  State  faces
       difficulties in respect of the evidential  burden  if  there  is  no
       individual evidence which shows the test results to be invalid. This
       position  is  consistent  with  the  generic  evidence  of   Rebecca
       Collings, at paragraph 29 of her statement, which states that  where
       tests results were cancelled as questionable  this  was  because  of
       test administration irregularities including the fact where numerous
       other results had been invalidated due to a match with a proxy test-
       taker.

   24. Of course, in this case there  was  also  the  interview  which  the
       Secretary of State conducted in 2015 with the claimant in  which  he
       was questioned about his TOEIC test. I find that  the  claimant  was
       not able to provide a lot of detail of what he did during  the  test
       at that interview, and inaccurately said he took a writing  test  at
       that time (although his full statement does say that  he  was  aware
       that a writing test took place afterwards which he did not  need  to
       take) and in retrospect he says that he got the  time  the  speaking
       test took wrong - it  was  about  20  minutes  not  one  hour.  This
       interview was nearly four years after the event, and he was  not  on
       notice about the focus of his interview,  and  if  innocent  of  any
       fraud would have  had  no  reason  to  think  he  was  going  to  be
       questioned about his TOEIC English test or had reason to think about
       it after taking it. He had by this time also taken  another  English
       language test at another college in 2015, and it is notable that  he
       struggles to remember the details of that one as well. In all of the
       circumstances I am not satisfied that the Secretary of State has met
       the evidential burden on  her  to  show  the  claimant  submitted  a
       fraudulently obtained English language certificate.

   25. However, in case I am wrong I go on to balance the totality  of  the
       evidence and assess whether the legal burden is met. I note that the
       claimant has, with time to consider  the  matter,  provided  a  very
       detailed statement about  taking  his  TOEIC  tests,  and  that  the
       Secretary  of  State  has  not  identified  any  detail   as   being
       inconsistent with the known facts about  the  tests  taken  at  Opal
       College.

   26. I find it is an indicator that the  claimant's  statement  and  oral
       evidence should be seen as  credible  that  there  was  no  positive
       invalidation of his scores as fraudulent by ETS and  given  that  he
       scores very significantly below the average marks that were achieved
       on that day at Opal College where 73% of persons were found to  have
       used a proxy test-taker. The claimant achieved 110 marks and was  at
       level 5 whereas the average score  was  172  and  at  level  7:  the
       claimant only got 55% whereas on  average  candidates  were  getting
       86%, on the Secretary of State's  evidence,  through  this  cheating
       process. His speaking score was also  equivalent  to  his  listening
       score for which there is no contention of cheating.

   27. I accept Mr Kotas's argument that there are  many  reasons  why  the
       claimant might have cheated other than he had  insufficient  English
       to take the test himself, as has been said by the Upper Tribunal the
       following might be the case: lack of confidence,  fear  of  failure,
       lack of time and commitment and contempt of the immigration  system.
       However, it is still of some relevance that  the  level  of  English
       achieved at that time in the claimant's English tests  was  probably
       consistent with his actual ability as is born out in his evidence in
       English to the First-tier Tribunal in 2013 and his passing a test at
       the higher B1 level in 2015.

   28. It is not in the claimant's favour that he could  not  give  a  full
       account of his tests in 2015 when called to interview, and even  got
       some elements wrong, but I do not find this  weigh  heavily  against
       him. I accept his evidence that his mind went blank about what was a
       fairly minor matter which happened almost  four  years  earlier  and
       that he was able to recall more when he sat  down  to  consider  the
       matter with his documents later one. It is of  course  of  relevance
       that in relation to almost three quarters of the candidates at  Opal
       College on the day he attended there is ETS  evidence  of  cheating,
       and that this evidence is highly likely to be accurate on the  basis
       of the generic evidence. However,  it  remains  the  case  that  the
       claimant is not part of his  cohort,  and  that  for  a  quarter  of
       candidates there is no such evidence. I do not find  it  significant
       that  the  claimant  did  not  write  to  ETS  himself   given   his
       questionable designation as  it  would  appear  that  there  was  no
       evidence of his specifically cheating to probe.

   29. As a result, having weighed all of this material,  I  conclude  that
       the claimant has provided an innocent explanation for  the  ETS  and
       interview evidence provided by the Secretary of State which  is  not
       countered by the totality of the Secretary of State's evidence.  The
       claimant was refused under paragraph 287 of  the  Immigration  Rules
       solely because he failed to meet the requirement that he not fall to
       be refused under the general grounds of refusal, which in turn  were
       said to be met due to the submission of a false TOEIC certificate. I
       find that the Secretary of State has not shown  on  the  balance  of
       probabilities that this was the case. The claimant  therefore  meets
       the requirements of the Immigration Rules for  indefinite  leave  to
       remain as a spouse of a person present and  settled  in  the  United
       Kingdom.

   30. The claimant has family and private life ties with UK,  having  been
       resident in the UK for eight years and being genuinely married to  a
       British  citizen  in  a  relationship  which  is   subsisting.   The
       consequence of the refusal of leave to remain is that bar success on
       appeal he is required to leave, and this requirement will  interfere
       with his private and family life ties with the UK. As  the  claimant
       has shown that he can meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules
       at paragraph 287 of the Immigration  Rules  (which  include  showing
       financial and English language requirements were met)  I  find  that
       there is no public interest in refusing him that leave to remain  to
       maintain immigration control, and as such  find  that  any  proposed
       removal would be a disproportionate interference with his Article  8
       ECHR rights.



Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

   3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it  on  human  rights
      grounds.





Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  24th April 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley







