
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12244/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 27th November 2018                     |On the 5th December 2018      |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                 SAFINA [F]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain, Counsel instructed by Janjua &
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of Judge  Hands
    to dismiss the appeal against refusal of her  application  for  further
    leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  private  and  family  life
    grounds.







Background

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on the 5th November 2014  with
    leave to remain  until  the  13th  May  2017  as  the  spouse  of  [FM]
    (hereafter, "the sponsor"). The sponsor is a British citizen.

 3. The instant application was considered  under  the  '10-year  route  to
    settlement' because it was made some three days after  the  appellant's
    leave to remain had expired (see above). This meant that the  appellant
    had to establish that there were "insurmountable obstacles" to  married
    life continuing outside the UK under Section Ex of Appendix FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules unless there was a good reason beyond her control for
    failing to make the application 'in time'.

 4. The appellant's explanation for the delay in making her application was
    that the expiry of  her  leave  coincided  with  a  time  when  it  was
    suspected that the sponsor had been suffering from cancer and  she  had
    therefore had other things on her mind. The judge did not  regard  that
    as a good reason for exercising discretion under paragraph 39E  of  the
    Rules [11]. The appellant also argued that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing outside  the  UK  because  (a)  her
    husband was  the  recognised  carer  of  his  elderly  mother  and  the
    appellant assisted him in undertaking this function whilst  he  was  at
    work, and (b) she no longer had any family, social or economic ties  to
    Pakistan given that all her family members now  live  in  Saudi  Arabia
    wherein her own residence permit had expired [21].  The judge concluded
    that (a) it was not reasonable to expect  the  sponsor  to  follow  the
    appellant to Pakistan given  his  responsibility  for  caring  for  his
    mother, (b) somebody other than the appellant could assist the  sponsor
    in caring for his mother whilst he was at work, (c) the  sponsor  could
    continue to support the appellant financially from the UK were  she  to
    return to Pakistan, (d) the couple could maintain their relationship by
    "modern means of communication" [24], and (e) the appellant could  live
    in Pakistan and visit her parents in Saudi Arabia "until such times  as
    she can return to the United Kingdom" [27].

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  on
    grounds that the First-tier Tribunal's assessment of  both  aspects  of
    the appellant's case was arguably inadequate. I additionally granted Mr
    Hussain's application for permission to add a ground  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's conclusion that it was proportionate for the  appellant
    to be required to leave the United Kingdom and to  re-apply  for  entry
    clearance from Pakistan as the wife of  the  sponsor  was  perverse.  I
    granted that application because Mrs Pettersen indicated that  she  did
    not object to it and felt able to meet the new argument notwithstanding
    it being made at the eleventh  hour  and  fifty-ninth  minute.  In  the
    event, the representatives concentrated their submissions upon this new
    ground of appeal.

Discussion

 6. The structure of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules is in broad terms
    as follows. The first section deals with what are called  'suitability'
    requirements. These are sub-divided into  mandatory  and  discretionary
    grounds for refusal respectively. The second  section  deals  with  so-
    called 'eligibility' requirements. These requirements  are  sub-divided
    into 'relationship', 'immigration status',  'financial',  and  'English
    language' requirements. An applicant will achieve settled status within
    5 years if s/he continues to meet  all  those  requirements  throughout
    that period. If however they cannot be met,  the  applicant  will  only
    succeed if s/he is able to demonstrate that there  are  "insurmountable
    obstacles" to family life continuing outside the United  Kingdom  under
    Section EX. In such a case, it will take ten rather than five years  to
    achieve settled status.

 7. In this case the appellant was unable to meet the 'immigration  status'
    requirement of not being in the United Kingdom without leave to remain.
    This was because her application was made some  three  days  after  her
    initial grant of  leave  to  remain  had  expired.  She  was  therefore
    required under the Rules to meet the test of "insurmountable obstacles"
    under Appendix FM.

 8. At paragraph 25 of her decision, the  judge  appeared  to  accept  that
    there were "insurmountable obstacles" to family life continuing outside
    the United Kingdom -

         "Whilst I accept the Appellant will help her husband with the  care
         of his mother and his mother prefers to be cared for by someone she
         has got to know, it is not an insurmountable problem to  have  that
         care provided by someone else as I have found  above.  The  problem
         arises if the sponsor had to leave the United Kingdom to live  with
         the Appellant in Pakistan as he would not be able to care  for  his
         mother as expected of him by the  United  Kingdom  government.  The
         sponsor would, if he were to continue with his family life with the
         Appellant, be forced to leave his  mother  in  circumstances  which
         would amount to an insurmountable obstacle to  his  departure  from
         the United Kingdom." [Emphasis added]

 9. That finding is based upon the questionable assumption that because the
    sponsor was in receipt of "carer's allowance" he  was  necessarily  the
    only person who was able to fulfil the role of caring for  his  mother.
    The possibility that some other person may have been able to take  over
    this responsibility in his absence - such  as  another  relative  or  a
    professional carer for example - is not one that appears to  have  been
    explored or even considered  at  the  hearing.  It  is  nevertheless  a
    finding that has not been challenged by the Secretary of  State  either
    by way of a Rule 25 Notice or a cross-appeal. It would thus  appear  to
    follow that the judge ought, by her own  logic,  to  have  allowed  the
    appeal on the ground that the appellant had  met  the  requirement  for
    insurmountable obstacles to family life being enjoyed  outside  the  UK
    under Section EX, given that this was  a  route  to  success  that  was
    available to the appellant as  a  direct  alternative  to  meeting  the
    'immigration status requirements' under E-LTRP.2.1 of  Appendix  FM  of
    the Immigration Rules. This failure of logic in the  judge's  reasoning
    amounts to an error of law going to the very core of  her  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal.

10. However, it is not the only fundamental error of law.  The  judge  also
    went on to  consider  whether  it  was  proportionate  to  require  the
    appellant to re-apply for entry clearance from  Pakistan  to  join  her
    husband in the UK. The judge's consideration of this  issue  begins  at
    paragraph 26 -

         "The Respondent has accepted that the Appellant meets all the other
         suitability and eligibility requirements of Appendix FM  under  the
         partner route therefore it is more than likely that if she were  to
         leave the United Kingdom to make an application to join her husband
         in the United Kingdom that application  would  be  successful.  The
         guidance in Chikwamba  would  indicate  it  is  a  disproportionate
         interference to the family life of an Appellant to make them  leave
         the United Kingdom in order to make an application from their  home
         country before re-joining their family in the United Kingdom.  This
         is the situation the Appellant would find herself in as  I  do  not
         find it would be reasonable to expect  the  sponsor  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom because of the situation in respect of  his  elderly
         and infirm mother."

11. This legal self-direction accurately reflected the observation of  Lord
    Brown in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 that it will be  comparatively
    rare for an article 8 appeal be dismissed in a family case on the basis
    that it would be proportionate and more appropriate for  the  appellant
    to apply for leave from abroad. It also reflected  the  observation  of
    Lord Reed in R (on the application Agyarko) v  SSHD  [2017]  UKSC  that
    where  an  applicant  is  unlawfully  residing  in  the  UK  there  may
    nevertheless be no  public  interest  in  his  or  her  removal  if  an
    application from abroad would be certain to  succeed.    As  previously
    noted, the respondent apparently  accepted  that  any  application  the
    appellant might make from abroad would likely succeed (see paragraph 26
    of the decision, quoted at paragraph 10 above). I am however unable  to
    ascertain any point in the judge's decision where  she  identifies  the
    public interest to support her conclusion that, nevertheless, "it would
    not be unjustifiably harsh on all members of the  family  unit  ...  to
    expect the Appellant to leave the United Kingdom" [emphasis added].  It
    is true that the judge identified several ways in which  the  appellant
    could  mitigate  what  might  otherwise  prove  to   be   the   "harsh"
    consequences of removal (see the final two sentences of  paragraph  27,
    as summarised at paragraph 4 above). However, this was predicated  upon
    the unspoken  assumption  that  there  was  a  counterbalancing  public
    interest that justified removal in the first place.  I  have  therefore
    looked for myself to see whether there was a specific  public  interest
    capable of justifying the appellant's removal from the  United  Kingdom
    with a view to her seeking re-admittance from abroad. I  remind  myself
    that the only justification relied upon by the Secretary of  State  was
    the fact that the appellant had remained in the  UK  unlawfully  for  3
    days before making an  application  for  leave  to  remain  that  would
    otherwise have succeeded. In my judgement, that falls very far short of
    a reason capable justifying removal and requirement to  seek  leave  to
    enter from abroad. I therefore conclude the judge made a further  error
    of law going to the core of her decision to dismiss the appeal.

12. Given the nature of the above errors of law, I conclude that  the  only
    decision that was reasonably open to the  Tribunal,  on  the  facts  as
    found, was to allow the appeal  on  the  ground  that  the  appellant's
    removal would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.
    It follows that the decision to dismiss the  appeal  was  perverse  and
    should accordingly be reversed.



Notice of Decision


 1. This appeal is allowed.

 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the  appeal  against
    refusal of the appellant's application for further leave to  remain  is
    set aside and substituted by a decision to allow that appeal.

Anonymity is not directed


Signed

                      Date: 28th November 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly





