
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/12495/2015
                                                               HU/12496/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                                   |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16th April 2019                            |On 07 May 2019               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     THE VICE PRESIDENT MR CMG OCKELTON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                           CHANDRA KUMARI PUN (1)
                                LILA PUN (2)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Ball, of Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



    Introduction



    1. The appellant are sisters and citizens of Nepal  born  in  1989  and
       1991. They applied for entry clearance to join their parents in  the
       United Kingdom in September 2015, those parents having been  granted
       indefinite leave to enter in November 2010, and having  entered  the
       UK in May 2011. The applications for entry clearance were refused on
       4th November 2015.  The appeals against the decisions were dismissed
       by First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones  QC  in  a  determination
       promulgated on the 5th May 2017.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan  on
       12th March 2018 on the basis that it was arguable  that  the  First-
       tier judge  had  erred  in  law  in  distinguishing  previous  cases
       relating to historic injustice to Gurkhas  by  stating  that  public
       policy consideration are now reflected in the  respondent's  policy,
       Annex K dated January 2015. It was also found to  be  arguable  that
       the First-tier Tribunal took an erroneous approach to  the  evidence
       as set out in the other grounds.

    3. The matter came before us.

Submissions & Conclusions - Error of Law

    4. In the grounds of appeal it is firstly argued  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal erred at paragraph 32 and  paragraph  33(ix)  in  making  a
       factual finding that there was no evidence of money transfers to the
       appellants in Nepal prior to the date of application, when  in  fact
       there was and there had been reference to this in  oral  submissions
       and in a skeleton argument. In any case the key  date  was  that  of
       decision, applying s.85(4) of the 2002 Act. As due to  the  lack  of
       such evidence the First-tier Tribunal then found that the appellants
       application lacked credibility there was a clear unfairness  to  the
       appellants by virtue of this First-tier Tribunal error  in  relation
       to existing facts; and thus in turn an error of law as per the Court
       of Appeal decision in E & R.

    5. Secondly, it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  in
       failing to consider the issue of family life in the context  of  the
       emotional dependency of the parents on the appellants,  particularly
       as the appellants' father is 75 years old  and  there  was  evidence
       that he needed the appellants' support. There was evidence that  was
       unchallenged at the hearing, as there was no presenting officer  and
       the judge did not ask any questions on these issues  (see  paragraph
       18 of the decision), that the parents speak to the appellants  every
       other day; that the parents had visited  the  appellants  in  Nepal;
       that separation is hard for them as they are a close family; that in
       Nepali culture it is the appellants  duty,  as  daughters,  to  look
       after their parents and the father is also expected  to  look  after
       his unmarried daughters. This evidence could not procedurally fairly
       have been disregarded as it was not  challenged  in  any  way.   The
       finding at paragraph 37(ii) of the decision, that if the parents had
       a cultural sense of family life  despite  the  appellants  being  no
       longer children they would have not come  to  the  UK,  ignores  the
       historic  injustice  point  which  led  the  father  to  be  granted
       settlement years late. It was also illogical to have found that  the
       telephone contact was not indicative of a close  family  because  it
       was what you would  expect,  although  all  families  are  different
       (paragraph 36(v)) as this statement is ultimately  meaningless,  and
       also to have found that because the second appellant  has  a  social
       life that she does not have family life with her parents  (paragraph
       33(v)).

    6. It is argued that the requirement to  show  that  there  were  real,
       committed and effective family life bonds between the appellants and
       their parents is clearly met as the appellants were 26 and 24 at the
       time of decision; they had always lived  with  their  parents  until
       they moved to the UK  in  2011;  there  was  evidence  of  financial
       dependency; there was evidence that the appellants' father paid  for
       their education; the appellants speak to their parents  every  other
       day; the parents have visited the appellants in Nepal; and there  is
       unchallenged evidence about their emotional ties.

    7. Thirdly, it is argued  that  there  was  a  failure  to  follow  the
       reported authorities from the Upper Tribunal and the Court of Appeal
       which mean that ordinarily if Article 8 ECHR is engaged by showing a
       family life relationship between the appellants  and  their  parents
       then the appeal will be determined in the appellant's favour  absent
       criminal conduct or a very poor immigration history, see Ghising and
       others (Gurkhas/ BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 567.  The
       introduction of s.117B of the  2002  Act  or  Annex  K  of  the  IDI
       Guidance does not affect this approach as the weight to be given  to
       the maintenance of immigration control  cannot  affect  cases  which
       succeed because the respondent accepts that  there  was  a  historic
       unfairness and Gurkhas were wrongfully excluded from the UK by being
       wrongly excluded from the Armed Forces Concession. Further  Annex  K
       is not, as it is stated in the decision,  parliament  declaring  its
       policy, as this is a policy of the executive and  not  part  of  the
       Immigration Rules approved by parliament.

    8. Mr Clarke accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred
       in  law.  He  accepted  that  there  were  documents  showing  money
       transfers prior to the date of decision, and that the error of fact,
       in finding that there were not, had been relied upon by  the  First-
       tier Tribunal in concluding that the appellants lacked  credibility,
       and so this amounted to an error of law. He accepted that there  had
       been procedural unfairness in not putting matters the judge disputed
       to the witnesses. He noted that the First-tier Tribunal  had  failed
       to follow the decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Rai  v  Entry
       Clearance Officer, New Delhi [2017] EWCA Civ  320  as  there  was  a
       failure to consider firstly whether the appellants had  family  life
       with their parents before they travelled to the UK, as the focus had
       entirely been on the criticism of  the  evidence  of  financial  and
       other contact since that time. There was also  an  error  in  giving
       weight against the appellants due to their parents' choice  to  come
       to the UK, which was identified as a mistaken approach at paragraphs
       38 to 40 of Rai. There was a further error in  placing  reliance  on
       s.117B of the 2002 Act when the Court of  Appeal  had  indicated  at
       paragraphs 55 to 57 that they could not see how this provision could
       affect the outcome of such an appeal. Mr Clarke  accepted  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal had erred in believing that Annex K was a policy
       approved by parliament, although it was something which  could  have
       some relevance to a proportionality decision the caveats within that
       policy would have to be properly observed if that were done. In  all
       the circumstances  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
       unsustainable.

    9. At the end of the submissions we indicated that  we  found  for  the
       reasons set out by  Mr  Clarke  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
       materially erred in law and that the decision should be set aside in
       its entirety.

   10. Mr Clarke submitted that the matter should be remitted to the First-
       tier Tribunal  for  re-making  but  we  did  not  find  that  to  be
       appropriate and decided instead that we would remake the  matter  in
       the Upper Tribunal.  We did not find that it would be just  for  the
       respondent to be able to challenge the evidence of  the  appellant's
       parents, sister and brother-in-law in the remaking hearing  when  he
       had chosen not to do so before the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  would
       only now be able to  do  so  if  we  were  to  permit  this  by  the
       unfortunate intervening  circumstance  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge making errors of law. Mr Clarke did not seek to argue that our
       decision was wrong on the facts of this case.

   11. We therefore informed the parties that we would remake the  decision
       on the basis of the uncontested evidence put before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal. Mr Clarke submitted that the  respondent  did  not  accept
       that this evidence showed that family life had continued  from  2011
       when the appellants entered the UK. He accepted that  this  was  the
       only issue we needed to determine to remake the appeal. We  informed
       Mr Ball we did not need to call upon him.

   12. We reserved our decision.

   Conclusions - Remaking

   13. We remind ourselves of the test  for  finding  family  life  between
       adult children such as the appellants and their parents as  set  out
       in Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and other authorities. We  are
       looking for something more than normal emotional ties, and more than
       love and affection, but not necessarily evidence of  exceptionality.
       Our decision will be based on the careful consideration  of  all  of
       the relevant facts. We set out the key  salient  evidence  which  is
       found in the bundle noting that the  appellants  parents  and  their
       sister and brother-in-law attended the First-tier Tribunal  to  give
       oral evidence as set out in their  statements  and  confirmed  these
       statements to be true and correct.

   14. The appellants lived with  their  parents  at  the  time  when  they
       travelled to the UK and were both single at the  date  of  decision.
       They are both daughters and their parents' youngest children -  this
       being supported by documents from the Village Development  Committee
       and Records Office of the British Gurkhas in Pokhara. They  did  not
       apply to accompany their parents in 2011 as  the  family  could  not
       afford all four visa application  fees  at  once,  so  instead  they
       applied two years later in 2013. They were refused in 2013, and they
       could not afford to pay for any legal advice at that time and so did
       not appeal the decisions. They  reapplied  for  entry  clearance  in
       October 2015 in the belief that a new policy of the respondent would
       mean that they would be granted entry clearance as they  were  under
       30 years old. We find that this evidence is indicative of  the  fact
       that the appellants and their parents wanted  to  continue  to  live
       together as a family in the UK from the time  the  parents  came  to
       settle.

   15. The appellants' parents have continued to pay  for  the  appellants'
       rented home since they left  to  live  in  the  UK.  The  appellants
       withdraw money using  a  cash  card  from  their  father's  Standard
       Chartered  Bank  account  for  their  living  expenses  along   with
       receiving monthly money transfers from their parents, some of  which
       are evidenced in the appeal bundle. The appellants have  not  worked
       due to high unemployment rates  and  a  lack  of  contacts  to  find
       employment in Nepal, but the  second  appellant  has  studied  in  a
       graduate programme which her parents have paid  for  and  the  first
       appellant has done some short study courses.  It is seen  in  Nepali
       culture as the duty of a father to provide support to his  unmarried
       daughters, and the appellants and their parents are keen to reunited
       so that the appellants can care for their parents with face to  face
       practical and emotional support particularly as  father  is  now  75
       years.  The appellants and their  parents  speak  on  the  telephone
       every other day and sometimes have contact via  Viber  or  Facebook,
       and there are  telephone  records  in  the  bundle  supporting  this
       contact. The appellants have also been visited by their  parents  in
       Nepal on  two  occasions,  once  in  2013  and  once  in  2015.  The
       appellants  assert  that  they  are  financially   and   emotionally
       dependent on their parents.

   16. Looking at  this  evidence  in  the  round  we  are  satisfied  that
       notwithstanding the fact that they are adults  the  appellants  have
       continued their family life relationships with their  parents  after
       they came to settle in the  UK,  and  this  is  reflected  in  their
       settled intention to join their parents in  the  UK  through  making
       applications; their high level of telephone contact and the parents'
       visits  to  see  them;  the  fact  that  the  appellants  have   not
       established  families  of  their  own;  and  the  prevailing  Nepali
       cultural expectations of their remaining under their  father's  care
       until they marry and that they have strong duties to care for  their
       parents in this situation too. We also find that  it  is  consistent
       with our finding of a family  life  relationship  that  all  of  the
       appellants' living expenses are paid by their parents. We find  that
       the relationships amount to more than normal emotional ties, and are
       accompanied by a  significant  level  of  financial  dependency.  It
       follows that the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  to  the  appellants
       interferes with their family life relationships with their parents.

   17. In accordance with Ghising and Others (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong;
       weight), having found that Article 8 ECHR is engaged, we  find  that
       this determines the outcome of the Article  8  ECHR  proportionality
       assessment  in  the  appellants  favour  as  we  accept   that   the
       appellants' father would, but for the historic injustice to Gurkhas,
       have settled earlier in the UK following  his  retirement  from  the
       British Army in 1970, and as we find that there are no issues  of  a
       bad immigration history or criminal behaviour  which  weigh  against
       the appellants.

          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   3. We re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it on Article 8 ECHR
      grounds.



Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:   1st May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley






