
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12779/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 March 2019                              |On 29 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                samantha [s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Akinbolu, counsel instructed by Rashid & Rashid
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant and  the
    Appellant is referred to  as  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Trinidad and Tobago, appealed  against  the
    Secretary of State's  decision,  dated  29  May  2018,  to  refuse  her
    application, which the Secretary of State recorded as being made on  30
    January 2014, albeit the Claimant refers to the application as made  at
    the  middle  or  end  of  2013.   The  application  was  based  on  her
    relationship with her husband who she had met in 2012  and  married  in
    2013.

3.   Her appeal against the Secretary of State's decision came before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Freer (the Judge) who, on 18 January 2019,  allowed
    the appeal on Article 8  ECHR  grounds.   The  Judge's  hearing,  on  8
    January 019 was followed by a letter, dated 9 January  2019,  which  it
    was said was addressed to the Judge, by the Presenting  Officer,  Mr  I
    Briant. The latter set out with  reference  to  the  Claimant's  bundle
    various  criticisms  of  the  Claimant's  evidence  in  terms  of   her
    relationship with her husband, a friend, and the extent  to  which  the
    Claimant had presented herself as having no material family  ties  left
    in Trinidad and Tobago.

4.   Other minor points were raised by Mr Briant which  somewhat  ironically
    arose from parts of the  Claimant's  bundle  to  which  Mr  Briant  had
    objected to the Judge considering, because it referred to a new matter,
    which had not been considered by the Secretary of State.  Therefore  it
    was inappropriate to consider the matter or time to be spent presumably
    on this matter, which the Judge accepted

5.   The case file does not  show  any  copy  of  that  letter  having  been
    received at all or around the 9 January 2019 nor was there anything  to
    indicate that it was forwarded to the Judge to consider.  It was common
    ground I think that the points raised by Mr Briant in his  letter  were
    not raised at the hearing before the Judge.  Ms Akinbolu did not appear
    for the Appellant.  The position was therefore  that  these  criticisms
    for what they be worth were not aired before the Judge and when he  was
    considering his decision his attention was not  drawn  to  reading  the
    documents, if he chose to do so, on those issues by the parties.

6.   What was clear, before the Judge was  that  the  Claimant's  claim  was
    that she had no relatives and family ties left in Trinidad and  Tobago:
     A complete contradiction to the documents which asserted fact that her
    mother was still alive in Trinidad as was  her  stepfather.   In  other
    material there was an assertion by  the  Claimant  of  regular  contact
    being maintained by the Claimant with  her  family  in  Trinidad.   The
    Judge plainly took at face value the assertion that the Claimant had no
    close family in Trinidad [D30] and similarly that her principal contact
    with family related to that within the United Kingdom [D30].

7.   The  Judge  also  had  a  considerable  amount  of  evidence  from  the
    Claimant's husband and accepted the  relationship  to  be  as  claimed.
    What the Judge did not have his attention taken to  was  correspondence
    emanating from the South West London and St George's NHS Mental  Health
    Trust, dated 1 September 2017 (AB  130-  135)  which  adverted  to  the
    Claimant but made no reference whatsoever to the existence of a husband
    nor indeed other than to a friend of the  Claimant's  by  the  name  of
    (Kieran) Ciaran who was playing a significant part  in  the  Claimant's
    wellbeing, was a close friend with whom  the  Claimant  had  close  and
    regular contact and Ciaran (Kieran) stayed overnight with the  Claimant
    (AB128).  Equally in the letter of 2 October 2017  (AB127-129)  written
    from the same mental health trust  there  was  a  complete  absence  of
    reference  to  the  Claimant's  spouse  or  any  significance  of   the
    uncertainties  about  her  immigration   status   impacting   on   that
    relationship.  Rather, the correspondence  particularly  addressed  the
    wellbeing of the  Claimant  and  referred  to  the  daily  contact  the
    Claimant  had  with  her  mother  in  Trinidad.  Ciaran  attended   the
    Claimant's health review on 27 September 2017

8.   In a further letter from the Trust, following a review on  20  November
    2017 (AB 136-139) again there was reference to the facetime contact the
    Claimant has with her mother several times a day and contact which  the
    Claimant has on a regular basis with Ciaran (AB137).  The letter if  it
    was founded upon  further  investigations  suggested  that  Ciaran  was
    staying overnight with the  Claimant  in  order  to  provide  emotional
    support. There was no reference to her husband or partner's absence  Ms
    Cunha essentially argued that the Judge, even though he  did  not  have
    these matters taken to his attention, had proceeded,  in  the  findings
    made on the relationships, was misled and that errors of fact have  led
    to an error of law even though the Judge was not aware of  it.  And  it
    was concealed from him. It will be recalled  the  Claimant's  statement
    said she did not have "... any memory or relationship with  my  parents
    ..." (AB2 para 3), "... My grandmother has raised me since birth ... as
    my own mother." (AB4 para 13) and had "... lost  all  ...  family  ties
    there." (AB7 para 27) The claimant signed a statement of truth that the
    contents were true to the best of her own knowledge  and  true,  on  24
    December 2018.

9.   Ms Cunha relied upon the case of MM (Sudan) [2014] UKUT 00105 to  argue
    in effect that the error was not so much an error of the Judge but  the
    Judge proceeded in ignorance of  material  issues  which  affected  the
    general credibility of the claim and could arguably have  affected  the
    outcome of the appeal.  The argument was not  particularly  attractive,
    not least because the material was before the Judge in the sense in the
    Appellant's bundle, but the Judge was not taken to the  issues  or  the
    conflict by either her representative or Mr  Briant.   The  question  I
    have to ask is whether those omissions  and  conflicting  material  are
    material to the outcome of the appeal and was the Judge's decision made
    under errors of fact which  amounted  to  an  error  of  law.   It  was
    difficult to form a view, without any criticism of the  Judge,  whether
    or not it would have made a material difference.

10.  Having considered this matter there was the underlying difficulty  that
    the Appellant's statement made for  the  purposes  of  the  appeal  was
    unequivocally asserting the absence of family and support  from  family
    in Trinidad whereas other evidence  contradicted  that.  There  was  an
    unpleasant sense that the Judge was plainly and intentionally misled as
    to the Claimant's circumstances in Trinidad as well  as  the  part  her
    husband played in her life in the UK as opposed to Ciaran (Kieran)  (AB
    99) or others.   On the other hand taking that for what  it  was  worth
    the basis of the claim was  ultimately  driven  by  the  issue  of  the
    relationship between the Claimant and her husband and the  significance
    of his inability to return to Trinidad and Tobago. Inevitably  part  of
    that consideration was the extent to which he and she could make a life
    for themselves together on a return there.

11.  On balance I concluded, without certainty  that  a  different  decision
    could well be arrived at by another Tribunal, hearing the evidence  and
    then making an informed choice as to whose claim was believed in  terms
    of the material impact of return and  Article  8  ECHR.   To  this  end
    therefore I conclude with considerable reluctance that this is  a  case
    where there was material  which  had  it  been  drawn  to  the  Judge's
    attention could have led to  a  different  decision  in  terms  of  the
    proportionality of returning to Trinidad and Tobago,  the  relationship
    between the Claimant and her husband and whether or not  he  could  not
    return there with her as her spouse.

12.  For these reasons with reluctance as I have identified it seemed to  me
    that this was a case where there was  at  least  an  arguable  material
    error of law.  Accordingly  the  Original  Tribunal's  decision  cannot
    stand. No findings of fact to stand unless otherwise agreed between the
    parties before the resumed hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.



NOTICE OF DECISION

13.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed to the extent  that  it
    needs to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.



DIRECTIONS

(1)  List for hearing at Taylor House.

(2)  Not before First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer.

(3)  No interpreter required.

(4)  List for hearing two hours.

(5)  List with reference to Ms S Akinbolu's (Counsel)  availability  on  020
    7797 7788.

(6)  List for a CMRH unless by correspondence it becomes  unnecessary.   The
    Respondent to indicate whether the new matter of the Appellant's health
    can be taken into account and if so whether the Respondent  intends  to
    produce a supplementary reasons for refusal letter.

(7)  The CMRH should be listed not earlier than  six  weeks  from  11  March
    2019.

(8)  No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 26 March2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
