
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12756/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the papers                        |On 04 November 2019                  |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                DONNABEL [M]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

ED TO FIND ERROR OF LAW AND THEN REMAKE

1.   The Appellant is a national of The Philippines. She entered the  United
    Kingdom, as a Tier 4 (General) Student, on 14  February  2010  and  her
    leave to remain was extended on the same basis until 31 December  2012.
    On 29 December 2012 she applied for leave to remain on the basis of her
    family and private life rights but her application was  refused  on  22
    April 2013. She appealed against  this  decision  but  her  appeal  was
    dismissed and she had exhausted her appeal rights by 22 July 2015.  She
    has had no further leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  since  that
    date.

2.   She made a further application  for  leave  to  remain  on  family  and
    private life grounds on 5 December 2015 but  on  24  October  2016  the
    Respondent found that this did not  amount  to  a  fresh  human  rights
    claim.  On 11 December 2017 she made a further human  rights  claim  on
    the basis that she had been  living  with  her  British  partner  since
    November 2015 and that his two British children stayed with them  on  a
    regular basis. Her application was refused on 4 June 2018.

3.   The Appellant appealed against this decision  but  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Anthony dismissed her appeal in  a  decision  promulgated  on  14
    January 2019. First-tier Tribunal Judge Buchanan granted her permission
    to appeal on 7 February 2019. The matter initially came before me on 11
    March 2019 for an error of law hearing. At that hearing the  Respondent
    filed and served a copy of a PNC record which purported  to  show  that
    the Appellant had been convicted on one count of theft by  employee  on
    18 April 2017 and had been ordered to pay costs, compensation,  a  fine
    and a victim surcharge. As the  Appellant  did  not  accept  that  this
    conviction related to her and had not previously  been  served  with  a
    copy of this record, I adjourned the  hearing  and  directed  that  the
    Appellant provide further evidence.

4.   I also vacated the hearing set down for 28 June 2019, as the  Appellant
    was still awaiting further evidence from the  Metropolitan  Police.  At
    that hearing, the Home Office Presenting Officer indicated that, if the
    evidence being sought by the  Appellant  indicated  that  she  was  not
    someone who had been convicted of theft by employee, he would write  to
    me asking me to decide the appeal on the papers.

5.   I have now received a  letter  from  Tony  Melvin,  Specialist  Appeals
    Team, dated 18 October 2019, which stated:

         "I can confirm that  Ms  [M's]  finger  prints  have  been  checked
         against the police  records  which  verify  that  Ms  [M]  who  was
         convicted on 18 April  201[7]  is  not  the  same  person  as  this
         Appellant".

6.   The letter continued "in the light of this information  the  Respondent
    seeks to withdraw the suitability aspect of the  refusal  decision  and
    invite the Upper Tribunal to decide the appeal on the papers".



ERROR OF LAW DECISION

7.   The Appellant was relying her family and private life  rights  and  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was correct to consider whether she was  able
    to meet the requirements contained in Appendix FM  to  the  Immigration
    Rules.

8.   In paragraph 11 of her  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Anthony
    recorded that the Appellant was married to a British national  and,  in
    paragraph 4 of her decision, she said that the Respondent accepted that
    the Appellant met the relationship requirements contained  in  Appendix
    FM.  The Judge also noted, in paragraph 9 of  her  decision,  that  the
    Respondent accepted that the Appellant and her husband were enjoying  a
    family life with each other. In paragraph 27,  the  Judge  also  stated
    that the oral evidence before her  was  that  the  Appellant's  husband
    worked and earned above the minimum income threshold.

9.   However, the Appellant was an overstayer at the date  of  the  decision
    and, therefore, her case was one which had  to  be  considered  in  the
    light of paragraph EX.1. (b) of  Appendix  FM.  Section  EX,  which  is
    entitled Exceptions to certain eligibility requirements  for  leave  to
    remain as a partner or parent, states:

         "This paragraph applies if

         (a)(i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
         a partner who is in the UK and is a British citizen, settled in the
         UK or in the UK with refugee status or humanitarian protection  and
         there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that  person
         continuing outside the UK".

10.  In paragraph 21 of  her  decision  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Anthony
    found that "the appellant's  partner  could  not  move  abroad  to  the
    Philippines with the appellant because of  his  family  life  with  his
    children". The Judge did not consider whether  this  meant  that  EX.1.
    applied in the Appellant's case because she  had  previously  found  in
    paragraph 7 of her decision that it could not apply  as  the  Appellant
    could not meet the suitability requirements.

11.  She then went on to consider whether  the  Appellant  was  entitled  to
    leave to remain outside the  Immigration  Rules.   When  doing  so  she
    failed to apply a cogent balancing exercise as to whether leave  should
    be  granted  before  proceeding  to  consider  whether  it   would   be
    proportionate to expect the Appellant to leave the United  Kingdom  and
    apply for entry clearance. This arguably amounted to a Robinson obvious
    error of law.

12.  It is also arguable for the reasons identified by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Buchanan, when he granted permission, that too  much  weight  was
    placed on the Appellant's failure to  provide  evidence  to  rebut  the
    assertion that she had been convicted of theft by employee.

13.  For these reasons, I find that there were errors of law  in  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Anthony's decision and set  it  aside,  apart  from  the
    findings which I retain below.

14.  I have retained the appeal in the Upper Tribunal.



RE-HEARING

15.  For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.1 the Respondent accepted  that  the
    Appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with  her  partner,
    who is in the United Kingdom and who is a British citizen. It was  also
    not disputed that the Appellant's  partner's  children  live  with  him
    every alternate weekend. I adopt First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Anthony's
    findings in paragraph 20 which accepted by implication that it  was  in
    these children's best interests for  their  father  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom so that their family life with him could continue.

16.  I also adopt the Judge's findings in paragraph 21 that it would not  be
    possible for the children and their mother to move to the  Philippines.
    Therefore, I find that there would be insurmountable obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's partner moving with her to the Philippines.

17.  I have also taken into account that the  Respondent  now  accepts  that
    the Appellant  does  meet  the  suitability  requirements  detailed  in
    Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.

18.  Therefore, I allow the Appellant's appeal on the basis that  she  meets
    the requirements for leave under paragraph EX.1. of Appendix FM to  the
    Immigration Rules.



DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

Nadine Finch
Signed   Date 31 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
