
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12439/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 September 2018                         |On 25 September 2018          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                             MISS MITHU SUNAWAR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         the ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Layne, Counsel, instructed by Everest Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Lyndsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. No anonymity order is made.

 2. The appellant is a national of Nepal.  The appellant applied on June 6,
    2017 for entry clearance as her mother's dependent child.

 3. The respondent refused that application in a decision  dated  September
    6, 2017 as  he  was  neither  satisfied  the  appellant  satisfied  the
    requirements of paragraph EC-DR1.1 of Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules  nor  the  respondent's  policy  in  respect   of   Foreign   and
    Commonwealth HM Forces dependants over the age of eighteen (Annex K).

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of  appeal  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Her appeal  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ajula (hereinafter called "the Judge")
    on June 14, 2018 and in a decision promulgated on  June  28,  2018  the
    Judge refused her appeal.

 5. The appellant appealed this decision on July 11,  2018.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by myself on August 4, 2018.  I  found  it  arguable
    that the Judge's approach in paragraphs  26  and  27  of  the  decision
    failed to follow the approach set out  in  Ghising  [2013]  UKUT  00567
    (IAC) and Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 although  in  doing  so  I
    made it clear  that  even  if  there  was  an  error  the  outcome  may
    ultimately be the same.

 6. The matter came before me on the above  date  for  submissions  on  the
    relevant issues.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Layne adopted the grounds of appeal and submitted the  Tribunal  had
    been tasked to consider whether there had been family life between  the
    appellant and her mother and whether that family life  was  continuing.
    Mr Layne submitted that the Judge had erred in paragraphs 26 and 27  of
    the decision by considering  whether  the  appellant  needed  emotional
    support from her mother in light of the fact she was now  36  years  of
    age and she had two adult siblings living in Nepal. He  submitted  that
    the appellant had demonstrated a continuing  financial  dependency  and
    the evidence that had been produced by the sponsor and  appellant  also
    showed ongoing emotional dependency.  The  statement  provided  by  the
    appellant demonstrated that she was unemployed and  reliant  on  monies
    sent to her by  her  mother.  Following  the  decision  in  Ghising  he
    submitted that the Judge should have allowed the appeal on the basis of
    the historic injustice.

 8. Mr Lindsay opposed the application and submitted  that  the  Judge  was
    fully aware of the correct approach to take as he had set this  out  in
    paragraph 23 of the decision. The Judge reminded himself that he had to
    establish whether there was extant family life  between  the  appellant
    and sponsor in terms of something more than the normal  emotional  ties
    between parents and their children. In paragraph 26 of his decision the
    Judge concluded that the appellant had closer ties  with  her  siblings
    than with her mother and that mere contact between  the  appellant  and
    her mother and occasional visits did not amount to family life. In  any
    event, the Judge went on to consider the  alternative  that  there  was
    family life and made findings in paragraph 29 that  had  been  open  to
    him.




    FINDINGS

 9. The appellant's father enlisted in the Gurkha brigade in November  1959
    and served until he was discharged in July 1970. He died in June  1996.
    On July 9, 2012 the appellant's mother was granted entry clearance  and
    permanent residence I the United Kingdom as the widow of an  ex  Gurkha
    and she moved to the United Kingdom on July 20, 2012 and has lived here
    since that date. A previous application for  entry  clearance  by  this
    appellant was refused on March 13, 2015 on the basis  of  "unconvincing
    supporting documents".

10. It was acknowledged at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  that
    the appellant could not meet either the Immigration Rules or  Annex  K.
    This was always an application under article 8 on the basis  of  family
    life.

11. The evidence shows that the appellant's  mother  lives  alone  in  this
    country whilst the appellant and two  siblings  remain  in  Nepal.  The
    appellant is 36 years of age and claimed she was both  emotionally  and
    financially  dependent  on  the  sponsor.  Evidence  was  submitted  to
    demonstrate the sponsor  sent  money  to  the  appellant  and  she  had
    continued to visit  the  appellant  and  her  siblings  in  Nepal.  The
    appellant's mother relied on a pension topped up by pension credit  and
    she also received housing benefit to pay for her accommodation.

12. It was not disputed in the First-tier Tribunal that the  appellant  was
    uneducated and continued to live in a property that was  owned  by  her
    mother.

13. In deciding whether there was family life the Judge reminded himself of
    the appropriate paragraphs in both Kugathas and  Ghising  (approved  in
    Gurung v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ
    8. The Court of Appeal in Gurung provided further clarification on  the
    issue of dependency and gave guidance on when the child/parent bond  of
    family life comes to an end for the purposes of article 8.

14. The Upper Tribunal revisited the  decision  of  Ghising  in  Ghising  &
    Others (Ghurkas/BOCs: Historic Wrong; Weight) [2013] UKUT 567 (IAC) and
    the Judge set out the important aspects of this authority in  paragraph
    22 of his decision.

15. Having set out the law the  Judge  quite  properly  asked  himself  the
    question namely, "was the extant family life between the appellant  and
    the sponsor in terms of something more than the normal  emotional  ties
    between parents and children?"

16. Mr Layne submission is that whilst he may have properly been  aware  of
    the law he failed to apply it correctly.

17. In considering the appellant's personal circumstances the  Judge  noted
    there was nothing to suggest she had  any  physical  or  mental  health
    issues. Mr Layne criticises the Judge's approach in paragraph 26 of his
    decision because the Judge posed the question, "why did  the  appellant
    still need the emotional support from her elderly mother?"

18. However, the Judge went on to consider the level of  emotional  support
    that existed between the appellant and her mother and concluded that in
    the absence of any health-related issue the level of emotional  support
    that existed was no different to that which would have existed  between
    any parent and a child  aged  36.  Whilst  there  was  a  reference  to
    emotional support from siblings I am satisfied that this was  something
    the Judge was entitled to make a reference to as long as this was not a
    reason for saying there was no emotional support between the  appellant
    and her mother over  and  above  that  which  normally  existed.  I  am
    satisfied that this was not how the Judge approached this issue.

19. At paragraph 27 of the Judge's decision the Judge found that "financial
    support without more" could not create family life between  an  elderly
    parent and child although this has been  challenged  by  Mr  Layne  who
    stated that the appellant was wholly reliant on her mother for  support
    as she was unemployed.

20. The difficulty facing the appellant in this appeal is  that  the  Judge
    did consider both issues and at paragraph 29 of the decision the  Judge
    gave  reasons  why  the  interference  with  family  life   was   fully
    proportionate despite any historic injustice. The Judge was critical of
    the lack of explanation as to why the appellant, at the age of 36,  had
    been unable to engage in productive or resourceful  work  and  maintain
    herself.

21. In granting permission to appeal I made it clear that the grant was not
    an indication that there was an actual error in law but that the  issue
    deserved further argument. Having heard these submissions presented  by
    both Mr Layne and Mr Lindsay I am satisfied that the  decision  reached
    by the Judge was one that was open to him and in  refusing  the  appeal
    the Judge examined the evidence and caselaw and  reached  a  conclusion
    that was open to him.

    DECISION

22. I therefore find there has been no  error  in  law  and  I  uphold  the
    original decision.

Signed                              Date     22/09/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.

Signed                              Date     22/09/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
