

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12778/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 October 2017                         |On 24 October 2017               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                mr Nurul huda
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in this case is a national  of  Bangladesh  born  on  1st
    February 1989.  He entered the United Kingdom  on  27th  November  with
    entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student until 20th February 2013.
     The appellant's leave was curtailed on 31st March 2012 with  no  right
    of appeal.  The appellant was subsequently  granted  further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student until 5th May 2015.  This was also
    curtailed with no right of appeal, to expire on 16th February 2015.  On
    16th February 2015 the appellant  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules on the basis that the 60 day period to find an
    alternative Tier 4 sponsor was not sufficient.  The respondent  refused
    that decision on 29th April 2016.  In a decision  promulgated  on  10th
    July 2017, Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Davidson  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission on the ground that the judge  may
    have materially erred in  failing  to  adjourn  the  hearing  when  the
    appellant was in hospital due to sudden ill-health.

Error of Law Decision

 3. There was no appearance before me by or on behalf of the appellant.  In
    a letter  dated  10th  October  2017  the  appellant's  representatives
    confirmed that they had been instructed  to  request  the  Tribunal  to
    conduct the hearing on the papers because the appellant does  not  have
    funding to pay the representation.  The Tribunal indicated in a  letter
    dated  10th  October  2017  to  the  appellant's  representatives   the
    respondent's representative would have  an  opportunity  to  make  oral
    submissions.  I heard from Mr Tufan.  He noted that  there  was  now  a
    note, which was not before the judge, from North  Middlesex  University
    Hospital showing that the appellant had attended on  the  date  of  his
    hearing at 8.19 in the morning complaining of vomiting blood, abdominal
    pain and a pain in the back of his head.  He was subsequently diagnosed
    with a headache and discharged  on  the  same  day  with  no  follow-up
    treatment.  Mr Tufan  submitted  however  that  there  was  no  further
    evidence of the  claimed  illness  or  any  evidence  produced  by  the
    appellant which might support any Article 8 claim.

 4. I have considered what was said  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  of
    Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) where the Upper
    Tribunal held that:
         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness: was there any deprivation of the affected  party's  right
         to a fair hearing?  See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284".

 5. I take into account that the judge in considering  whether  or  not  to
    grant an adjournment noted, at [2], that the respondent objected to  an
    adjournment request and submitted that "in any event,  given  that  the
    right of appeal was very limited, the Appellant would not  be  able  to
    add anything to the hearing even if he was in attendance".   The  judge
    noted  that  the  respondent  submitted  that  at  [15]  "There  is  no
    jurisdiction to hear Article 8 arguments as there  is  only  a  limited
    right of appeal in this case".

 6. Mr Tufan conceded that this submission was clearly wrong.   I  bear  in
    mind what was said in the case of Patel & Ors v Secretary of State  for
    the Home  Department  {2013]  UKSC  72  in  relation  to  private  life
    including that Article 8 is not a general  dispensing  power  and  that
    "the opportunity for a promising student to complete his course in this
    country, however desirable in general terms, is not in itself  a  right
    protected under Article 8".  However Mr Tufan conceded that  this  does
    not mean that the appellant is  not  entitled  to  a  fair  hearing  on
    Article 8.  I am satisfied that the judge took into account  irrelevant
    considerations in considering as she did  that  the  appeal  right  was
    "very limited".

 7. Although there was limited evidence  of  illness,  I  accept  that  the
    appellant did attend hospital on the morning of his hearing.  Whilst it
    may have been reasonable for the judge to refuse the adjournment,  that
    is not the test which applies.  This  appellant  will  have  an  uphill
    struggle to discharge the burden of proof in  relation  to  Article  8;
    however he has not had an opportunity to address  those  issues  before
    the Tribunal.  Although the judge made alternative findings that  "even
    if Article 8 arguments were taken into account" that the appellant  did
    not discharge the burden, I am satisfied that the judge's findings were
    tainted, including by her consideration of the submissions  that  there
    was  no  appeal  under  Article  8.   Mr  Tufan  did  not  pursue   the
    respondent's case with any great force.

Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that it must be set aside.  Given that the appellant  has  not  had  an
    opportunity for a fair hearing I remit the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, other than to  Judge  Davidson.   No  findings  of  fact  are
    preserved.

 9. No anonymity direction was sought or is appropriate and none is made.


Signed                                  Dated: 20 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made.


Signed                                  Dated:  20 October 2017



