
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12569/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 November 2019                  |On 11 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                OMAR MAHJAZI
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - AMMAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Moran, Alex Moran Immigration & Asylum
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the continuation of an appeal by the Appellant  against  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge L Murray)  in  which  the
       Judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Syria,
       against the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision  to  refuse  entry
       clearance as an adult dependent relative under the Immigration Rules
       (section EC-DR of Appendix FM) and the Human Rights Convention.

    2. At a hearing on 18 July 2019 we decided that the First-tier Tribunal
       erred in law in dismissing the appeal and set aside the decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal to be remade by the Upper Tribunal.

    3. The primary reason that the decision was set aside was  because  the
       Judge failed to properly consider the evidence relevant to paragraph
       E-ECDR.2.5 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. The finding that
       the Appellant met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  E-ECDR.2.4  was
       upheld.

    4. At the resumed hearing before us Mr Moran  again  appeared  for  the
       Appellant and submitted a supplementary bundle containing 209  pages
       and including a written skeleton argument.  Mr  Howells  represented
       the Secretary of State and did not submit any additional documents.

    5. At the outset Mr  Moran  indicated  that  he  wished  to  call  oral
       evidence from the Sponsor, Hussam Mehjazi, and that  an  interpreter
       would be needed. Permission to call oral evidence  not  having  been
       requested and there being no  interpreter  present  there  was  some
       discussion as to how this should be  resolved.  Mr  Howells  had  no
       objection to the evidence being called and we agreed that it was  in
       the interests of justice  to  admit  oral  evidence.  The  Sponsor's
       brother being present and fluent in English we agreed to  delay  the
       start of the hearing to enable the Sponsor's  brother  to  read  the
       Sponsor's witness statement to enable him to give  evidence  instead
       of the Sponsor. We were conscious of the  fact  that  the  Sponsor's
       witness statement before the First-tier Tribunal said  that  he  and
       his brother proposed to share the responsibility  of  looking  after
       the Appellant in the United Kingdom and that this was, in effect,  a
       joint sponsorship.

    6. For the Respondent Mr  Howells  agreed  that  there  was  subsisting
       family life enjoyed between the Appellant and his two sons and  that
       if it was found that the Appellant met the requirements of paragraph
       E-ECDR.2.5 that would be determinative. Mr Howells said that it  was
       not accepted that the Appellant lived in Rabia, as asserted  in  the
       Sponsor's witness statement, and referred to  paragraph  22  of  the
       Entry Clearance application which showed the Appellant's address  as
       Latakia Tabiat.

Oral Evidence

    7. Amer Mehjaze gave oral evidence in English and confirmed that he had
       read and adopted the witness statement of his brother Hussam Mehjazi
       as his own. He said that the Appellant lives in the Tabiat  district
       of Rabia in the province of Latakia about 35km from Latakia city. It
       would take about 30 minutes to travel depending on checkpoints.   He
       said if it were not for  the  war  and  wishing  to  avoid  military
       service his brother would have stayed in Syria looking  after  their
       father.

    8. Cross examined by Mr Howells the witness said he did not know of  an
       area in Latakia City called Tabiat although it  could  be  a  street
       name. He said the security situation  in  Rabia  was  'on  and  off'
       depending on the Free Syrian Army.  They  had  not  mentioned  Rabia
       before because they had not been asked. Bustan Alrihan was where his
       father goes to the doctor, it's  about  5km  outside  Latakia  City.
       Referred to page 26 of the supplementary  bundle  the  witness  said
       that Wahid Aziz Zoubi ("Wahid") lives in Bustan, he is  the  son  of
       Aziz Zoubi ("Aziz") who lives next door to the Appellant  in  Rabia.
       This is why they used the doctor in Bustan. Wahid was hiding at  his
       father's address to avoid military service  and  has  now  left  for
       Turkey. Up to this point he had helped care for  the  Appellant  for
       about 2 years. Now it is only Aziz who is 60 years old and has a bad
       back and he also looks after his wife who is  not  well.  He  cannot
       continue to provide personal care to the Appellant  and  is  unable,
       for example, to lift him on to the toilet.

    9. The witness said that to provide alternative personal care  was  not
       practical. There is no home care system. Women cannot  be  used  for
       intimate personal care for religious reasons. There are no available
       men. Sending money to Syria would only result in abuse. They have no
       relatives left in Syria; everyone has left.

Submissions

   10. For the Respondent, Mr Howells said that the correct approach is  to
       consider  the  human  rights  appeal  through  the  prism   of   the
       Immigration Rules. The issue is E-ECDR.2.5. The case of  BRITCITS  v
       SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 268 at paragraph 59 established that  provision
       of care must be reasonable both from the viewpoint of the individual
       concerned and the provider. The burden of proof is on the  Appellant
       and where he lives is key. It does not appear to have been  asserted
       in either the application or appeal that he lives in Rabia where the
       security situation is unstable. On the visa application his  address
       is given as Latakia Tabiat. In response to the grounds of appeal the
       ECM review  dealt  with  presumed  place  of  residence  as  Latakia
       asserting that it was a  government  stronghold.  In  his  statement
       before Judge Murray there is no reference to the ECM being wrong and
       no mention of Rabia. It is very surprising that if he was living  in
       Rabia that this was never mentioned. Further the claim has been that
       Appellant has received personal care from his next-door  neighbours,
       firstly Wahid and then from his father Aziz. The evidence  indicated
       that the family lives in Bustan, not in Rabia, which  is  closer  to
       Latakia.

   11. The medical evidence before Judge Murray is now 21  months  old.  It
       refers to the unavailability of healthcare which means personal care
       and support. The second report also from 12 February 2018 refers  to
       unavailability at place of residence. The new report of  2  November
       2019 from Dr Sadiq is at page 29 of the supplementary  bundle.  This
       says the type  of  healthcare  he  needs  is  unavailable  where  he
       currently lives.  There are two issues:  first  where  in  Syria  he
       lives and secondly in Syria as a whole. Singh LJ made this point  in
       Ribeli v ECO, Pretoria [2018] EWCA Civ 611 (at paragraph 49). He has
       been receiving personal care from male neighbours for 2-3 years.  It
       seems the current arrangement can continue. He has  not  shown  care
       cannot continue or if it  stops  that  alternative  care  cannot  be
       funded by UK sponsor.

   12. Mr Howells' submitted that, looking at Article 8 outside the  Rules,
       if he does not meet the requirements of the Rules he would  need  to
       show unjustifiably harsh consequences in accordance with  Agyarko  v
       SSHD [2017] UKSC 11. Judge Murray accepted various matters,  so  the
       Respondent accepts there is Article 8 family life and therefore that
       the issue is one of proportionality. The Appellant is 82  years  old
       and suffers from several health  conditions.  He  receives  personal
       care and can arrange an alternative. The Respondent does not  accept
       that he lives in Rabia, he lives closer to Latakia City. There is no
       evidence he has suffered from violence or bombing.  Section  117B(1)
       of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  provides  that
       the maintenance of immigration control is  in  public  interest.  If
       Appellant does not meet Rules and succeeds outside Rules there would
       be a burden on taxpayer in respect of medical and social care needs.
       Paragraph 69 of BRITCITS v SSHD  put  the  cost  of  caring  for  an
       individual aged between  65  -  85  as  approximately  �75,000.  The
       Respondent's decision is not disproportionate.

   13. For the Appellant Mr Moran relied on his skeleton argument. He  said
       that the first issue is one of credibility as to where the Appellant
       lives. The evidence is that Wahid was wanted  for  military  service
       and was in hiding at his father's house and this issue was raised at
       the last hearing. The location was not raised, and  the  explanation
       is that no one asked. The documents refer to an  address  in  Bustan
       and the witness has given an explanation. Taking  the  case  at  its
       lowest if the Appellant is living in Bustan rather  than  Rabia  the
       analysis  still  needs  to  be  made  as  to   whether   alternative
       arrangements  are  available.  There  is   considerable   background
       evidence in the bundle. We were referred specifically to Mr  Moran's
       skeleton argument in this respect showing, said Mr Moran, that  care
       centres for the elderly are hardly available. A woman who is  not  a
       relative cannot provide intimate care for  cultural  reasons.  There
       are only women left in Latakia. Were it not for the war the  Sponsor
       would not have left. For the same reason Wahid, who was  capable  of
       providing care, would not have left. It must be clear that there  is
       unlikely to be an alternative male carer in the young man age group.
       There are two prongs to the care needed. First, physical care needs.
       There is some care in place, but Mr Moran submitted that it  is  not
       reasonable from the point of view of the carer and this  impacts  on
       the  Appellant.  If  Wahid  had  remained  the  level  of  care  was
       reasonable. The second prong is the  emotional  needs.  The  Sponsor
       talks about his father's feelings of isolation and  not  wanting  to
       die alone. The doctor says he suffers from severe  depression.  This
       also impacts on the reasonableness of current care  arrangements  as
       does relying on the charity of a neighbour when his son  would  have
       done this.

   14. Turning to Article 8 Mr Moran said that if the Rules  were  not  met
       there are truly compelling circumstances. The  Appellant's  case  is
       distinguishable from Ribeli in that the Sponsor cannot  go  back  to
       Syria: he is a refugee. The Appellant is a disabled 82-year-old  man
       with no family to care for him and little else in the  way  of  care
       available.

   15.  We reserved our decision.

Discussion

   16. The Appellant is 82 years old and a Syrian citizen. He sought  entry
       clearance as an adult  dependent  relative  to  join  his  son,  the
       Sponsor, who is a refugee in the United Kingdom. His other  son  who
       gave oral evidence is a British citizen.  The Appellant suffers from
       various  medical  conditions  and  the  finding  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal that he requires long term personal care to perform  every-
       day tasks has been preserved. Mr Howells confirmed at the outset  of
       the hearing that the Respondent was  satisfied  not  only  that  the
       Appellant met  the  requirements  of  paragraph  E-ECDR.2.4  of  the
       Immigration Rules but also that he enjoyed family life with his sons
       for the purposes of Article 8 and agreed that if the  Appellant  met
       the   requirements   of   paragraph   E-ECDR.2.5   that   would   be
       determinative.

   17. Paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 of Appendix FM provides

    "The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner are the sponsor's
    parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must be unable,  even
    with the practical and financial help of the  sponsor,  to  obtain  the
    required level of care in the country where they are living, because-

         (a)      it is not available and there is no person in that country
         who can reasonably provide it; or

         (b)      it is not affordable."

   18. There is therefore a simple issue for us to decide and to do  so  we
       must consider the current  care  needs  of  the  Appellant  and  the
       arrangements that are in place  for  the  provision  of  that  care.
       Central to this is determining where the Appellant lives.

   19. At the First-tier Tribunal hearing it was accepted that he lives  in
       Syria and, although  there  was  no  discussion  as  to  his  actual
       location within Syria the decision records  (at  paragraph  7),  the
       Respondent's position was  that  he  'resided  and  originated  from
       Latakia which had been a government stronghold'. For the first  time
       at the hearing before us it was asserted that the Appellant lives in
       Rabia, a town some distance from Latakia City which, although within
       the province of Latakia, is a town where there has been  significant
       conflict.

   20. In his entry clearance application, the Appellant is shown as living
       in  'Latakia  Tabiat'.  The  Syrian  passport  of  the   Appellant's
       neighbour, Aziz (page 20 of the Appellant's bundle,) shows his place
       of birth as 'Latakia'. The Civil Register  for  Wahid  (Aziz's  son)
       shows his place of birth as 'Latakia'. At  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       hearing the Sponsor provided a witness  statement.  Paragraph  8  of
       that statement states "(the Appellant) is  based  in  Latakia".  The
       medical  report  (page  17  of  the  bundle  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal) shows a clinic address in Bustan Alrihan. The letter  from
       Wahid (page 27 of the same bundle) shows his address as  "Bustan  Al
       Raihan ... Near the mosque" and refers to the Appellant as "my  dear
       neighbour". The DHL delivery receipt gives the address of the sender
       as "Bustan Alrihan, Neer Mousk ... Lattakia".

   21. The first mention of Rabia comes in the Sponsor's witness  statement
       of 11 November 2019. At paragraph  3  he  says  that  the  Appellant
       lives:

    "... in the town of Rabia, which is in the north-east  of  the  Latakia
    province in Northern Syria, not far from Idlib province to the east and
    from the border with Turkey to the north ... The situation is Rabia  is
    a world away from the city of Latakia on the coast".

Much is made in the statement of the Appellant's location in Rabia  and  the
oral evidence in this respect is recorded above.

   22. We have considered the documentary and oral evidence very  carefully
       and having done so we not satisfied  that  the  Appellant  lives  in
       Rabia as claimed by his sons. Everything in the documentary evidence
       points to an address in or near Latakia  City.  The  only  addresses
       mentioned are Latakia, Latakia Taibat and Bustan which  the  witness
       accepted are all in close proximity to Latakia City.  There  was  no
       challenge to the Respondent's assertion that the Appellant lived  in
       "Latakia, a government stronghold" before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
       This cannot conceivably, in our judgement, be  because  the  Sponsor
       was not asked. If his father did indeed live in a war-torn  town  he
       would have said so. We reject the assertion that the Appellant lives
       in Rabia and we find that the Appellant lives within the environs of
       Latakia City.

   23. Given this finding the question remains  whether  the  Appellant  is
       unable, even with the practical and financial help of  the  Sponsor,
       to obtain the required level of care in Latakia, because it  is  not
       available and there is no person in Syria who can reasonably provide
       it or it is not affordable. In considering  this  and,  despite  our
       findings as to the credibility of both the Sponsor and  his  brother
       above, we have  no  difficulty  in  accepting  the  truth  of  their
       evidence  concerning  the  Appellant's  medical  condition  and  the
       current arrangements for his care. We accept their evidence in  this
       respect because it has been consistent, credible,  corroborated  and
       largely unchallenged. The fact that the Appellant is an  82-year-old
       man with no in country family support is  unchallenged.  He  suffers
       from various medical conditions and this is not unusual for a man of
       his age. The latest medical report (pages 28-9  of  the  Appellant's
       bundle)  confirms  the  effects  of  a  stroke  causing  left  sided
       paralysis, issues with vision and a hip replacement following a fall
       (suffered when  applying  for  entry  clearance  resulting  in  this
       appeal). Given this condition it is not surprising, and of course it
       is accepted, that he needs long term personal care.

   24. The evidence that care is currently provided  by  his  neighbour  is
       again unchallenged and of course corroborated by a letter from Wahid
       and WhatsApp messages from Wahid  and  Aziz.  Wahid,  the  son,  was
       looking after the Appellant whilst in hiding at his father's  house.
       His evidence that he was in hiding  to  avoid  military  service  is
       consistent  and  uncontroversial  in  that  it  accords   with   the
       unchallenged objective evidence in the Appellant's bundle:

    "Since the outbreak of protests in March 2011, Latakia  City  has  been
    one of the most important strongholds for the Syrian government, acting
    as a reservoir of soldiers for its  protected  war  against  opposition
    factions. As a result, there has been a huge exodus of young  men  from
    Latakia,   many   of   whom   were    killed    or    went    missing."
    (Syriadirect.org/news - page 160)

That Wahid has left  Syria  for  Turkey  for  the  same  reason  is  equally
credible and unchallenged. Without Wahid the Appellant is  in  the  care  of
Aziz a 60-year-old who it is said suffers from a bad back.  Again,  we  have
no difficulty accepting  the  evidence  and  the  fact  that  a  60-year-old
neighbour is not able to provide the required level of support  for  an  82-
year-old man who needs long term personal care including lifting on  to  the
toilet.  The required level of care cannot in our  judgement  be  reasonably
provided by Aziz.

   25. The next question is whether alternative care  arrangements  can  be
       made. In our judgement they cannot  and  as  such  the  question  of
       affordability does not arise. Intimate personal care  is  needed  as
       referred to above. We accept that such  care  cannot  reasonably  be
       provided by a female non-family carer. The Respondent's IDI on Adult
       Dependent Relatives notes

    "The ECO should bear in mind any relevant cultural factors, such as  in
    countries where women are unlikely to be able  to  provide  support  in
    some circumstances".

   26. The objective evidence (pages 149-157  of  the  Appellant's  bundle)
       emphasises that care  of  the  elderly  is  largely  dealt  with  by
       families and that there are virtually no care homes for the  elderly
       in most of Syria. The evidence also shows that there is  a  distinct
       shortage of male labour in Latakia due to the shortage of  men  with
       many having been killed or having left the country due  to  the  war
       (pages 158-160).

   27. In our judgement,  the  required  level  of  personal  care  is  not
       available to the Appellant in Syria and there is no person  who  can
       reasonably provide it.   He  therefore  meets  the  requirements  of
       paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 and this was  accepted  by  Mr  Howells  to  be
       determinative given that the Respondent  accepts  that  family  life
       exists. So far as the required level of care is concerned the letter
       of 2 November 2019 from Dr Saqiq, referred to by Mr Howells  in  his
       submissions meets the documentary requirements  of  Appendix  FM-SE,
       confirming  as  it  does  that  care  cannot  be  provided  in   the
       Appellant's home area. The background  evidence  combined  with  the
       individual circumstances  of  the  Appellant  satisfy  us  that  the
       required and necessary level of care cannot be provided elsewhere in
       Syria. On this basis the appeal must be allowed.

   28. Turning briefly to the situation outside the Immigration  Rules  and
       it being accepted that family life exists, it is  our  finding  that
       even outside the Rules the Respondent's decision is disproportionate
       to the legitimate aim of immigration control. We make  this  finding
       on the basis that the Appellant  is  an  elderly  and  immobile  man
       living in a country that has been ravaged by the effects of  a  long
       term war who is without relatives to provide physical and  emotional
       support. The Sponsor is unable to travel to Syria to even visit  the
       Appellant because of his refugee status and  the  Sponsor's  brother
       and the Appellant's other relatives are practically unable to travel
       to Syria because of the ongoing violence in that country.  Not  only
       does this mean that the Appellant's relatives are  unable  to  visit
       him it essentially means that  the  Appellant  will  never  see  his
       children again.  These,  in  our  judgement,  are  truly  compelling
       circumstances resulting in unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the
       Appellant that not only bring Article 8 into play outside the  prism
       of the Rules but also weigh the balance of  proportionality  heavily
       in the Appellant's favour.



Decision

   29. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  has  been  set  aside.  We
       remake the decision and we allow the Appellant's appeal under Art 8.




Signed:     Date: 4 December 2019

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
