
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12634/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th March 2018                             |On 28th March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             mr pran thapa magar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Manley (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Obhi, promulgated on 30th May 2017, following a hearing  at  Birmingham
    Sheldon Court on 11th  May  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent Secretary
    of State subsequently applied  for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nepal, who was born on 5th August
    1986.  He applied for entry clearance  as  the  dependent  son  of  his
    parents, who are now settled in the UK.  His father was a former Gurkha
    and decided to live in the UK with his wife.  The Appellant  challenges
    the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer dated 19th November 2015.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim  is  that  prior  to  his  parents
    moving to the UK, he was part of the family unit.  He  continues  still
    to be both financially and emotionally dependent upon his parents.   He
    has never worked.  The Appellant's maintenance  in  Nepal  is  arranged
    through his father's pension, to be used by him  for  his  maintenance.
    In addition, his father also sends  him  money  regularly.   He  has  a
    sister with whom he had been in Australia studying together.   However,
    as a result of his depression and anxiety he was unable to complete his
    studies and returned back to Nepal.  He did not take  employment.   His
    parents had visited him in Nepal, but cannot do so indefinitely because
    of the cost involved.  He wishes to be reunited with his family so that
    he can be with his father as he grows old (paragraph 11).

 4. The Respondent Secretary of State was not satisfied that the  Appellant
    was wholly financially or emotionally dependent upon  his  father.   He
    noted that only three money transfers had been produced.  There was  no
    bank statement to show how these  transfers  had  been  received.   The
    Appellant claimed to be unemployed but do not appear to accept that  he
    was not entirely employed in the past.  The Appellant had  lived  apart
    from his parents for a period in excess of  two  years.   He  had  even
    lived in Australia.  He had done so separately from his  parents.   The
    parents were settled without the Appellant in the UK for  a  period  of
    nine years now.  The Respondent did not accept that there  was  ongoing
    emotional support and noted that there had not been any visits  to  the
    Appellant while he was studying in Australia (paragraph 14).

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge had regard to Appendix  K  of  the  Home  Office  Policy  IDI
    chapter 15(2A) 13.2 (paragraph 21).  It was considered that the  appeal
    did not involve their removal, but the ability of the Appellant to join
    his parents in the UK, as he had been separated from them,  because  he
    was unable to come with them when they came, because he was  then  over
    the age of 18 years.  As soon as the policy  was  introduced  to  allow
    adult dependent children to come to the UK the Appellant had  made  his
    application, and a policy was introduced on 1st January 2015, with  the
    Appellant  making  his  application  in  October  2015.   Although  the
    Appellant had gone to Australia for higher  education  he  intended  to
    return back to the family unit.  He did in fact return.  He was  unable
    to complete his studies due to events which occurred in  Australia  and
    there was a detailed psychological report filed on his behalf.  He  has
    said in his statement that he continues to live in the family  home  in
    Nepal and that  he  is  financially  maintained  by  his  father.   His
    father's pension is paid into his father's bank  account  and  is  then
    accessed by the Appellant directly from his account.  His parents  also
    send  him  money  through  Western  Union  and  other  bank   transfers
    (paragraph 22).

 6. The judge was satisfied that the Appellant went to Australia  in  order
    to study and that the intention was for him to  return  to  the  family
    unit.  In Australia, the Appellant learned that his cousin, who he  had
    considered to be his brother, had been stabbed to death whilst visiting
    Hong Kong, at the age of 19.  He was given this  news  by  his  mother.
    This led to him becoming delusional and feeling numb and lifeless.  His
    sleep pattern became disturbed and  he  was  unable  to  interact  with
    anyone.  This lead to his being unable to study in Australia (paragraph
    24).

 7. The judge concluded that the Appellant has remained  dependent  on  his
    parents and that there is a "close knit" family and  that  the  parents
    have remained responsible for the Appellant.  The policy  contained  in
    Appendix K acknowledges that "there may be separation of more than  two
    years where the adult dependent child is in education".  The judge  was
    satisfied that if the Appellant had completed his studies, he may  well
    have become independent and he may well  have  obtained  employment  in
    Australia.   That  would  have  "been  a  different  outcome  for  him"
    (paragraph 25).

 8. However, in the circumstances of this case,

         "The reality however is that he has never stopped  being  dependent
         on his parents.  It is important to note that he returned home when
         things did not work out for him.  I have considered  the  pages  of
         bank statements and the telephone exchanges and I am satisfied that
         the Appellant does meet the requirements of Appendix K in  relation
         to financial and emotional dependency" (paragraph 25).

   9. The Judge had regard to the leading cases such as  Gurung  and  Others
      [2013] EWCA Civ 8  and  Ghising  and  Others  [2013]  UKUT  00567  and
      observed that, "these decisions were taking into account when the 2015
      policy was formulated as a policy at paragraph 7 refers  to  the  case
      law and states:

         "The Home Office has viewed the 2009 Policy,  taking  into  account
         case law and evidence provided to the all party Parliament group on
         Gurkha welfare.  As a result of this view, the  2009  discretionary
         arrangements are being adjusted to allow adult children  of  former
         Gurkhas  to  be  granted  settlement  in   certain   circumstances"
         (paragraph 27).

10. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application state, inter alia, that,

         "It is submitted that this limited evidence  does  not  demonstrate
         emotional dependency to the Kugathas standard.  The  ECO  does  not
         disagree that a family life exists between the  Appellant  and  his
         Sponsors; simply that  the  evidence  does  not  show  elements  of
         dependency during the normal emotional ties between adults.   There
         has to be something more" (paragraph 2 of the grounds).

  12. The grounds go on to say that, "even if the FTTJ's findings  regarding
      financial dependency were correct, the Tribunal is referred to  AAO  v
      Entry Clearance Officer [2011] EWCA Civ 840" which was to  the  effect
      that, "as for the position  of  parents  and  adult  children,  it  is
      established that family life will  not  normally  exist  between  them
      within the meaning of Article 8".




  13. On 19th December 2017 permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

14. At the hearing before me on 9th March 2018,  Mr  Walker,  appearing  as
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer,  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, asserted that he  did  rely  upon  the  grounds  of
    application, but he would have to say that Judge Obhi has  referred  to
    all the evidence in a clear and  comprehensive  way,  and  has  in  the
    footnotes cited the relevant case law such  that,  "all  the  necessary
    points are covered".  He submitted he could not add more.

15. For his part, Mr Manley submitted that, whilst he was  appreciative  of
    the sensible approach taken by Mr Walker, in stating that he would  not
    wish to labour the grounds any further,  than  to  say  that  he  would
    simply seek to rely upon them, but also to add that all  the  necessary
    points were covered, nevertheless, he was duty bound to point out, that
    the grounds were completely misconceived.

16. He submitted that he was earlier  today  doing  another  Gurkha  appeal
    before DUTJ Zucker, where the grounds formulated were  exactly  in  the
    terms which they appear in this appeal.  He stated  that  he  had  come
    across at least three appeals in the last ten  days  where  the  Gurkha
    cases were purported to be  challenged  on  the  basis  of  grounds  on
    application that were not only flimsy but actually wrong.

17. First, he stated that the contention that, "the ECO does  not  disagree
    that a family life exists  between  the  Appellant  and  his  Sponsors;
    simply that the evidence does not show elements of dependency ..."  (at
    paragraph 2 of the grounds), was simply  so  unintelligible  as  to  be
    plainly wrong.  If one could not dispute that family life existed, then
    it made no sense whatsoever to say  that  the  evidence  did  not  show
    elements of dependency.

18. Secondly, Mr Manley  then  said  that  "even  if  the  FTTJ's  findings
    regarding financial dependency were correct", a  reliance  upon  AAO  v
    Entry Clearance Officer [2011] EWCA Civ 840, to  make  the  point  that
    "the position of parents and dependants and other  children"  was  such
    that "family life will not  normally  exist  between  them",  was  also
    manifestly wrong, as a matter of law.  This was because the case of AAO
    [2011] arose prior to the Home Office change of policy in  relation  to
    Gurkas which was formulated in January 2016.

19. Second, it is also prior to the Tribunal decision in Rai v  ECO  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 320.

20. Thirdly, it places reliance upon the Kugathas judgment, which is now no
    longer good law, insofar as it states that emotional dependency between
    an adult son and his parents would not in itself suffice, because  what
    one was here looking at was a very specific regime, namely, the  regime
    that applies  in  relation  to  the  Gurkha  cases,  on  account  of  a
    specifically recognised "historic injustice" which was to  be  remedied
    in these cases.

21. Accordingly, he submitted that he would have to make an application for
    a wasted costs order.

22. He submitted that he will do so on the  following  two  bases.   First,
    that he makes an oral application now in which all he would  claim  was
    his Brief Fee today for attending this hearing.  Secondly, and  in  the
    alternative, that he could submit a schedule of costs in the next  four
    weeks, such that in the meantime  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State
    would be put on notice of the wasted costs  application,  but  that  in
    this event, if he had to submit a Schedule of Costs, then  he  and  his
    solicitors would claim the entire cost that  had  been  wasted  by  the
    Secretary of State bringing this appeal today.

23. For his part, Mr Walker submitted that he would have to accept that the
    way that the grounds are drafted do reflect the position  that  is  now
    outdated and even wrong.  He submitted that if there was, as Mr  Manley
    stated, a repetition of such Grounds  of  Appeal  being  put  in  other
    Gurkha cases, then the matter did need addressing from the viewpoint of
    the wasted costs jurisdiction.

No Error of Law

24. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

25. First, it is well-known that there have been a number of cases, such as
    Gurung v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 8, Ghising and Others  [2013]  UKUT  567,
    both of which are referred to in the footnote by Judge  Obhi,  who  has
    set out to deal with the family  rights  of  Gurkha  soldiers,  in  the
    context of the dependency of the Sponsor's own children, which had been
    the subject of judgments from the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the  Court  of
    Appeal.  It is as a result of these  decisions  that  the  Home  Office
    policy to redress the "historic  injustice"  has  been  formulated  and
    reformulated in January 2016.

26. Second, notwithstanding this, the level  of  analysis  and  clarity  of
    decision making, that is required in such cases,  has  been  emphasised
    most recently by Lindblom LJ in his judgment in Rai v  Entry  Clearance
    Officer [2017] EWCA Civ 320, in relation to the assessment of Article 8
    claims.  The question here is whether Judge  Obhi  has  satisfied  this
    level of analysis and a clear decision making.  I am in no  doubt  that
    she has.  The evidence, even under  cross-examination,  at  the  appeal
    before her showed that the Appellant did not  do  anything  other  than
    study while he was in Australia.  His father paid his tuition fees.  It
    is true he had lived apart from the father between 2005 and  2009,  but
    he had not been able to work since return to Nepal and  he  had  health
    problems.  In Nepal he continued to stay in the family home.  This  was
    a small house acquired by the sponsoring father when he  was  still  in
    the British Army.  The reality now was that the Appellant lived  alone,
    and although there were aunts and uncles in Nepal, they had  their  own
    families, and his grandparents  were  very  old  (paragraph  17).   The
    sponsoring father's evidence before Judge Obhi was that he spoke to the
    Appellant on a daily basis.  He maintained contact with  his  son,  the
    Appellant, by visits, through Viber, and through  an  internet  calling
    site.  The money was sent to the Appellant into his bank accounts  with
    Lloyds and Santander, as well as through Western Union (paragraph  18).
    The judge accepted this level of dependency.  Neither the analysis, nor
    the assessment of that analysis, is in any way overlooked by the  judge
    and the strictures of Rai [2017] EWCA  Civ  320  are  amply  fulfilled.
    There is no error of law.

Directions

27. That  leaves  the  question  of  how  I  deal  with  the  wasted  costs
    jurisdiction.  Given that Mr Manley  did  make  the  costs  application
    before me, I have to accept the application, but I have decided to give
    directions, in a manner such that the wasted costs application  is  not
    in any way prejudiced.  I give the following directions with a view  to
    ensuring that any application that the Appellant through Mr Manley  has
    made, is properly considered, with an opportunity equally given to  the
    Respondent Secretary of State, to respond to such  an  application.   I
    give the following directions:

      a) That by 4pm on 6th April 2018, if so advised, the  Appellant  shall
         file and serve:-




          i) a skeleton argument in  support  of  the  application  that  a
             wasted costs application should be made; in default  of  which
             the application shall lapse;




         ii) that  the  skeleton  argument  be  filed  with  the  principal
             Resident Judge in Field House, and served on  Mr  Walker,  the
             Senior Home Office Presenting Officer in this appeal;




        iii) that the skeleton argument shall be accompanied by a  schedule
             of costs said by the Appellant to have been wasted;




         iv) that by 4pm on 27th April the Respondent  Secretary  of  State
             shall, if so advised, file and serve a skeleton  argument,  in
             response (so that absent any response the Respondent Secretary
             of State shall be deemed to have  admitted  the  application).
             Any response shall also include by way of a costs schedule the
             extent to which, if at all, in relation to each item of  costs
             claimed, the amount conceded;




          v) liberty to apply.

Notice of Decision

There  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  Judge  Obhi's  decision.    The
determination shall stand.  Any application for a wasted costs order  is  to
proceed in accordance with the directions given in the preceding paragraph.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th March 2018

