
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12757/2019
                                                               HU/12763/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Manchester (via Skype)            |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On 15 December 2020                  |On 26 February 2021                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               MARIYA SHARPAK
                                TALAL HASSAN
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Z Malik instructed by West London Solicitors Ltd.

For the Respondent: Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The first appellant appeals with permission a  decision  of  First-
        tier Tribunal Judge Andrew ('the  Judge')  promulgated  on  the  18
        December 2019 in which she Judge dismissed the appellants'  appeals
        on human rights grounds.
     2. In relation to the first appellant, at [10] of the  decision  under
        challenge the Judge writes:


         "I should add that there is no dispute that the First Appellant  is
         unable to meet the Immigration Rules so far as 10 years  continuous
         lawful residents is concerned. This is right. The Appellant has had
         a break in her continuous lawful residents at least from 30  August
         2012 until 12 September 2012. This, I find, is fatal to  the  First
         Appellant's application."


Error of law


     3. The first appellant's representative sought  permission  to  appeal
        alleging  that  it  was  disputed  that  she  could   satisfy   the
        requirements of the immigration rules and asserting legal error  by
        the Judge by reference to the respondent's guidance in force at the
        relevant time.
     4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on a
        renewed application the operative part of the grant  being  in  the
        following terms:


        2.   The issue under the Rules was whether a period of absence from
             the  UK  between  29.6.12  and  8.10.12  prevented   A1   from
             establishing 10 years continuous lawful residence.  It appears
             from the skeleton argument of that, contrary to what the Judge
             says at [10], that the appellants argued it did  not.  A1  had
             leave when she left the UK and entry clearance (taking  effect
             as leave) on re-entering the UK. She was absent for less  than
             6 months. It is arguable that, as a consequence, by virtue  of
             paragraph 276A(a) the continuity  of  her  residence  was  not
             broken even if she had different leave  on  leaving  and  when
             returning (see Home Office guidance, 3 April 2017 p43 of  48).
             It is arguable that the case of R(Ahmed) v  SSHD  [2019]  EWCA
             Civ 1070 - which dealt with Para 276B(v) - has no  application
             to the present circumstances.  However,  the  relationship  of
             para 276A(a) apply to A1 and para 276A(b) (the  definition  of
             "lawful residence") may need to be explored in the case of  an
             appellant who relies, in part, on a period of time outside the
             UK. In essence, even if the residence is  "continuous"  it  is
             also "lawful" when the individual does not have leave for some
             of the period abroad - as they would  require  for  the  whole
             period if they were in the UK. For these  reasons,  permission
             to appeal is granted.


     5. The relevant guidance provided:


        Continuous residence is not considered broken if the applicant:

        .    is absent from the UK for 6 months or less at any one time
        .    had existing leave to enter or remain when they left and  when
             they returned - this can include leave  gained  at  port  when
             returning to the UK as a non-visa national
         .    departed the UK before 24 November 2016, but after the  expiry
             of  their  leave  to  remain,  and  applied  for  fresh  entry
             clearance within 28 days of that previous leave expiring,  and
             returned to the UK  within  6  months  If  the  applicant  had
             existing leave to enter or remain when they left and  returned
             to the UK, the existing leave does not have to be in the  same
             category on departure and return. For  example,  an  applicant
             can leave the UK as a Tier 4 (General) student and return with
             leave as a spouse of a settled person.

             Continuous residence is not broken as the applicant had  valid
             leave both when they left and returned to the UK.


     6. Mr McVeety accepted that the first appellant satisfied all relevant
        requirements  on  the  facts  and  that  the  Judge  had  erred  in
        dismissing first appellant's appeal on human  rights  grounds  when
        she was entitled to succeed under the long residence provisions  of
        the immigration rules in light of the published policy.
     7. I find the Judge has erred in  law  and  failing  to  consider  the
        policy and its impact upon the ability of the  first  appellant  to
        satisfy the long residence provisions of the Rules. On that basis I
        set aside the decision of the Judge as such error is material.
     8. In light of  Mr  McVeety's  acceptance  that  the  first  appellant
        satisfied the relevant  legal  requirements  and  that  the  appeal
        should have been allowed, I substitute  a  decision  to  allow  the
        appeal on human rights grounds.

Decision

     9. The Judge materially erred in law. I  set  the  decision  aside.  I
        substitute a decision to allow the appeal.

   Anonymity.


    10. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 15 February 2021












