
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/12867/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated      |
|On 21 August 2017                    |On 23 August 2017                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

                             NAKULAN NAGENTHIRAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N. O'Brien, counsel instructed by Solidum,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z. Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

   1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Sri Lanka, arrived  in  the  United
      Kingdom in 2009, then aged 15 years of age, and claimed  asylum.  That
      was refused but he was granted discretionary leave, presumably on  the
      basis of his age,  until  March  2012,  by  which  time  he  would  be
      approaching his 18th birthday. Since his arrival in the United Kingdom
      he has largely been living with his brother, who has  acquired  German
      citizenship. There has, though, been an interruption in the continuity
      of those living arrangements, which, as we shall see, has a particular
      significance in the context of  this  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
      against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mace  who,  by  a
      determination promulgated on 2 June 2016,  dismissed  the  appellant's
      appeal against refusal of his claim founded upon rights  protected  by
      article 8 of the ECHR.

   2. The judge set out this succinct summary of the issues to be  addressed
      in determining the appeal, although I recognise that Mr  O'Brien,  who
      appeared before the First-tier Tribunal also, does not accept that the
      summary adequately sets out the case  he  sought  to  present  to  the
      judge:

           "The Appellant's Case

           ... In summary, he is a young man who lives with his family.  He
           receives material and emotional support from them. He has a long
           history of depression and  post-traumatic  stress  disorder.  He
           needs family support and cannot expect assistance in Sri  Lanka.
           The standard of treatment there is  inferior.  There  is  family
           life and his removal would  be  disproportionate.  It  would  be
           degrading and inhuman to require him to leave.

           The Refusal Decision

           There is no partner or dependent child in  the  UK  and  so  the
           requirements for family  life  under  the  rules  are  not  met.
           Consideration has been given to paragraph 276ADE.  He  does  not
           meet the age or residence requirements. It is not accepted  that
           there would be very significant  obstacles  to  his  integration
           into Sri Lanka. He lived there for the first  15  years  of  his
           life. He is familiar with the culture and customs. In  September
           2014 the Immigration Judge stated "He has parents  and  siblings
           still living in Sri Lanka  and  he  still  maintains  ties  with
           family members there, is still able to speak the language of his
           community." His family would be able to offer help and support."

      The judge noted also that in the refusal letter  the  respondent  said
      that she did not accept that the family bonds  between  the  appellant
      and his  brother  and  his  brother's  family  went  beyond  "ordinary
      emotional ties" and that any treatment he  needed  for  mental  health
      difficulties would be available also in Sri Lanka. Pausing  there,  it
      seems to  me  that  it  is  not  clear  whether  the  judge  correctly
      understood the position of the appellant's  relatives  in  the  United
      Kingdom. There were two family units. The appellant has lived for most
      of his time in the United Kingdom with  his  brother,  who  is  now  a
      German national,  and his family and he has a sister  who  lives  with
      her husband, both of whom are British citizens and who live nearby and
      whom he visits regularly. The judge said that:

           "While the appellant  currently  resides  with  his  sister  and
           brother-in law he has not always done so  while  in  the  United
           Kingdom. A letter dated May 2014 from Supported  Housing  states
           that he had been referred due to becoming homeless...."




   3. The judge did not accept that the appellant was as dependent upon  his
      brother and his brother's family as was  claimed.  She  gave  two  key
      reasons for reaching that conclusion. First, that a letter  dated  May
      2014 from Supported Housing stated that he had been  referred  due  to
      being homeless, which the judge plainly considered indicated  that  he
      was not then reliant upon those relatives  and  that  those  relatives
      were not willing or able to accommodate him. The second key reason for
      doubting the asserted dependency upon those  relatives  was  that  the
      documentary evidence clearly established  that  the  appellant  had  a
      propensity to miss appointments with mental health professionals.  The
      judge said:

           "I also find that this impacts  on  the  level  of  support  the
           appellant states that he requires from  his  family.  I  do  not
           accept that were he to have the level of need for such care  and
           intervention as is claimed, that his family would not have  done
           more to ensure that he attended more of these  appointments  and
           referrals."

      The judge then referred to the evidence  of  the  appellant's  brother
      which was to the effect that:

           "his mental health has to be looked after and that can  only  be
           done through the involvement of our two families in the UK  with
           whom he has been living for the past 8 years"

      And concluded:

           "Given the evidence that the appellant has been homeless and has
           required the support of a charity with housing, I  question  the
           degree of that support."

   4. Having  found  that  treatment  for  the  mental  health  difficulties
      experienced by the appellant was available in Sri Lanka, she concluded
      that the appellant would be able to access that care. She rejected the
      submission that the appellant would face very significant obstacles to
      integration on return to Sri Lanka, saying:

           "I do not find that is the case. The  appellant  has  spent  the
           majority of his life in Sri Lanka. He has continued to live with
           family members during part of the time he has been in the United
           Kingdom and as such he has remained closely linked  with  people
           who share his  background  and  culture.  He  has  close  family
           members remaining in Sri Lanka, in the form of parents.  I  note
           the documentary evidence as to  their  health  issues.  However,
           that which has been put before me is of some  considerable  age.
           In any event,  I  do  not  accept  that  his  parents  would  be
           unwilling  or  unable  to  offer  emotional   support   to   the
           appellant...."

   5. Unfortunately, the judge was simply wrong about that. Whilst there was
      some documentary evidence concerning the appellant's  parents  in  Sri
      Lanka that was of  some  age,  there  was  also  very  recent  medical
      evidence. In particular, there was before the judge a letter from  the
      doctor treating the appellant's father in Sri  Lanka  dated  28  April
      2017 confirming that he was now in an advanced state of dementia, and:

           "[his] medical condition has poor prognosois given the nature of
           the disease and the lack of the kind support he is  supposed  to
           be getting further deterioration of  his  medical  condition  is
           inevitable and he could require twenty-four hour  care  in  two-
           three years time."

      There was also recent  medical  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's
      mother, that appears not to have been considered by  the  judge.  This
      was in the form of a letter dated  12  June  2017  from  the  hospital
      treating the appellant's mother n Sri Lanka. This  spoke  of  Diabetes
      Mellitus, Osteoarthritis and long standing  coronary  condition.  This
      evidence was perhaps not as stark as that concerning  the  appellant's
      father but required to be  considered  together  with  that  evidence,
      given the  additional  burden  that  would  inevitably  faced  by  the
      appellant's mother as his father's condition continues to deteriorate.



   6.  I  am  satisfied  also  that  the  judge  simply  misunderstood   the
      circumstances leading to the appellant being referred to SHP Supported
      Housing. The judge considered that this was  evidence  of  a  lack  of
      support from the appellant's relatives in the United  Kingdom  and  so
      indicative of a lack of dependence upon them. For  the  appellant,  Mr
      O'Brien submitted that as this was not a matter raised by or relied by
      the respondent in refusing the appellant's application and so, if  the
      judge was minded to hold this against the appellant, she  should  have
      raised it at the hearing. Had she done so she  would  have  been  told
      what actually happened, which is in  fact  disclosed  in  the  written
      evidence anyway and, further, accepted to be the case by the judge who
      had dismissed an appeal in 2014.  The appellant  had  lived  with  his
      brother's family until March 2012 The only reason for that arrangement
      being interrupted was that the owner of the house in which he had been
      living with his brother and his brother's family evicted  his  tenants
      because he was to be married and wanted the house for  himself.  Thus,
      the  need  for  the  appellant  to  spend  a   period   in   temporary
      accommodation was brought  about  not  by  any  unwillingness  of  his
      brother to accommodate him but because he no longer  had  a  house  in
      which to do so. The appellant  spent  a  period  living  in  temporary
      accommodation provided by SHP Supported Housing before moving  to  his
      sister's home until he was able to return to live with his brother  in
      the accommodation he was by then occupying.

   7. There is  real  difficulty  also  with  the  reasoning  of  the  judge
      concerning  the  appellant's  propensity  to  miss  appointments.  The
      evidence before the judge, including the oral evidence  given  by  the
      appellant's brother as recorded in the record of proceedings,  was  to
      the effect that the appellant's brother was very much aware  that  the
      appellant regularly missed appointments and that he did what he  could
      to deal with this problem, He said in oral evidence that  on  occasion
      he would accompany the appellant to appointments but  half  way  there
      the appellant would come back home. The appellant's oral evidence  was
      also that sometimes on the way to appointments he would become fearful
      and come back home and he said that sometimes "people at  home"  would
      call an ambulance to take him. I do not accept that on  the  basis  of
      that evidence, which was not discussed in the  determination,  it  was
      reasonably open to the judge to conclude that the missed  appointments
      were  a  consequence  of  a  lack  of  support  or  concern  from  the
      appellant's relatives.

   8. Drawing all of this together, I am satisfied that the assessment  made
      by the judge of the nature of the relationship between  the  appellant
      and his relatives and the extent to which he was dependent  upon  them
      was made on a mistaken understanding of the evidence before her. I  am
      satisfied also that the judge left out of  account  material  evidence
      relied upon by the appellant in her assessment of the  family  support
      available in Sri Lanka. There has been  mention  of  siblings  in  Sri
      Lanka as well as the appellant's parents but the judge made no finding
      as to whether or not there were siblings living in Sri  Lanka  and  if
      there were, their circumstances and whether they were able to  provide
      any support. I cannot be satisfied that the outcome  would  have  been
      the same but for those errors and that is sufficient to establish that
      the judge has made an error of law material  to  the  outcome  of  the
      appeal. Therefore, the decision of Judge Mace cannot stand.

   9. Mr O'Brien pursued other grounds in challenging the  decision  of  the
      judge but, given what I have said, it  is  not  necessary  to  address
      them.

   Summary of decision:

  10. First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald made a material error of  law  and
      her decision to dismiss the appeal is set aside

  11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the
      appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.




      Signed           [pic]
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                               Date: 22 August 2017

