
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12233/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th February 2018                         |On 22nd March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                miss n.v.r.p.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Alhadi of Stevjeme & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Fujiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal. However as
part of the evidence in this case relates to the Appellant's minor child,
it is appropriate to direct anonymity.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a citizen of St Vincent and Grenadines (born [ ]  1983),
    appeals with permission against the decision of a  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Skehan) dismissing her appeal against the  Respondent's  refusal
    of 28th April 2016 to grant her leave  to  remain  on  account  of  her
    Article 8 ECHR family/private life rights.

Background

 2. The Appellant's immigration history is as follows:

      i) she entered the UK on 2nd August 2003, in possession of a two  year
         visa as a working holidaymaker valid until 1st August 2005;

     ii) on 25th July 2005, the Appellant made an application for  leave  to
         remain which was refused with a right  of  appeal.  The  subsequent
         appeal was dismissed and by 7th December  2005  her  appeal  rights
         were exhausted;

    iii) on 28th September 2012 the Appellant made an application for  leave
         to remain as an unmarried partner.  That  application  was  refused
         with no right of appeal;

     iv) on 20th August 2014 the Appellant  was  served  with  notice  as  a
         person liable for removal;

      v) on 24th October 2014 the Home Office conducted a further review  of
         the case and found no basis to grant leave to remain;

     vi) on 8th January 2016 the Appellant was served with  a  notice  as  a
         person liable to removal together with a  Statement  of  Additional
         Grounds;

    vii) the Secretary of State  made  a  decision  dated  28th  April  2016
         refusing the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR  human  rights  claim.  The
         refusal contained a right of appeal.   It  is  that  refusal  which
         forms the basis of the present appeal before me.

 3. The Appellant's claim under Article 8 centred on her relationship  with
    her partner Mr L.A.J., a Jamaican national.  On [ ] 2016 the  Appellant
    gave birth to a child; the father of the child is L.A.J.

First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 4. Obviously by the time of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the
    parameters of the Appellant's claim had widened. Events  had  moved  on
    since the date of the Secretary of State's decision. It was  said  that
    L.A.J.  has  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  and  thus  the
    Appellant's child was entitled to be recognised as a British child  and
    to be granted a British passport.

 5. In his decision at [24] the judge said the following:

         "While [L.A.J.] claims that he has permanent right to remain within
         the UK, I  have  seen  no  documentary  evidence  to  support  that
         contention.  I note however that [L.A.J.]  claims  his  documentary
         evidence, in the form of his old  passport,  is  currently  in  the
         possession of the respondent.  The respondent has confirmed that it
         does hold [L.A.J.'s] passport but is unable to produce  it  to  the
         court.  The circumstances are far from ideal.  However, I  find  it
         unusual that  the  appellant  is  unable  to  provide  any  further
         information or correspondence  to  support  [L.A.J.'s]  immigration
         status.  The burden of proof falls upon the appellant and  she  has
         not  been  able  to  provide  any  supporting  evidence  to   prove
         [L.A.J.'s] immigration status."

 6. At [25], the judge then said:

         "... The baby's interests in the absence of  any  evidence  to  the
         contrary clearly rests with remaining with his mother  and  ideally
         both parents.  I have not seen sufficient evidence to  persuade  me
         that it was more likely  than  not  that  the  appellant's  son  is
         entitled to a British passport."

 7. Having  made  those  findings,  the  judge  went  on  to  consider  the
    Appellant's Article 8 claim on the basis  that  her  child  was  not  a
    British citizen and therefore made no factual assessment  into  whether
    it would be reasonable to expect the child to relocate with his  mother
    to St Vincent and Grenadines.  The judge went on to dismiss the appeal.

 8. Permission to appeal the FtT's decision was sought on the grounds  that
    the judge  had  failed  to  consider  and  make  findings  on  material
    evidence.  This was supported by reference to [24].  It was  said  that
    there had been provided to the Tribunal  as  part  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle a copy of L.A.J.'s passport  showing  the  grant  of  indefinite
    leave to remain to him.   Therefore,  there  was  documentary  evidence
    provided which the judge had failed to acknowledge.

 9. Permission having been granted, the  matter  now  comes  before  me  to
    determine whether the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contained
    such error that it must be set aside and be remade.

Error of Law Hearing

10. Before me Ms Fujiwala appeared for the Respondent and Mr Alhadi for the
    Appellant.

11. At the outset of the proceedings Ms Fujiwala confirmed that  the  issue
    noted by the FtTJ at [25] is fully resolved.  The Appellant's child  is
    a British citizen and a passport has now been issued to him.  In  fact,
    Mr Alhadi produced the passport.

12. Following on from that, Ms Fujiwala conceded that the FtTJ had erred in
    his decision.  She submitted that the decision should therefore be  set
    aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full  rehearing  on
    this basis.

13. The Appellant's appeal was brought on the basis that the  Secretary  of
    State's decision seeking to  remove  her  as  an  overstayer  would  be
    unlawful on account of her Article 8 ECHR  rights.   By  the  time  the
    appeal came before the FtTJ in October 2017, events had  moved  on  and
    the Appellant's child had been born.  Ms Fujiwala submitted that  if  I
    accepted that the FtTJ had erred in his factual assessment at [25], and
    had  a  proper  finding  been  made  concerning  the  child's   British
    citizenship, then it would have been incumbent upon the FtTJ to proceed
    to consider the Appellant's claim by reference to EX1(a) of Appendix FM
    to the Rules.  The judge would then  have  had  to  engage  in  a  fact
    finding analysis of whether it would be reasonable to expect a  British
    child to leave the United Kingdom with his mother.

14. The FtTJ had not conducted that  proper  assessment  of  the  evidence,
    because he had proceeded on  the  mistaken  premise  that  the  child's
    nationality was indeterminate.  Therefore, the decision should  be  set
    aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a proper fact-finding
    analysis to be carried out.

15. Mr Alhadi on behalf of the Appellant submitted that as  the  Respondent
    had conceded that the FtTJ had erred  by  making  a  factual  error,  I
    should simply remake the decision allowing  the  appeal  outright.   He
    submitted that all the available evidence had been before the FtT,  and
    that the FtTJ's findings at [25] provided sufficient evidence to enable
    me to allow the appeal outright (see first sentence quoted at paragraph
    6 above).  He did accept that should I find an error of law and  decide
    that the matter must be reheard, then it was  appropriate  that  it  be
    reheard in the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion

16. Firstly, I am satisfied that  the  decision  of  the  FtTJ  contains  a
    material error requiring it to be set outside and remade.

17. It is clear that the FtTJ's decision is premised on a material error of
    fact. As the grounds seeking permission point out and as accepted by Ms
    Fujiwala, there was before the FtTJ a copy of the Appellant's partner's
    passport showing a grant of indefinite leave to  remain  to  him.   The
    judge was therefore in factual error at [24].

18. That error in my judgment affects the whole of the decision.   Had  the
    judge properly evaluated the evidence and taken the copy passport  into
    account, then he would no doubt have recognised  that  the  Appellant's
    son is entitled to be recognised as a British child. That  changes  the
    focus of the enquiry  and  the  judicial  fact  finding  exercise.  The
    question before the judge  shifts  to  whether  or  not  Article  8  by
    reference to Appendix FM of the Rules applies, and to  the  issues  set
    out in paragraph EX1(a) therein.

19. I find, despite Mr Alhadi urging me otherwise, that there has  been  no
    meaningful fact-finding exercise showing that proper consideration  has
    been given to  the  above  point.  Indeed,  Mr  Alhadi  was  unable  to
    demonstrate to me anywhere within the decision that this point had been
    covered.

20. I find therefore that I am satisfied that the  FtTJ  decision  contains
    material error of law.  I see no alternative other than  to  set  aside
    the decision in its entirety because it is  infected  by  an  incorrect
    factual matrix.  The decision will now need to  be  remade  with  fresh
    findings of fact being made.  It is  appropriate,  on  account  of  the
    amount of judicial fact-finding necessary, that this decision be remade
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 25th October 2017  is
hereby set aside.  The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
full rehearing (not Judge Skehan).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     21 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
