


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/12643/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : Field House                   |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On : 12 October 2017                     |  On : 13 October 2017            |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               shibbir ahammad
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, instructed by Connaughts
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 17 August  1981.  He
      has been given permission to appeal against the decision of  Residence
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Zucker dismissing his appeal  against
      the respondent's decision to refuse  his  application  for  indefinite
      leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  ten  years'  continuous  lawful
      residence.

   2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 4 January 2007 with  entry
      clearance as a student valid until 30 April 2009 and was  subsequently
      granted further periods of leave to remain as  a  student,  a  Tier  4
      General Student Migrant and a Tier 1 Post-Study Work Migrant until  19
      March 2014. On 4 February 2014 he  made  an  application  for  further
      leave to remain as a Tier 4 General Student Migrant. That  application
      was refused on 18 June 2014 with a  right  of  appeal.  The  appellant
      lodged an appeal but withdrew the appeal on 3 August 2015  and  became
      appeal rights exhausted that day.


   3. On 18 August 2015 the appellant submitted an application for leave  to
      remain as a Tier 2 General Migrant. His application was refused  on  7
      October 2015 and that decision was  maintained  on  an  administrative
      review in a decision dated 2 November 2015. On 26  November  2015  the
      appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain on the basis  of  ten
      years' continuous lawful residence. His application was refused on  11
      May 2016.


   4. The appellant's application was refused under  paragraphs  322(2)  and
      322(1A) of the immigration rules on the basis  of  having  made  false
      representations in his previous  application  of  18  August  2015  by
      submitting a false certificate of sponsorship number and  having  used
      deception in his  current  application.  The  respondent  went  on  to
      consider paragraph 276B of the immigration rules with  regard  to  the
      appellant's length of residence in the UK and concluded  that  he  had
      failed to demonstrate ten years' continuous lawful residence in the UK
      for the purposes of paragraph 276B(i)(a), that he  could  not  satisfy
      the requirement in paragraph  276B(v)  since  his  application  of  26
      November 2015 had been made over a month after his  lawful  leave  had
      ceased and that he  failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
      276B(ii)(c) and (iii) as a result of the false representations he  had
      made in his  application  of  18  August  2015.  The  respondent  then
      considered Article 8 and concluded that the appellant did not meet the
      eligibility  requirements   for   the   purposes   of   paragraph   R-
      LTRP.1.1(d)(ii) of Appendix FM as his partner was not British and  was
      not settled in the UK and did not meet the eligibility requirements as
      a parent for the purposes of paragraph R-LTRPT.1.1(d) as his child was
      five years of age and was not British or settled in  the  UK.  It  was
      considered  further  that  the  paragraph  EX.1  did  not  apply.  The
      respondent considered, in addition, that the appellant could not  meet
      the criteria in paragraph 276ADE(1) on the basis of private  life  and
      that there were no exceptional circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of
      leave outside the immigration rules.

   5. The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard  by
      Resident First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker on 17 July  2017,  by  which
      time there were two children in the family, one  aged  six  years  and
      eight months and the other aged under one  year.  The  judge  did  not
      accept that the  respondent  had  discharged  the  burden  of  proving
      deception and therefore  did  not  uphold  the  decisions  made  under
      paragraph 322(2) and (1A). He then went on to consider whether or  not
      the appellant had demonstrated ten years' continuous lawful  residence
      in the UK. He considered that the appellant had had  no  lawful  leave
      after withdrawing his Tier 4 appeal on 3  August  2015  and  that  the
      continuity  of  residence  was  therefore  broken.  He  rejected   the
      appellant's argument that, since his application of 18 August 2015 had
      been made within 28 days, his leave was considered to  be  continuous.
      Turning to the appellant's human rights, the judge considered that  he
      could not meet the requirements in Appendix FM or paragraph  276ADE(1)
      and that there were no  circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of  leave
      outside the immigration rules. He  accordingly  dismissed  the  appeal
      under the immigration rules and on human rights grounds.

   6. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the appellant
      on the grounds that the judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  correct
      construction in regard to the 28 day  period,  as  the  appellant  had
      submitted a new application within 15 days of withdrawing his  appeal,
      on 18 August 2015, and thus within the 28 days' grace period; that the
      judge  had  failed  to  assess  the  respondent's  failure  to   apply
      discretion in view of the 28 days' grace period; and  that  the  judge
      had failed properly to assess the appellant's and his  family's  human
      rights and the best interests of his children.


   7. Permission was granted in relation to the judge's consideration of the
      application of paragraph 276B(v) of the immigration rules with respect
      to the 28 day grace period.

Appeal Hearing

   8. At the hearing both parties made submissions.

   9. Ms Anzani, quite properly, conceded that there was  no  merit  in  the
      first two grounds of appeal and that the  28  day  argument  was  ill-
      founded. She therefore focussed on the third ground  of  appeal  which
      challenged the judge's findings on  Article  8,  in  particular  those
      relating to the best interests of the eldest child who  was  aged  six
      years  and  eight  months.  Ms  Anzani  submitted  that  the   judge's
      consideration of the best interests of the  appellant's  daughter  was
      insufficient and there was no acknowledgement  that  the  respondent's
      decision had been silent on the children's best interests.

  10. Mr Nath submitted that the judge had considered the best interests  of
      the children and had made findings open to him on the evidence.


  11. Ms Anzani did not seek to respond.


Consideration and findings

  12. As Ms Anzani properly identified, the grounds relying on the 28  days'
      "grace" period were ill-founded. I see no need to go into  the  matter
      in any further detail. The judge dealt with the issue properly at [10]
      and was fully entitled to conclude that the appellant  had  failed  to
      demonstrate ten years' continuous lawful residence in the UK.


  13. As for the third ground, permission was not granted on that basis, but
      neither was it explicitly  addressed  or  refused  in  the  permission
      decision. In  any  event  there  is  no  merit  in  that  ground.  The
      appellant's eldest child plainly did not fall within the  criteria  in
      paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) as she was only five years of age at the  time
      of submitting the application. Clearly she had not lived in the UK for
      seven years and the  question  of  reasonableness  therefore  did  not
      arise. Neither was the appellant's eldest child seven years of age  at
      the date of  the  hearing  and  therefore  that  was  not  a  relevant
      consideration in relation to Article 8 outside the immigration  rules.
      As to the matter of the best interests of the children, that was given
      full and adequate consideration by the judge at [14].  The  fact  that
      the respondent had  not  specifically  addressed  the  matter  in  the
      refusal decision was not material when it was a matter fully addressed
      by the judge in any event. At [14] and [15] the judge  considered  all
      relevant matters for the purposes of  assessing  proportionality  with
      respect to Article 8 outside the rules, referring specifically to  the
      factors in section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
      2002. On the evidence available to him, and for the reasons fully  and
      properly given, the judge was unarguably entitled to  conclude  as  he
      did and to dismiss the appeal on the basis that he did.


  14. I find no errors  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision.  I  uphold  the
      decision.

DECISION

  15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.





Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  12 October
2017
