
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12493/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On March 25, 2019                            |On April 1, 2019              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                mrs noor alif
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Khan, Counsel instructed by SH Solicitors Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Whilst the respondent is the appellant in these proceedings before  me,
    I hereafter refer to the parties using terminology used in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The appellant in the First-tier Tribunal will hereafter
    be referred to as the appellant in these proceedings and the respondent
    will be referred to as the respondent.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom as a  visitor  on  October  4,
    2006 with leave to remain until March 21, 2007.  Whilst the  dates  are
    unclear it seems that she made an application for indefinite  leave  to
    remain, but this was refused on March 20, 2007 probably without a right
    of appeal.  She next applied for leave to remain  towards  the  end  of
    2014 on the grounds of private and family life, but this was refused on
    January 9, 2015 again possibly without a right of appeal.

 3. On January 4, 2016 she applied  for  leave  to  remain,  but  this  was
    refused by the respondent on May 5, 2016.  The appellant appealed  that
    decision on May 13,  2016  under  Section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. Her appeal came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  James  on
    December 5, 2017 and in a decision promulgated on January 15, 2018  her
    appeal  was  allowed  on  the  basis  the  Judge  was   satisfied   the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) HC 395 were met and the  appeal
    was allowed under Article 8 ECHR.

 5. The respondent appealed this decision on January 25, 2018  arguing  the
    Judge had materially erred by:

      a) Incorrectly accepting evidence from the  appellant's  sponsor  that
         there were no  care  homes  available  for  the  appellant  without
         adducing objective evidence to support this claim.

      b) Failing to attach sufficient weight  to  the  fact,  the  appellant
         owned a home with her brother-in-law in Pakistan.

      c) Failed to give adequate reasons for not finding she was  simply  an
         overstayer and placing the appropriate weight.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Hodgkinson on May 23, 2018.  No reasons were given by  the  Judge  save
    that permission was given on all grounds.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Bramble relied on the grounds of appeal as drafted.  At paragraph 22
    of the decision, the Judge had found that traditional care lay with the
    family and that care homes were scarce and expensive.  Whilst there had
    been evidence submitted in the appellant's bundle, between pages 55 and
    68, he submitted there was nothing in those documents  to  support  the
    Judge's finding.  With regard  to  the  second  ground  of  appeal,  he
    submitted that the sponsors could financially assist the appellant  and
    the  appellant  herself  and  had  an  interest  in   a   property   or
    alternatively, the appellant could simply go and live in a private care
    home or stay in the property she had a share in.  Finally, he submitted
    the Judge had failed to  give  any  reasoning  why  he  had  found  the
    appellant had not used subterfuge to remain.

 9. Mr Khan opposed the  application  and  referred  the  Tribunal  to  the
    evidence provided by the sponsor and the  documents  contained  in  the
    appellant's bundle.  The respondent had not provided  any  evidence  to
    demonstrate  that  care  homes  were  available  whereas  the  sponsor,
    supported by documentation that could be found between pages 55 and  68
    of the appellant's bundle, had demonstrated there was a  lack  of  care
    homes for appellants of  her  age  and  with  her  health  issues.   He
    submitted the Judge  had  considered  all  the  issues  in  a  detailed
    decision and had concluded that care homes were few and far between and
    that finding was open to the Judge.  The  Judge  gave  reasons  why  he
    found it would be unreasonable to expect either the sponsor or  anybody
    else to return to Pakistan to look after the  appellant  and  concluded
    there  were  very  significant  obstacles  as  defined   in   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) HC 395.

    Findings on Material Error

10. Permission to appeal had been granted although in  granting  permission
    the Judge did not offer any opinion on the reason for permission  being
    given save that they disclosed arguable errors in law.

11. I found there was no error in law and that the argument advanced by  Mr
    Bramble amounted to a mere disagreement only.

12. The appellant had been married but her husband had died, and the  Judge
    had medical evidence that set out her problems.  The  Judge  considered
    whether there were very significant obstacles to her return because her
    daughter lived in the United Kingdom with  her  own  family  and  there
    would be no-one to look after her in Pakistan.

13. Contrary to the grounds  of  appeal  and  submissions  advanced  by  Mr
    Bramble, the appellant had provided a bundle of documents and contained
    within that bundle were several articles that dealt with  the  care  of
    elderly persons in Pakistan.

14. Articles within the bundle supported the  submissions  advanced  before
    the First-tier Judge that elderly people in Pakistan were cared for  by
    their families in Pakistan.  Articles pointed out there was an "extreme
    deficiency of health and social care services for the elderly"  and  it
    was  felt  that  healthcare  providers  should  start  allocating   and
    improvising for the specialised needs of the elderly.

15. A second article contained at page 57  of  the  bundle  confirmed  that
    Pakistan had still not formulated any policy to address  the  needs  of
    its fast-growing aged population which would touch 45 million by  2025-
    seomthing confirmed by  The  UN  Population  Fund.   The  Sindh  Senior
    Citizens Welfare Bill 2014 was still awaiting approval and until a  law
    was passed and promulgated serious social, economic and health problems
    would continue to rise.  Medical care did not recognise geriatrics  and
    there was a lack of residential rehabilitation facilities for the older
    population.

16. The Judge therefore had material upon which to make the  findings  that
    he did.  The Judge's conclusions at paragraph 22 of  the  decision  was
    therefore open to him.

17. The Judge did consider the appellant's share in a property in  Pakistan
    but as Mr Khan pointed out this was not a  property  that  she  herself
    owned  but  was  owned  by  other   family   members.    It   was   not
    straightforward to sell such a property,  and,  in  the  circumstances,
    there would be no funds or insufficient funds available.

18. The final ground raised in the grounds of appeal related  to  the  fact
    that the appellant came as  a  visitor  and  overstayed.   That  ground
    overlooks the fact that the Judge was satisfied the appellant  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) HC 395.  The  Judge  identified
    very significant obstacles and overstaying would I  such  circumstances
    have not been an issue for him on the basis she had met the Immigration
    Rules and case law suggests that in such circumstances she is  entitled
    to succeed under article 8 ECHR.

    DECISION

19. I do not find there is an error of law and I dismiss the appeal.


Signed                              Date         27 March 2019


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I uphold the costs decision made by the First-tier Judge


Signed                              Date         27 March 2019

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
