

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/12424/2019 (P)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Decided under rule 34                      |Decision and Reasons          |
|                                           |Promulgated                   |
|                                           |On 7 September 2020           |
|                                           |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               SHAZIA SHABNAM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLERARNCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent

                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The ECO's decision, dated 3 July 2019.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Skehan, promulgated on 9 March 2020.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal, filed on 6 April 2020.

      v) The grant of permission by the FtT, dated 28 April 2020.

     vi) The UT's directions, issued on 18 June 2020.

    vii) The response for the ECO, dated 25 June 2020,  conceding  that  the
         FtT erred in law, and that its decision should be set aside.

   viii) The appellant's response, dated 9 July 2020.

 2. The FtT erred by treating the provision in  paragraph  320(11)  of  the
    immigration rules that applications "should normally be refused"  as  a
    mandatory requirement.

 3. The decision of the FtT is set aside, and stands only as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

 4. It is appropriate under section 12 of the 2007 Act, and under  Practice
    Statement 7.2, to remit to the FtT for a fresh hearing.  The  member(s)
    of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include Judge Skehan.

 5. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

 6. The date of this determination is to be taken as the date it is  issued
    to parties.

        Hugh Macleman

      UT Judge Macleman      Date: 28 August 2020



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.





