
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12575/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Iac (Priory      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Courts)                              |                                     |
|On 3 June 2019                       |On 12 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                               Mrs Ranjit Kaur
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Appearances:
For the Appellant:     Mr Thathall, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national  of  India,  date  of  birth  26  June  1957,
    appealed against the Respondent's  decision,  dated  19  May  2018,  to
    refuse leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2.   Her appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Taylor  (the  Judge),
    who dismissed the appeal on 9 October 2018.  Permission to  appeal  was
    given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Swaney on 22 November 2018.

3.   The judge said in granting permission, at paragraph 3

         "The judge has focused on whether or not the Appellant is a 'family
         member'.  Arguably this approach is flawed, as the question  to  be
         answered is whether or not the Appellant enjoys  family  life  with
         her son, daughter-in-law and grandchildren.  It  is  not  necessary
         for the Appellant to be a 'parent' for  the  purposes  of  enjoying
         family life and she is plainly a member of her son's  family.   The
         judge has not made reference to the guidance on how  the  existence
         of family life is established between  family  members  other  than
         spouse/partner and minor children (Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA  Civ
         31)."

4.   I conclude, having read  the  judge's  decision,  that  the  judge  had
    failed correctly to address the relationship between the Appellant,  as
    a grandparent and the children as well as with  her  own  children.  In
    doing so the judge had failed  to  consider  the  significance  of  the
    impact of her being required to leave, both on the family and  for  her
    own part in being separated from her grandchildren.

5.    In these circumstances I concluded the  appropriate  course  was  that
    the matter should be entirely remade. Trying to save findings  of  fact
    would impede an effective reconsideration of the matter.



DECISION

The appeal is allowed to the extent that  the  matter  is  returned  to  the
First-tier Tribunal.  The Original Tribunal's decision does not stand.



ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity order was sought nor is one was required.



DIRECTIONS

1.   List for hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   All documentation relied upon to be updated not  less  than  ten  clear
    working days before the resumed hearing.

3.   Any other directions to be sought in the First-tier Tribunal.

4.   List at Nottingham  Justice  Centre,  not  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge I F Taylor.



[pic]

Signed                                  Date 24 June 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


