

         [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/12947/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 26 February 2019                        |On 19 March 2019                 |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                          THE HON. MRS JUSTICE LANG
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     B A
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, Counsel, instructed by OTS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings. This direction has been made in order to protect the
    Appellant's child from serious harm, having regard to the interests  of
    justice and the principle of proportionality.




                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Rourke ("the judge"), promulgated on 28 November 2018,
    in which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's
    refusal of his human rights claim.

 2. The Appellant, a national of Bangladesh, arrived in the United  Kingdom
    in August 2008 as a visitor. He subsequently overstayed. On 9 May  2011
    he made an  application  to  the  Respondent  for  a  No  Time  Limited
    confirmation of indefinite leave to  remain  in  this  country.  In  so
    doing, the Appellant used a passport  issued  in  another  individual's
    identity and which contained a fraudulent stamp.  This  deception  went
    undetected and he obtained the endorsement in a new passport issued  in
    this false identity.

 3. In  October  2011,  the  Appellant  made  another  application  to  the
    Respondent on the same basis, claiming that his previous  passport  had
    been lost. Again, his dishonesty was not uncovered.

 4. On 30 April 2013 the Appellant then applied  for  naturalisation  as  a
    British citizen, relying on his dishonest  obtaining  and  use  of  the
    documentation described above. In  considering  this  application,  the
    Respondent sought further information. In light of this, the use of the
    fraudulent documents was finally detected and on 29 November  2013  the
    naturalisation application was refused on bad character grounds.

 5. In March 2014 the Appellant took  the  step  of  instructing  his  then
    representatives  to  submit  a  Pre-Action  Protocol  letter   to   the
    Respondent, alleging that the refusal of the application was  unlawful.
    Some months later the Respondent confirmed that  the  original  refusal
    was being maintained.

 6. The Appellant then changed tack and in April 2015 he  made  a  separate
    application  for   leave   to   remain   on   human   rights   grounds.
    Notwithstanding  what  had  occurred  in  respect   of   the   previous
    applications already  described,  he  used  the  same  false  identity.
    Unsurprisingly, that application was refused.

 7. At some stage the Appellant had also used the false  documents  in  his
    possession to apply for a driving licence.

 8. On 24 August 2015 the Appellant was arrested on suspicion of committing
    offences relating to the use of the documents. On 30 November  2015  he
    was convicted on a guilty plea to two  counts  of  possessing  identity
    documents with  intent,  contrary  to  section  4(1)  of  the  Identity
    Documents Act 2010 and, on 16 February 2016, he  was  sentenced  to  16
    months' imprisonment.

 9. By virtue of section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 and the custodial
    sentence imposed, the Respondent was  obliged  to  make  a  deportation
    order against the Appellant. A decision to  deport  the  Appellant  was
    made on 11 March 2016, following by the order itself on 26  October  of
    that  year.  Representations  from   the   Appellant   asserting   that
    deportation would  contravene  his  Article  8  rights  were  initially
    refused and certified by the Respondent pursuant to section 94B of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002"). A challenge
    to this was lodged and, following the judgment of the Supreme Court  in
    Kiarie  and  Byndloss  [2017]  UKSC  42,  the  original  decision   was
    withdrawn. The Appellant made further submissions  on  Article  8  (the
    last of these dated 25 May 2017) and on 4 October 2017  the  Respondent
    finally produced the refusal of the human rights claim which led to the
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

10. During the course of most of the events set  out  above,  two  material
    changes in the Appellant's personal circumstances occurred.  First,  in
    September 2012 he married SB, a British citizen. Second, in July  2013,
    SB gave birth to a daughter, A. She too is British.

11. The Appellant's family circumstances in the United Kingdom  underpinned
    the human rights  claim  presented  to  the  Respondent.  Evidence  was
    provided to indicate that SB and A had  certain  medical  problems.  In
    particular, it was said that A suffered from eczema and  mental  health
    difficulties. Both of these were connected,  to  a  greater  or  lesser
    extent, to the Appellant's immigration predicament.




The Respondent's refusal of the human rights claim

12. The Respondent noted the Appellant's offending  history  and  concluded
    that he fell within paragraph 398(c) of  the  Immigration  Rules  ("the
    Rules"). It was acknowledged that there was "some degree" of a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship between the Appellant and A. There
    was an express acceptance in the reasons for  refusal  letter  that  it
    would be "unduly harsh" for A to go and live  in  Bangladesh  with  the
    Appellant. However, it was said that she could be  separated  from  him
    without such a consequence. Therefore, paragraph 399(a)(b) of the Rules
    could not be met.

13. The Respondent accepted that the Appellant had a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with SB, although because  that  relationship  was  formed
    when the Appellant was in the United Kingdom unlawfully he  was  caught
    be paragraph 399(b)(i)  of  the  Rules  and  could  not  rely  on  that
    provision at all.

14. The Respondent concluded, with  reference  to  paragraph  399A  of  the
    Rules, that any private life the Appellant might have could not provide
    a route to success because of his unlawful status in this  country  and
    the absence of  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  reintegration  into
    Bangladeshi society.

15. Finally, having considered medical evidence submitted by the Appellant,
    the Respondent took the  view  that  there  were  no  "very  compelling
    circumstances over and above" those contained in paragraphs 399(a)  and
    399(b).

16. This was the factual context in which the judge came  to  consider  the
    Appellant's appeal.



Relevant legal framework

17. The core legal framework applicable to the  Appellant's  appeal  before
    the judge included the following.

18. Paragraphs 398 - 399A of the Rules state:

          398. "Where a person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
          contrary to the UK's obligations under Article  8  of  the  Human
          Rights Convention, and

          (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
          public good and in the public interest  because  they  have  been
          convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to  a
          period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

          (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
          public good and in the public interest  because  they  have  been
          convicted of an offence for which they have been sentenced  to  a
          period of imprisonment of less than  4  years  but  at  least  12
          months; or

          (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to the
          public good and in the public interest because, in  the  view  of
          the Secretary of State, their offending has caused  serious  harm
          or  they  are  a  persistent  offender  who  shows  a  particular
          disregard for the law,

          the Secretary of State in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
          whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it  does  not,  the
          public interest in deportation will only be outweighed  by  other
          factors where there are very compelling  circumstances  over  and
          above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.




          399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c) applies
         if -

          (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
          with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

          (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

          (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least  the
          7  years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
          decision; and in either case

          (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the country
          to which the person is to be deported; and

          (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain  in  the  UK
          without the person who is to be deported; or

          (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a
          partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or  settled  in
          the UK, and

          (i) the relationship  was  formed  at  a  time  when  the  person
          (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and  their  immigration  status
          was not precarious; and

          (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner  to  live  in  the
          country to which  the  person  is  to  be  deported,  because  of
          compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
          paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

          (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in  the
          UK without the person who is to be deported.




          399A. This  paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
        applies if -

          (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most  of
      his life; and

          (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

          (c) there would be very significant obstacles to his  integration
          into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."

19. Sections 117A-D NIAA 2002 set out in  primary  legislation  the  public
    interest considerations which  a  court  or  tribunal  must  take  into
    account in an appeal based upon Article 8. The provisions of  relevance
    to the appeal before us state:

           117A Application of this Part

           (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is  required  to
           determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

           (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and  family
           life under Article 8, and

           (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the  Human
           Rights Act 1998.

           (2) In considering the public interest question,  the  court  or
           tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

           (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section  117B,
         and

          (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,  to
          the considerations listed in section 117C.

          (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question"  means  the
          question of whether an interference  with  a  person's  right  to
          respect for private and family life is  justified  under  Article
          8(2).



          117C Article 8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
          foreign criminals

          (1) The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
    interest.

          (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
          the  greater  is  the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
          criminal.

          (3) In the case of a foreign criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
          sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,  the
          public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception  1  or
          Exception 2 applies.

          (4) Exception 1 applies where-

          (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom  for  most
        of C's life,

          (b) C  is  socially  and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
      Kingdom, and

          (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's  integration
          into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

          (5) Exception 2 applies where C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
          relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine   and
          subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the
          effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly
          harsh.

          (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
          period of  imprisonment  of  at  least  four  years,  the  public
          interest requires deportation unless there  are  very  compelling
          circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and
          2.

          (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be  taken
          into account where a court or tribunal is considering a  decision
          to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason
          for the decision was  the  offence  or  offences  for  which  the
          criminal has been convicted.




          117D Interpretation of this Part

          (1) In this Part-

          "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human
      Rights;

          "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18  and
         who-

          (a) is a British citizen, or

          (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period  of
          seven years or more;

          "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

          (a) is a British citizen, or

          (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the  meaning  of
          the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).

          (2) In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

          (a) who is not a British citizen,

          (b) who has been convicted in the United Kingdom of  an  offence,
      and

          (c) who-

          (i) has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12
        months.

20. The leading case on the meaning of "unduly harsh" with paragraph 399(a)
    and section 117C(5) NIAA 2002 is  KO  (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  53  ("KO
    (Nigeria)"). At paragraph 23  of  his  judgment  with  whom  the  other
    Justices agreed), Lord Carnwath stated:

           "On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh"  seems  clearly
           intended  to  introduce   a   higher   hurdle   than   that   of
           "reasonableness" under section 117B(6), taking  account  of  the
           public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals. Further
           the word "unduly" implies an element of comparison.  It  assumes
           that there is a "due" level of  "harshness",  that  is  a  level
           which may be acceptable or justifiable in the relevant  context.
           "Unduly" implies something going beyond that level. The relevant
           context is that set by  section  117C(1),  that  is  the  public
           interest in the deportation of foreign criminals. One is looking
           for a degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily be
           involved for any child faced with the deportation of  a  parent.
           What it does  not  require  in  my  view  (and  subject  to  the
           discussion of the cases in the next section) is a  balancing  of
           relative levels of severity of the parent's offence, other  than
           is inherent in the distinction drawn by the  section  itself  by
           reference to length of sentence. Nor (contrary to  the  view  of
           the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the
           Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 932, [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras 55,
           64)  can  it  be  equated  with  a  requirement  to  show  "very
           compelling reasons". That would be in effect  to  replicate  the
           additional test applied  by  section  117C(6)  with  respect  to
           sentences of four years or more."

The judge's decision

21. Having  provided  a  summary  of  the  Respondent's  case  against  the
    Appellant at [3] and then making an initial reference to  KO  (Nigeria)
    at [8], the judge sets  out  two  sections  of  his  decision  entitled
    "Undisputed Facts" and  "Disputed  Facts".  The  former,  at  [9]-[10],
    summarises the accepted immigration and offending history. The  latter,
    at [11]-[18] relates to contested evidence provided by  the  Appellant,
    SB, and two supporting witnesses.

22. The respective submissions  of  the  two  representatives  (Mr  Collins
    appearing for the Appellant, as he does before  us)  are  laid  out  in
    detail at [19]-[20]. It is clear that the focus of the Appellant's case
    before the judge was very much on  A's  circumstances  and  whether  it
    would be unduly harsh for her to be separated from the Appellant.

23. The section entitled  "Findings  of  Fact"  begins,  by  way  of  self-
    direction, with  another  reference  to  KO  (Nigeria),  in  particular
    paragraph 23 of Lord Carnwath's judgment, cited above. An extract  from
    the specific factual analysis and conclusions of the Upper Tribunal  in
    the case of  appellant  KO  himself  is  then  quoted,  followed  by  a
    confirmatory direction that the focus is on the child (in this case, A)
    and a reference to Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74.

24. The judge's analysis of the evidence pertaining to A  is  contained  in
    [23]. He reiterates the stringency of the unduly harsh test, noting the
    factual matrix in one of the linked appeals in KO (Nigeria), and states
    that what is effectively required are circumstances which  are,  as  he
    puts it, "out of the ordinary".

25. The judge concludes that it would not be  unduly  harsh  for  A  to  be
    separated from the Appellant as a result of his deportation.

26. In summary form, the reasons provided for this are as  follows.  First,
    the fact that SB would have to care for A as a single mother  following
    the Appellant's deportation could not be considered as something out of
    the ordinary. In the judge's view, this scenario would be "routine".

27. Second, A's eczema was  subject  to  treatment,  was  not  particularly
    serious,  and,  even  if  exacerbated  initially  by  the   Appellant's
    departure, would be likely to reduce over time. Any mental problems  on
    A's part would, in the judge's view, follow a similar path.

28. Third, the judge regarded SB's medical problems as  not  being  serious
    and clearly not a matter which would impede her ability to  look  after
    A.

29. The remainder of the judge's decision is taken up with an assessment of
    Article 8 outside the context of the Rules, in line with  the  approach
    set out in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC  60.  Various  factors  pertinent  to
    sections 117B and 117C NIAA 2002 are discussed. The only point of  note
    in the context of the appeal to us is the fact that A's best  interests
    are addressed in terms at [27(d)], wherein it is concluded  that  these
    lay  in  remaining  with  the  Appellant.  Notwithstanding  these  best
    interests, the "very strong public interest" in deporting the Appellant
    outweighed all other considerations.

30. The appeal was duly dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

31. The grounds of appeal confirm that the "core issue"  before  the  judge
    and in respect of the challenge against his  decision  relates  to  the
    question of whether it would be unduly harsh to  separate  A  from  the
    Appellant.

32. The first ground asserts that the judge failed to  make  a  finding  of
    fact as to the particular nature of the relationship between A and  the
    Appellant. It is said that there was a very close bond.

33. The second  ground  attacks  the  judge's  reasoning  in  [23]  of  his
    decision. Specifically, is said that he: wrongly sought to compare  the
    facts of one of the appeals within  KO  (Nigeria)  with  those  of  the
    present case; failed to address material  aspects  of  the  Appellant's
    case; failed to provide adequate reasons in respect of medical evidence
    relating to A; failed to deal with a letter from A's school at all; and
    erred when considering certain  factors  outside  the  context  of  the
    Rules.

34. In a  decision  dated  27  December  2018,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Blundell granted permission to appeal. In his view it was arguable that
    the judge may have applied a form of  exceptionality  when  considering
    the question of undue harshness and  may  then  have  wrongly  examined
    relevant factors in isolation from one another.



The hearing before us

35. Both Mr Collins and Mr Wilding provided helpful skeleton arguments  and
    we are grateful for their overall assistance in this appeal.

36. As re-stated in paragraph 5 of his skeleton argument and  in  his  oral
    submissions,  Mr  Collins  concentrated  exclusively  on  the   judge's
    approach to A's circumstances and  the  unduly  harsh  assessment.  His
    challenge was very much in line with the grounds of appeal.

37. Particular emphasis was placed upon the following points:

              i. there had been inadequate analysis of evidence relating  to
                 A's mental health and her school;

             ii. there was a failure to  make  a  specific  finding  on  the
                 closeness of the relationship between the Appellant and A.

38. Consistently with the way in which the Appellant's case has been argued
    throughout the appellate process, Mr Collins  did  not  suggest  to  us
    that, as an alternative to the  unduly  harsh  assessment,  there  were
    "very compelling circumstances  over  and  above"  those  described  in
    paragraph 399(a) and/or 399(b) of the Rules. Nor did  he  contend  that
    the Appellant was able to satisfy paragraph 399A.

39. Acknowledging that the structure of the judge's  decision  was  not  as
    clear as it might have been, Mr Wilding urged us  to  view  it  in  the
    round. All relevant evidence had been considered and it was open to the
    judge to conclude that A's situation would become "more  settled"  over
    time. Whilst the judge did not make a specific finding on the  strength
    of the relationship between the Appellant and A, there was  nothing  to
    indicate that he did not assess that bond as being close. He  submitted
    that there was enough  in  [23]  to  show  that  the  impact  on  A  of
    separation had been adequately considered.

40. In reply, Mr Collins submitted that it was difficult  to  see  how  the
    judge could have concluded that A would  feel  "more  settled"  at  any
    point. In addition, the judge had failed to adequately resolve what had
    been described by the judge as the "disputed facts".

Decision on error of law

41. Although it is right that the judge's  decision  would  have  benefited
    from  a  clearer  structure,  having   considered   it   sensibly   and
    holistically, we conclude that he has not committed any material errors
    of law. Our reasons for this ultimate conclusion are as follows.

42. In our view, the judge correctly directed himself in law to the central
    issue in the appeal, namely whether it would be unduly harsh for  A  to
    be separated from the Appellant. It is clear from [22(i)-(iv)] that the
    judge accurately distilled the  essential  principles  set  out  in  KO
    (Nigeria), with particular reference to the  stringent  nature  of  the
    unduly harsh test and the focus being on the child in question.

43. There is no merit in the  suggestion  that  the  judge  relied  on  the
    particular factual circumstances underlying two of the appeals  in  the
    KO (Nigeria) litigation and in some  way  used  these  as  a  benchmark
    against which to assess the Appellant's case. We see the references  in
    [22(ii)] and [23(i)] as simply  a  factual  illustration  of  the  high
    threshold imposed by the unduly harsh test.

44. The judge's use of the phrase, "out of the ordinary"  to  describe  the
    type of circumstances required to be shown  in  order  to  satisfy  the
    stringent threshold is unobjectionable. It sits well enough  with  Lord
    Carnwath's exposition of what is meant by unduly harsh in paragraph  23
    of KO (Nigeria). We note too his Lordship's approval  of  the  guidance
    provided by the Upper Tribunal in MK  (Sierra  Leone)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC):

         "....'unduly   harsh'   does   not   equate   with   uncomfortable,
         inconvenient, undesirable, or merely difficult. Rather, it poses  a
         considerably more elevated  threshold.  'Harsh'  in  this  context,
         denotes something  severe,  or  bleak.  It  is  the  antithesis  of
         pleasant or comfortable. Furthermore, the addition  of  the  adverb
         'unduly' raises an already elevated standard still higher."

45. The judge's phraseology could perhaps be substituted by,  for  example,
    "materially beyond the expected consequences", but that is in our  view
    a distinction without a difference. We are satisfied that the judge was
    not applying a test amounting to a  requirement  for  "very  compelling
    circumstances", which of course would be impermissible in light  of  KO
    (Nigeria).

46. We turn now to the more  particularised  elements  of  the  Appellant's
    challenge.

47. It is right that the judge has not  made  an  express  finding  on  the
    strength of the relationship between the Appellant and A. It would have
    been better if this had  been  done.  However,  having  regard  to  the
    decision as a whole, we agree  with  Mr  Wilding's  submission  to  the
    effect that there is no indication that the close bond alleged  was  in
    fact  being  rejected.  We  note  the  judge's   references   to   that
    relationship at [11], [17] and [20], in addition to the reported "close
    relationship" between the Appellant and A as stated in the letter  from
    the Mental Health Practitioner at 84 of the Appellant's bundle and  the
    "very strong bond" referred to in the school letter at 85-86  (evidence
    which, as we find below, the judge clearly took account of).  It  would
    be strange indeed  if  the  judge  had  not  had  this  aspect  of  the
    Appellant's case  well  in  mind  when  undertaking  the  unduly  harsh
    assessment.

48. Further, at [23(ii)b] the judge states that the Appellant's deportation
    would "no doubt  be  upsetting  for  the  child",  thus  indicating  an
    acknowledgement  of  the  close  relationship  between  the  two.   The
    conclusion at [27(iii)d] that A's best interests lay in remaining  with
    her father reinforces our view that the judge had the parent/child bond
    in  mind  when  undertaking  the  task  of  evaluating  the  impact  of
    separation.

49. We make it clear that it has not been suggested by Mr Collins that  the
    nature of the relationship was sufficiently strong, in and  of  itself,
    to require a conclusion that separation would be unduly harsh.  On  the
    evidence  before  the  judge,  such  a  contention  would  have   faced
    insurmountable obstacles.

50. The judge was referred (as we have been) to medical evidence  at  80-84
    of  the  Appellant's  bundle.  80-81  are  letters  from  a  Consultant
    Dermatologist, Dr P Goldsmith. In essence, her evidence  was  that  A's
    atopic eczema had been exacerbated and much more difficult  to  control
    during the Appellant's absence whilst he served his custodial sentence.
    There was a causal link between A's stress and the skin  condition.  It
    was, in Dr Goldsmith's view, "important"  to  keep  A  and  her  father
    together.

51. In our view the judge has dealt adequately with this evidence.  It  was
    open to him to say that eczema is not uncommon (although the nature  of
    the condition could of course be more  or  less  severe  in  any  given
    case). It is clear from [23(ii)b] that he has accurately summarised  Dr
    Goldsmith's  opinion  that  A's  then  temporary  separation  from  the
    Appellant had exacerbated the eczema. The judge was  entitled  to  take
    account of the absence of up to date medical evidence  (Dr  Goldsmith's
    letters were, by the time of the hearing, over a year old) and the fact
    that the condition was not mentioned in the GP's consultation record at
    97 of the bundle.

52.  The  judge's  reference  to  eczema   not   being   "life-threatening,
    excessively debilitating, or necessarily long-term  in  children"  does
    not represent the imposition of an impermissibly high threshold.  On  a
    fair reading of the passage as  a  whole,  it  was  simply  one  factor
    amongst a number and is to be seen in the context of  the  guidance  on
    what is meant by unduly harsh provided in KO (Nigeria).

53. Turning  to  the  evidence  on  A's  mental  health  at  83-84  of  the
    Appellant's bundle, it is quite clear that the judge  took  account  of
    this  in  [23(ii)b].   He   expressly   acknowledges   that   emotional
    difficulties on A's part were, much like the eczema, exacerbated by the
    Appellant's absence. We note that the evidence did not suggest  that  A
    had an enduring mental health condition.

54. As it relates to A's overall wellbeing, we address the school letter at
    this point. This evidence, at 85-86 of the Appellant's bundle,  is  not
    dealt with in detail by the judge. Having said that, he clearly  refers
    to it in [23(ii)b] and notes, accurately, that the Appellant's  absence
    at the time resulted in her being unsettled at school. We are satisfied
    that the judge took adequate account of the substance of this evidence.

55. In respect of A's physical and emotional wellbeing, the judge took  the
    view that her symptoms would, as had occurred in the  past,  reduce  or
    cease altogether once her situation  became  "more  settled"  after  an
    initial period of upset. Mr Collins takes issue with  this,  submitting
    that it amounts to excessive speculation.

56. We disagree. It will only be in very rare cases that a judge  can  ever
    be sure about future events. To an extent, there  is  almost  always  a
    degree   of   speculation   involved   when   undertaking   prospective
    assessments, whether that be in relation to protection claims or,  like
    here, the separation of a child from her father.

57. In our view, when making that judgment as to A's future situation,  the
    judge did, and was fully entitled to, take into account  the  following
    factors: single-parent families are relatively common; SB would be able
    to avail herself of some assistance from friends  and  family,  as  had
    occurred in the past; the nature of the health issues was  not  severe;
    A's relatively young age; the fact that SB's own health issues were  no
    impediment to her ability to care for A; and the acknowledged  distress
    caused to A by the removal of her father from her life.

58. It follows from we have said that the assertion that the  judge  failed
    to assess the various factors on a cumulative basis is misconceived. It
    is  sufficiently  clear  that  everything  had  been  properly  brought
    together.

59. Standing back from our analysis of particular aspects  of  the  judge's
    decision and the challenges proffered against them, we conclude that in
    light of his sustainable consideration of the evidence  and  the  legal
    test which he correctly applied thereto, he was entitled to  find  that
    the separation of A and the Appellant would not be  unduly  harsh.  The
    Appellant could not therefore succeed in his  appeal  by  reference  to
    either paragraph 399(a) of the Rules or section 117C(5) NIAA 2002.

60. We reiterate the fact  that  it  has  never  been  suggested  that  the
    Appellant  could  have  succeeded  in  the  absence  of  a   favourable
    conclusion on the unduly harsh assessment.

61. Thus, the judge was bound to have dismissed the appeal.

62. As there are no material errors of law in the  decision,  we  too  must
    dismiss the Appellant's appeal.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and  the  Appellant's  appeal
to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed      [pic]            Date: 12 March 2019

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

