
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/12666/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15 March 2018                         |On 11 May 2018                    |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mabel Victoria Stewart
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Waithe of Counsel instructed by Okafor & Co.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Clarke promulgated on 22 February 2017.


2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the Appellant and Ms  Stewart  is  the  Respondent,  for  the  sake  of
    consistency with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall
    hereafter refer to the Secretary of State  as  the  Respondent  and  Ms
    Stewart as the Appellant.


3.   The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 3  September  1954.   She
    entered the United Kingdom on 10 October 1998 with a visitor visa valid
    until 10 April 1999.  It appears that she was granted further leave  to
    remain on 11 May 2000 until 31 May 2001.  On 9 July 2012 the  Appellant
    made an application for leave to remain on the basis of long  residence
    claiming to have resided in the United Kingdom for fourteen years.  The
    application was refused on 27 July 2013 with no right of appeal.  On  2
    October 2015 the Appellant was  served  with  a  'section  120  notice'
    advising her of her immigration status and liability to  detention  and
    removal from the United Kingdom.  In response, by way of a letter  from
    her representatives dated 27 October 2015, the Appellant raised  issues
    in respect of Article 8 in particular with regard to  her  relationship
    with Mr Keith Moseley.  It was said that the Appellant was in a 'common-
    law relationship' with Mr Moseley. Mr Moseley was born on  21  February
    1949 in Barbados.  I will return to the issue  of  his  status  in  due
    course.


4.   The Appellant's representations were treated as a human  rights  claim,
    which was refused for reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter
    ('RFRL') dated 17 November 2015.  The RFRL gives consideration  to  the
    Appellant's  application  pursuant  to  the  Immigration   Rules   with
    reference to the 'partner' rules  under  Appendix  FM,  and  also  with
    reference  to  the  private  life  pursuant  to  paragraph   276ADE(1).
    Consideration was also given to whether or not there  were  exceptional
    circumstances in the case.  It was determined that there were  no  such
    circumstances to warrant the grant  of  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    provisions of the Rules.


5.   In considering 'family life' pursuant to  Appendix  FM  the  Respondent
    acknowledged that the Appellant  met  the  'suitability'  requirements.
    However,  the  Respondent  was  not  satisfied  in   respect   of   the
    requirements of either GEN.1.2 of Appendix FM with regard to the nature
    of the relationship with Mr Moseley, or the 'eligibility' requirements.
    In particular the Respondent did not  accept  that  the  Appellant  had
    provided sufficient evidence to show  that  Mr  Moseley  was  either  a
    British citizen,  or  otherwise  present  and  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom, or in the United Kingdom with refugee leave  or  as  a  person
    with humanitarian protection.


6.   Under paragraph 276ADE(1) the Respondent  did  not  accept  that  there
    would be very significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration into
    Jamaica if she were required to leave the United  Kingdom  because  she
    had been born and raised there and spent the  first  44  years  of  her
    life, including in particular her formative years, living there  before
    coming to the  United  Kingdom.   It  was  considered  that  she  would
    therefore be familiar with the social and cultural aspects of  life  in
    Jamaica.


7.   The Appellant appealed to the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber.   The
    appeal was allowed for reasons set out in the decision of Judge Clarke.


8.   The Respondent applied for permission to appeal which  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on 6 September  2017.   The  grant  of
    permission observes that the grounds argue that the Judge did not  have
    evidence that would justify finding that the  Appellant's  partner  had
    the required status in the UK.  This  was  considered  'arguable'.  The
    grant of permission to appeal comments:

    "This was a  point  on  which  the  Judge  should  have  obtained  more
    information both legally and factually.  It may be that the Appellant's
    partner can demonstrate a right to reside  but  it  is  an  area  where
    proceeding on limited information is inadvisable".


9.   It was indeed the status  of  the  Appellant's  partner  that  was  the
    subject of particular focus before the First-tier Tribunal - and is now
    in turn the focus before the Upper Tribunal.


10.  Nonetheless, it is to be noted that the Respondent did not  accept  the
    fact of the claimed relationship between the Appellant and Mr  Moseley,
    irrespective of his status: see RFRL  at  paragraphs  12  to  17.   The
    Respondent's decision in this regard was based in part on the fact that
    notwithstanding the claim that the Appellant had been in a relationship
    akin to marriage with Mr Moseley since 2003, neither  the  relationship
    nor Mr Moseley had featured in the application for leave to remain made
    by the Appellant in 2012.


11.  In  the  current  application  it  was  said  in  the  representatives'
    covering letter of 27 October 2015 that Mr Moseley "is a person present
    and settled here in the United Kingdom".  However,  the  only  document
    submitted in respect of his possible status was a copy  of  a  Barbados
    passport issued by the Barbados High Commission in  London  on  20  May
    2003 valid until 19 May 2008.  There was nothing in the  passport  that
    indicated that the Appellant had been granted any particular status  in
    the United Kingdom.  It was not pleaded in the covering letter that  he
    had acquired British citizenship at any stage.


12.  In  support  of  the  application  Mr  Moseley  provided  a  supporting
    statement by way of a letter dated 15 October 2015 (Respondent's bundle
    before the First-tier Tribunal at Annex C1).  He refers therein to  his
    relationship with the Appellant, and also to various  family  networks.
    However, the letter is  silent  with  regard  to  his  own  immigration
    history and status.


13.  The RFRL, at paragraph 20, identified that the only evidence  presented
    in support of status was Mr Moseley's  expired  Barbados  passport.  On
    that basis it was not accepted that the Appellant  had  shown  that  Mr
    Moseley  had  the  requisite  status   to   satisfy   the   eligibility
    requirements of ELTRP.1.2.


14.  On appeal Mr Moseley provided a witness statement  in  support  of  the
    Appellant's case which again primarily focused on  the  nature  of  his
    relationship with the Appellant and their respective  circumstances  in
    the United Kingdom.  Little was said as to his immigration status:  the
    statement offers no more than the following: "That I have been residing
    in the United Kingdom since 1960." (paragraph 2).


15.  During the hearing, however, it appears that he gave his date of  entry
    to the United Kingdom as being 1966. Paragraph 7 of the Decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal refers to  his  evidence  as  being  that  "he  was
    brought over to the UK from Barbados as a  child  by  an  aunt  on  her
    passport in 1966 when his country was a colony".


16.  During the course of discussion and argument before me, Mr Waithe,  who
    had also appeared before the First-tier Tribunal, acknowledged that  Mr
    Moseley had indeed referred to 1966 as being his date of entry  to  the
    United Kingdom during the proceedings before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Although Mr Waithe accepts that the witness said this, he suggests that
    the witness must have been in error: the Appellant now seeks to produce
    a further document that suggests that Mr Moseley may have  entered  the
    United Kingdom in 1961.  The document is an expired  Barbados  passport
    in the name of Velda Moseley issued in London on 19 July 1972.  At page
    31 of the passport there is an endorsement to indicate that the  bearer
    had previously travelled on 3 May 1961 on a previously  held  passport.
    Mr Waithe indicated that he was now instructed that this was  the  aunt
    with whom the Appellant had come to the  United  Kingdom,   and,  there
    being no other date of travel indicated on the document, thatit was  to
    be inferred that Mr Mosley had entered on 3 May 1961.


17.  Be that as it may, in my judgement this 'new' evidence as  to  possible
    entry in 1961, is not pertinent at the 'error of law' stage.  Nor  does
    the new evidence in itself  establish Mr Moseley's  present  status  in
    the United Kingdom.


18.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out the evidence and her findings  in
    respect of the status of Mr Moseley at paragraphs 7-11 of her  Decision
    in the following terms:

         "7.  We had a  discussion  as  to  the  immigration  status  of  Mr
             Moseley.  He told us that he was brought over to the  UK  from
             Barbados as a child by an aunt on her passport  in  1966  when
             his country was a colony.  His parents  were  in  the  UK  and
             attained citizenship simply by entering  the  UK  and  he  was
             brought by an aunt.  He was told of his naturalisation by  the
             governor of Oxford prison in 1986.


         8.   The only identification he has is an old Barbadian passport  a
             copy of the relevant page is in the  Respondent's  bundle.   I
             heard of how he applied for his  citizenship  documents  again
             but there was a fire in the records department and the  papers
             were destroyed.


         9.   It is unfortunate that  I  was  not  provided  with  objective
             evidence as to the situation before the Immigration  Act  1971
             came into force for Barbadian nationals coming to  the  UK  as
             British subjects.


         10.  I referred to the definition section Rule 6 of the Immigration
             Rules during the course of the submissions and on reading what
             is 'settled status' I am satisfied that for  the  purposes  of
             this appeal Mr Moseley has settled status because he has lived
             in the UK continuously since  his  arrival  in  1966  and  not
             leaving to the UK at all since his arrival.  Rule 6 reads that
             the person must be free from any restriction on the period for
             which he may remain and he is ordinarily resident  in  the  UK
             without  having  entered  or  remained  in   breach   of   the
             immigration laws.


         11.  I accept that on a balance of probabilities Mr Moseley is most
             likely to be settled if not a British citizen."


19.  In my judgment the reasoning therein - to be fund at paragraph 10 -  is
    unsatisfactory.


20.  It is not remotely  determinative  of  either  citizenship  or  settled
    status that a person "has  lived  in  the  UK  continuously  since  his
    arrival" - even if that arrival were as long ago as 1966  (or  1960  or
    1961) - and has not left the country since arriving.  There may be many
    cases where individuals have remained without any sort of authority for
    substantial periods of time.  The mere remaining, or the mere presence,
    for substantial periods of time  is  not  reliably  indicative  of,  or
    sustainably determinative of status -  albeit  that  it  might  give  a
    strong foundation in an application for regularisation where necessary.


21.  I am satisfied that the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  on
    this point is unsustainable and thereby flawed to  an  extent  that  it
    amounts to an error of law.


22   The error in this regard was clearly material to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge essentially appears to  conclude
    that the Appellant met the requirements of Appendix FM on the basis  of
    the finding as to the status of Mr Moseley - as well as being satisfied
    in respect of the Appellant's relationship with  Mr  Moseley.  (I  note
    that the Judge's finding - "the Appellant and Mr Moseley have been in a
    relationship since around 2003" (paragraph 6) - is not challenged.)


23.  Moreover at paragraph 13 in stating "I would have  allowed  the  appeal
    outside the Immigration Rules ...", the Judge is plainly influenced  by
    her observation that Mr Moseley is "likely to be a British citizen".


24.  I do not accept that the Judge's error is 'saved'  by  the  very  brief
    consideration given to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) at paragraph 12  of  the
    Decision.  Reference  is  made  to  the  Appellant's  age  -  dubiously
    characterised as elderly at the age of only 62 -  and  the  absence  of
    family ties to Jamaica: in my judgment substantially  more  would  have
    needed to have  been  considered  in  this  regard  before  reaching  a
    satisfactorily sustainable conclusion as to 'very significant obstacles
    to integration'.


25.  It is to be noted that these proceedings have taken some time  to  come
    to this stage by reason of having previously been adjourned in December
    2017 in order to obtain further evidence.


26.  The appeal was listed before Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker on 8  December
    2017 and it was indicated that Mr  Moseley's  mother  had  two  British
    passports which were at  her  home  and  which  could  be  located  and
    submitted.  Directions were issued by  the  Tribunal  accordingly  that
    such documents and copies of the relevant pages of the  passports  were
    to be filed and served by 22 December 2017 - and  it  was  recorded  in
    this regard that the Respondent did not object to the production of the
    passports.  It was also said that the originals should be  produced  at
    the resumed hearing which in due course was listed  in  February  2018.
    It seems to me that it is reasonable to infer that what was in mind  at
    that stage was that the production of Mr Moseley's  mother's  passports
    might provide a quick and easy answer to the question of his own status
    such that any error on the part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  might
    be seen as ultimately not being material, and that it would be feasible
    to reach a satisfactory  resolution  in  the  proceedings  expediently.
    (Again I note that any 'new' evidence would not in itself  be  relevant
    to  identifying  an  error  of  law  -  albeit  might  be  relevant  to
    materiality of any error.)


27.  However it transpires that the documents thus produced pursuant to  the
    Direction did not greatly assist the Respondent in consideration of the
    status of Mr Moseley because they were  very  far  from  determinative.
    The documents were filed under cover of letter dated 18 December  2017;
    they included a valid and an expired British passport, as  well  as  Mr
    Moseley's birth certificate.  The current British  passport  gives  the
    bearer's name as 'Marjorie  Small';  the  expired  passport  which  was
    seemingly issued in the United Kingdom in February 1969 is in the  name
    'Marjorie Eudora Small Moseley'. This prompted the Respondent  to  seek
    further information from the  Appellant's  representatives:  there  has
    been produced an exchange  of  emails,  including  an  email  from  the
    Secretary of State seeking an adjournment of the listed  hearing  on  2
    February 2018.  That hearing was indeed  adjourned  until  the  present
    date.  In the meantime, under  cover  of  letter  dated  9  March  2018
    received at the Tribunal on 12 March 2018  some  further  documentation
    was provided on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  by  way  of  the  marriage
    certificate of Mr Moseley's mother to Mr Leon Small on 22 January  1966
    at the register office in Southwark.  It is suggested elsewhere that Mr
    Small is the Appellant's father.  Some national  insurance  records  in
    respect of Mr Moseley were also provided - but these do  not  establish
    either his immigration status or his nationality status.


28.  As things stood before me, the materials that  have  been  filed  since
    the  direction  of  Judge  Zucker  have  not  been  considered  by  the
    Respondent to be such as to warrant making any concession in the appeal
    as to Mr Moseley's status.


29.  Mr Waithe attended the hearing today armed with a  considerable  bundle
    of materials, in particular the Constitution of Barbados from which  he
    had initially wanted  to  try  and  demonstrate  that  the  Appellant's
    partner's status must be that of a British citizen.  Mr Wilding for his
    part has provided a copy of the Barbados  Independence  Act  1966,  and
    both parties have referred me to various provisions in the  Immigration
    Act 1971, in particular Section 2 and Schedule  2.   At  one  point  Mr
    Waithe also wanted to refer me to Schedule 1, but in due course it  was
    not necessary to give consideration to it.


30.  After very considerable exploration and discussion  of  the  issues  it
    became common ground that the reality was that considerably more  would
    be required by way  of  both  fact-finding  and  legal  submissions  to
    establish not only the potential legal framework within which it  might
    be shown that Mr Moseley had acquired some sort of status in the United
    Kingdom  -  or  indeed  British  citizenship  -  but  also  by  way  of
    establishing the relevant facts to support  any  such  contention.   As
    such, Mr Moseley' status not being readily demonstrable before  me,  it
    was common ground that the Tribunal could not conclude that the  errors
    on the part of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  could  be  said  to  be
    immaterial. It follows that the decision in the appeal requires  to  be
    set aside, and requires to be remade by way of a further hearing before
    a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal with all issues at large.


31.  In this context sight should not be lost of the fact that this  is  not
    Mr Moseley's appeal, but that of Ms Stewart.  Her circumstances, whilst
    interlinked  with  the  circumstances  of  Mr  Moseley,  have   further
    dimensions to them and it may well be that there  are  aspects  of  her
    case that require further consideration irrespective of any  conclusion
    that may be made in respect of Mr Moseley's position.  I do not wish in
    any way to be prescriptive as to the matters that should be  considered
    by the next Tribunal: however, in light of the discussions before me it
    may be helpful to set out something by way of  exploration  as  to  the
    matters that the parties are likely to wish to address - although it is
    ultimately up to the parties to present the case as they see  fit,  and
    in turn it is up to the next Judge to determine on what basis he or she
    may wish to evaluate and determine the appeal.


32.  Insofar as Mr Moseley's status may  continue  to  be  an  issue  -  see
    further below - it is to be noted that as  things  stand  there  is  an
    absence of any direct evidence that he currently enjoys any  particular
    grant of leave.  It follows that if he has a case at all it is  on  the
    basis of having acquired undocumented indefinite leave  to  remain,  or
    British citizenship by some means.  Matters are complicated by the fact
    that it is unclear as to at what point in time he might  be  considered
    possibly to have obtained British citizenship.


33.  In discussion of the Barbados Independence Act 1966,  it  was  accepted
    on the part of the Secretary of State that the Appellant  as  a  person
    born in Barbados prior  to  independence  would  immediately  prior  to
    independence have been a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies. At
    the point of independence,  pursuant  to  section  2  of  the  Barbados
    Independence Act 1966, the Appellant would have ceased  to  be  such  a
    citizen (section 2(2)) unless he  retained  citizenship  by  virtue  of
    section 3. There is presently no evidence to  suggest  that  he  was  a
    person who retained citizenship of the United Kingdom  and  Colonies  -
    the evidence points in the direction of  him  having  ceased  to  be  a
    citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies on 30 November 1966  and  to
    have become a citizen of Barbados on  that  day.   This  is  consistent
    with, and perhaps underscored by, the fact that he obtained a  Barbados
    passport in 2003.


34.  However even in this regard  it  is  suggested  that  he  obtained  the
    passport notwithstanding that he had at some  earlier  point  renounced
    his citizenship of Barbados.  But  the  evidence  for  renouncement  is
    unclear. Moreover, Article 7 of the  Constitution  of  Barbados,  which
    deals  with  renunciation  of  citizenship,  suggests  that  any   such
    renunciation will not take effect if the renouncer fails to  acquire  a
    new citizenship within six months.  The fact  that  the  Appellant  was
    able to obtain a Barbados passport after his supposed  renunciation  of
    citizenship might be thought powerfully to indicate  that  he  did  not
    obtain any alternative citizenship - and therefore  did  not  become  a
    British citizen.  In this regard - as noted  in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal - it was Mr Moseley's understanding that  he  might
    have become a British citizen by way of naturalisation in 1986.


35.  Careful consideration may need  to  be  given  to  the  ways  in  which
    citizenship can be acquired under the British Nationality  Act  1981  -
    and indeed under the preceding legislation if it is suggested  that  Mr
    Moseley might have acquired his citizenship at any time  prior  to  the
    commencement of that Act in 1983.  It would appear on its face that the
    relevant provisions might be section  6  (naturalisation),  section  10
    (upon renunciation of  being  a  citizen  of  the  United  Kingdom  and
    Colonies), and section 11 (acquisition at  commencement).   Section  10
    appears on its face to be an unlikely provision in circumstances  where
    during the pendency of the 1981 Act the Appellant does  not  appear  to
    have been a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies having ceased to
    be so in 1966.


36.  Consideration may perhaps also have to be given not only  to  the  fact
    that Mr Moseley obtained a Barbados passport at a time when  he  claims
    he  had  acquired  British  citizenship  and  renounced  his   Barbados
    citizenship, but to the fact that the Appellant made an application  in
    2012 without referring to Mr Moseley - notwithstanding having been in a
    relationship with him, on the Judge's findings,  for  nine  years.   It
    might be thought - and it may require  some  exploration  -  that  this
    suggests that in 2012 there  was  some  considerable  doubt  as  to  Mr
    Moseley's status such that it was not considered appropriate  to  apply
    for leave as his partner.


37.  The matter is complex. In the circumstances the  hope  and  expectation
    is that the case will be listed appropriately.


38.  Since the giving of the  above  reasons  there  has  been  considerable
    focus in the media on  the  so-called  Windrush  generation  and  their
    children. The Secretary of State has made announcements to  the  effect
    that such persons who may have acquired rights to remain in the UK  but
    have not regularised their status, or who  have  struggled  to  provide
    proof, may have  their  cases  reviewed  by  special  task  force  duly
    appointed. It may be that Mr Moseley falls  to  benefit  from  such  an
    approach. No doubt the Appellant's representatives  will  be  alert  to
    this, and will act accordingly. Of course in the event that this  leads
    to a favourable resolution of Mr Moseley's status, the  Respondent  may
    wish to review the decision  in  the  Appellant's  case.  The  Tribunal
    should be kept informed by the parties of any relevant  developments  -
    particularly if it is to be suggested that the proceedings  before  the
    Tribunal should be adjourned in the meantime.


Notice of Decision

39.  There was material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The decision is set aside.


40.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with all issues at large by any Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Clarke.


41.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 8 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

