
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
hu/12577/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21 February 2018                        |On 14 March 2018                 |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                              mr oladayo okojie
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                  Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms U Dirie, Counsel instructed by Phil Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal P S Aujla
    dated 12 October 2017 which refused the Article 8  family  and  private
    life claim of the appellant.

 2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria and was born on 4 August 1971.

 3. The appellant came to the UK in 2009 with entry clearance as a  spouse.
    The couple had a daughter born on 24 March  2009.  The  marriage  broke
    down and the couple divorced on 8 June 2011. The appellant was  granted
    leave to remain in the UK to exercise access to his daughter  and  then
    on family grounds  until  15  January  2016.  On  7  October  2015  the
    appellant married a Turkish national  with  settlement.  The  appellant
    applied on 15 January 2016 for leave to remain as a spouse.

 4. The respondent refused the application in a  decision  dated  29  April
    2016, finding that the Immigration Rules concerning family and  private
    life were not met and that it was  proportionate  to  refuse  leave  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds outside the Immigration Rules.

 5. It is not disputed that the applicant indicated in the application  for
    leave that his wife was pregnant. The refusal letter shows this  to  be
    so on page 3 of  9,  under  the  heading  EX.1,  which  refers  to  the
    pregnancy and to the potential consequences of that for  the  appellant
    and the spouse.  The respondent's view was that it  was  reasonable  in
    all the circumstances for the child to be born in Turkey or Nigeria.

 6.  Following  the  refusal  the  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  On 24 September 2016 the  appellant's  wife  gave  birth  to
    their son.

 7. Also, in the period leading up to  the  appeal  hearing  listed  for  9
    October 2017, the appellant and  his  wife  separated.   The  appellant
    dealt with that in an appropriate manner,  indicating  in  his  witness
    statement that they had separated.  There was also a  letter  dated  19
    June 2017 from the wife at page 52 of the appellant's bundle before the
    First-tier Tribunal, stating that they were  separated  but  they  were
    working together to parent their child.

 8. By the time of the hearing before Judge Aujla on  9  October  2017  the
    appellant's evidence was that the couple had reunited and were again in
    a genuine and subsisting relationship.  Further,  it  is  not  disputed
    before me that the appellant's wife attended  the  hearing  before  the
    judge and it had been  thought  by  the  couple  that  she  would  give
    evidence both in support of the  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    between them and also regarding their child,  albeit,  as  recorded  at
    [15], she had not provided an updated witness statement.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal did not hear evidence from the spouse.  On  the
    basis of the appellant's oral evidence and the  written  evidence,  the
    judge did not accept that the couple  had  reunited  and  so  found  no
    genuine  and  subsisting  relationship;  see  [28]-[32].  The  Tribunal
    declined to consider the birth of the child as this was found to  be  a
    "new matter" precluded from consideration by s.85 of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002; see [34].

10. Before me, Mr Tarlow conceded for  the  respondent  that  a  procedural
    error occurred where, as set out in  the  grounds,  the  wife  was  not
    allowed to give evidence on the basis that she had not provided updated
    written evidence. Given that a procedural error occurred,  the  parties
    were also in agreement that the appeal should be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal to be re-made de novo.

11. The appellant also challenged the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to refuse to take into account the birth of the couple's child.  I also
    found this to be a material error on a point of law  where  the  proper
    procedure for establishing whether the Secretary of  State  would  give
    consent to the issue of the new child being  included  in  the  factual
    matrix before the Tribunal was not  followed.  It  is  to  some  degree
    understandable that this was so given  that  there  was  no  Presenting
    Officer at the hearing but this is not a situation where the respondent
    could be said to have refused consent as she was never  asked.  I  note
    the comments of the Tribunal in the case of Mahmud (S.85  NIAA  2002  -
    "new matters") [2017] UKUT 00488 at paragraph 31 that the  birth  of  a
    child "is likely" to be "a new matter".  It  appears  to  me  that  the
    circumstances  here  are  slightly  different,  however,  because   the
    imminence of the child's birth was, as above, known to the Secretary of
    State at the date of decision and it was not an entirely new matter.

12. For all of these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows
    errors on material points of law and it is set aside to be re-made, the
    re-making to take place in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside to be remade.

14. The remaking of the appeal will be in the First-tier Tribunal before  a
    judge other than Judge Aujla.

15. The Secretary of State is put on notice that the Tribunal requests  her
    to provide in writing within 28 days  of  the  date  of  this  decision
    whether or not she consents to the inclusion of the  appellant's  child
    as part of the evidence to be considered in the re-making of the appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal and provide written reasons to the First-
    tier Tribunal if consent is refused.



Signed: [pic]                                Date: 12 March 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
