
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12949/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th March 2019                             |On 22nd March 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           mrs ashrafsadat razavi
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Durance, promulgated on 7th September 2018, following  a  hearing
    on 20th August 2018.  In the determination,  the  judge  dismissed  the
    appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant  subsequently  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran, was born on 13th February 1982, and
    is a female.  She appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    refusing her application, dated 4th July 2017 to join  her  husband  in
    the UK, [AA], the refusal decision being dated 21st September 2017.

The Basis of Refusal

 3. The basis of refusal by the Respondent is that in her application,  the
    Appellant stated that she had never travelled to  the  United  Kingdom,
    which was untrue, and she had been encountered at UK Border Control  on
    13th September 2013, where she presented with a passport  and  a  false
    name.  On 3rd October 2013, she was encountered at Dunkirk,  trying  to
    enter  the  UK  illegally.   Therefore,  under  paragraph  320(11)  the
    application was rejected.

The Application of Devaseelan Principles

 4. A feature of this appeal is that there had been a previous decision  by
    Judge Heynes, where the Sponsor had argued that the Appellant had acted
    foolishly upon the advice of an unscrupulous lawyer.  Judge Heynes  was
    not impressed with this.  The conclusion by  the  judge  was  that  the
    Appellant had not told the truth and it was more probable than not that
    the Appellant had left Iran equipped with false documentation that  she
    attempted to use to enter the UK illegally (see paragraph 6).   It  had
    been argued before Judge Heynes that paragraph 320(11)  was  improperly
    imposed as the Appellant had acted in a moment of madness.   The  judge
    had concluded that the level of deception exercised  by  the  Appellant
    cast a  considerable  doubt  over  the  nature  of  their  relationship
    (paragraph 7).

The Judge's Findings

 5. At the hearing before Judge Durance, there was  a  statement  from  the
    sponsoring husband, to the effect that his wife had made some  mistakes
    in the past without having had any  bad  intentions.   She  was  a  lay
    person.  She wanted to be reunited with the sponsoring husband  in  the
    UK.  However, "My wife travelled to France to visit her friend.   While
    there, my wife was encouraged by her friend to enter UK in order to  be
    reunited with me" (see paragraph 10).  The judge was not impressed with
    this attempt to excuse the behaviour of the Appellant.   Judge  Durance
    observed that the Appellant had on two occasions used a false  identity
    attempting to enter the UK  illegally  and  on  a  third  occasion  the
    Appellant was dishonest about her activity outside of  Iran  (paragraph
    13).

 6. Applying the principles in Devaseelan, the judge stated, before  giving
    his reasons for the decision himself, that the summary of the  previous
    Tribunal's conclusions were that  the  sole  issue  here  involved  the
    application of paragraph 320(11) of the Rules, because  all  the  other
    requirements of the Immigration Rules had been satisfied.  The previous
    judge had held that the discretionary power by the Secretary  of  State
    had been properly exercised.  The previous judge  had  also  held  that
    "Article 8 is not engaged" (paragraph 26).  In then proceeding to  give
    the "reasons" for his own decisions (see  paragraphs  27  to  37),  the
    judge went on to refer to the  fact  that  IJ  Heynes,  had  found  the
    Sponsor  to  be  an  unsatisfactory  witness   who   did   not   accept
    responsibility for fraudulent activity of his wife and that he  himself
    would also agree with that conclusion.

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge made arguable errors of
    law in failing to consider relevant facts in issue  when  carrying  out
    the balancing exercise in the consideration of Article  8.   The  judge
    also failed to note that paragraph 320(11)  is  discretionary  and  not
    mandatory.  He failed to give adequate reasons for refusing  to  accept
    the explanation given by the Sponsor (at paragraph 35).

 9. On 4th December  2018,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted.   It  was
    observed that the Appellant's actions in 2013 had to be  considered  in
    the light of subsequent application where nothing was hidden  from  the
    ECO.  Second, the judge's conclusions in  relation  to  Article  8  (at
    paragraph 36) did not contain the balancing  exercise  required,  which
    involved the balance of the public  interest  against  the  Appellant's
    right to family life.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 7th March 2019,  Mr  Holmes,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that there were  two  points  before
    this Tribunal.  First, that the judge's analysis of  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules was flawed, because  the  judge
    did not take material circumstances into account, by way of undertaking
    a proportionality exercise,  and  these  included  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor were in a  genuine  and  subsisting  marriage
    relationship, where the Sponsor had visited the Appellant in Iran on  a
    number of occasions, such that it could not be concluded that Article 8
    was not even engaged.

11. Second, that insofar as the judge gives reasons (at paragraphs  34  and
    35) these reasons are inadequate to uphold the decision arrived at.  In
    making good his first ground, Mr Holmes submitted that this was a human
    rights appeal and so it is important to look at  the  position  outside
    the Immigration Rules,  as  against  what  was  a  general  ground  for
    refusal, which could not be determinative.  The judge had at the outset
    (at paragraph 56) simply referred to the findings of the previous judge
    which were that "Article 8 is not engaged" but this could simply not be
    true because the marriage was genuine and subsisting and there had been
    visits between the Sponsor and the Appellant.  In any event, no reasons
    are given by the judge in this Tribunal either.

12. Insofar as paragraph 36 is concerned, where the  judge  does  expressly
    refer to Article 8, the  fact  remains  that  the  conclusion  here  is
    necessarily coloured by what the judge had stated earlier at  paragraph
    26, namely, that Article 8 is not engaged.  All that the judge does  at
    paragraph 36 is to say that there  is  plainly  a  public  interest  in
    preventing the individual entering the UK who has  a  track  record  of
    fraudulently interception and that it would be "entirely  inappropriate
    to overlook  that  factor"  (paragraph  36).   There  is  no  balancing
    exercise undertaken here at all.

13. This was despite the  fact  that  the  judge  recognises  in  the  same
    paragraph that "The Sponsor has been able to  visit  the  Appellant  in
    Iran on a number of occasions since 2012".  It is no  answer,  however,
    to then also add that "There is no bar to the Sponsor  moving  to  Iran
    and enjoying family life with  the  Appellant  there"  (paragraph  36).
    This is because the application was to join the Sponsor in the UK.   It
    was incumbent upon the judge to carry out a balancing  exercise.   That
    was not being undertaken by the judge in this case.  Essentially,  what
    the judge was doing was giving an open-ended exclusion decision to  the
    Appellant entering the UK.

14. As far as the reasons given at paragraphs 34 to 35 were  concerned,  Mr
    Holmes submitted that the judge fastened upon the fact that the Sponsor
    had made family arrangements very shortly before his wife attempted  to
    gain illegal entry to the UK, and that his  bank  accounts  showed  him
    purchasing seven flights for which he paid, together with payment for a
    hotel in Euros, and that whilst he did not then go to  France,  "It  is
    unclear to  my why one would purchase flights and reserve accommodation
    if a visa had not been arranged" (paragraph 34), the  implication  here
    had been, submitted Mr Holmes, that the Sponsor knew that his wife, the
    Appellant, was coming  to  France,  where  he  could  meet  her  there.
    However, submitted Mr Holmes this  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    Sponsor's own explanation for this.

15. For his part, Mr Tan submitted that the judge had  properly  identified
    (at paragraph 13) that the sole issue in this appeal was to  deal  with
    the application of paragraph 320(11) because this was a case where "The
    Appellant has used deception in an application for entry clearance" and
    that "The  Appellant  has  on  two  occasions  used  a  false  identity
    attempting to enter the UK illegally and on  that  third  occasion  the
    Appellant was dishonest about an activity outside of  Iran"  (paragraph
    13).  The judge had then gone on to consider Article  8,  after  having
    found that the Appellant could not succeed under paragraph 320(11)  and
    the Article 8 assessment in this regard was bound to have been impacted
    upon by the judge's findings at  paragraph  320(11).   It  was  not  in
    dispute that this was a genuine marriage and it was not in dispute that
    the Sponsor had visited his wife on several  occasions.   Nevertheless,
    the judge had  rejected  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor, when considering the application of paragraph 320(11) and this
    was bound to influence the way in which the wider Article 8  assessment
    was to be carried out.  In short, the  public  interest  in  favour  of
    immigration control was bound to be given controlling  rate.   This  is
    what the judge held.

16. In reply, Mr Holmes submitted that if  one  looks  at  the  Appellant's
    bundle (from pages 48 onwards), there are  four  copies  of  disclosure
    documents, which the judge does not show any evidence of  having  taken
    into account.  Their importance  lies  in  the  fact  that  insofar  as
    paragraph 320(11) was a "discretionary" provision, then, faced with the
    full disclosure made by the Sponsor  in  the  latest  application,  the
    discretion ought to have been exercised in  favour  of  the  Appellant,
    because otherwise one was looking at a situation where there  would  be
    an indefinite exclusion of the Appellant  to  join  her  husband.   The
    failure by the  judge  to  have  regard  to  these  documents  of  full
    disclosure  and  to  factor  them  in  to  his  assessment  under   the
    Immigration Rules, insofar as paragraph 320(11) was concerned,  was  an
    error of law.  Second, and in any event, even if that was not the  case
    as far as paragraph 320(11) was concerned,  it  was  clearly  the  case
    insofar as Article 8 was concerned, because here regard could be had to
    the fact that the Appellant had made a full disclosure of documents  so
    that it did not necessarily follow that the public interest  in  favour
    of immigration control meant that the Appellant stood  to  be  excluded
    from joining her husband, even in a situation where the marriage was  a
    genuine and subsisting one, and where visits  had  been  made  by   her
    sponsoring husband to be with her in Iran.

Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  First, whereas I am not impressed with the argument that  the
    judge is vulnerable to a discrete reasons  challenge  with  respect  to
    what he said at paragraphs 34 to 35, I do think that the decision  with
    respect to Article 8 is flawed.  The reason why I am not  impressed  by
    the argument in relation to paragraphs 34 and 35  is  that  it  ignores
    what is said at paragraph 33, where the judge  refers  to  the  earlier
    decision of IJ Heynes, who found the Sponsor to be  an  "Unsatisfactory
    witness who does not accept responsibility for the fraudulent  activity
    of his wife", and the judge clearly gave  a  reason  himself  in  terms
    that, "I reached the conclusion that the Sponsor knew far more than his
    wife's deception than that which  he  has  disclosed"  (paragraph  33).
    Accordingly, there is nothing in this point.

18. However, the Article 8 argument is a more substantial one.  The  judge,
    having set out the summary of the findings of IJ  Heynes  in  2017  (at
    paragraph 26),  to  the  effect  that,  "Article  8  is  not  engaged",
    proceeded to approach the matter on the same footing at  paragraph  36,
    observing that, "There is plainly a public interest  in  preventing  an
    individual entering the UK where the individual has a track  record  of
    forgery and deception", and that  it  is,  "Entirely  inappropriate  to
    overlook that factor"  (paragraph  36).   But  this  does  not  show  a
    balancing exercise having been carried out in  an  even-handed  manner.
    It also fails to take into account the documentation in the Appellant's
    bundle from pages 48 onwards, where there has been a full disclosure of
    the matters to date.

19. What is significant in this relationship is that it is accepted by  the
    Respondent that the Appellant and the Sponsor  are  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  relationship,  and  that  the  Sponsor  has   visited   the
    Appellant, and that the Appellant has in turn been  keen  to  join  the
    Sponsor in the UK and to live with him here.  That requires a full  and
    proper assessment of their Article 8 rights to family life, which  have
    to be balanced against the public interest  in  favour  of  immigration
    control.  The reliance on the fact that "Article 8 is not  engaged"  is
    plainly wrong because the  engagement  of  Article  8  involves  a  low
    threshold, and in a case such as this, where the marriage  was  genuine
    and subsisting, there is no  doubt  that  such  a  threshold  had  been
    reached.

Notice of Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  I set aside the decision of the original judge.   I
    remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is remitted  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be  determined  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Durance pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2(b)  because  the  nature  or
    extent of any judicial fact-finding, which is necessary  in  order  for
    the decision in the appeal to be remade is such that, having regard  to
    the overriding objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

21. No anonymity direction is made.

22. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 20th March 2019

