
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/12545/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 July 2019                          | On 8 August 2019                  |
|                                        |                                   |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE CUTTS
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE),
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Syed-Ali, Counsel, instructed on a Direct
Access basis

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  (hereafter  SSHD)
         appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Cohen (the judge) who, in a decision promulgated on 18 April  2019,
         allowed the appeal of MS (hereafter claimant)  against  the  SSHD's
         decision of 31 May 2018 to refuse his human rights claim.


Background

      2. The claimant is a national of Pakistan who was  born  in  1985.  He
         entered the UK in February 2009 as a student and was later  granted
         further leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post Study Work)  Migrant.  He
         married a Lithuanian national and was issued with an EEA  residence
         card based on this relationship. This was a sham marriage.


      3. On 4 April 2018 the claimant was convicted of an  offence  relating
         to the facilitation of breaches of UK immigration law and  received
         a sentence of 3 years imprisonment.  On  18  April  2018  the  SSHD
         decided to make a deportation order against him pursuant to s.32(5)
         of the UK Borders Act 2007  and,  on  the  same  day,  refused  the
         claimant's human rights claim. The human rights claim was based  on
         the claimant's relationship with IS, his British  citizen  partner,
         and NB, their daughter born in February 2017.

      4. The claimant appealed the SSHD's decision refusing his human rights
         claim  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to  s.82   of   the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      5. Filed in support of the claimant's appeal was a bundle of documents
         running to 269 pages. Included in  the  bundle  were,  inter  alia,
         witness statements from  the  claimant  and  IS,  a  report  by  an
         Independent Social Worker (ISW)  dated  10  March  2019,  an  OASys
         Assessment dated 6 March 2019, and 34 pages of IS's medical  notes.
         There was no specific medical  report  in  respect  of  IS  and  no
         details of any counselling she may have undertaken. The  bundle  of
         documents also  contained  the  Sentencing  Remarks  and  documents
         confirming that IS and NB visited the  claimant  in  prison.  There
         were also copies of certificates obtained by the claimant whilst in
         prison. The judge heard oral evidence from both  the  claimant  and
         IS.

      6. We summarise the judge's pertinent findings.  The  claimant  was  a
         model  prisoner  who  participated  in  numerous  courses  and  who
         undertook positive work with an organisation called User Voice.  He
         successfully completed a job search in prison. The judge found  the
         claimant was a reformed character who had been assessed as posing a
         generally low risk of serious harm or future reoffending.

      7. The claimant had a strong relationship with his partner and  child.
         They frequently visited him in prison using public  transport.  The
         claimant and IS jointly  raised  their  daughter.  His  deportation
         would breach these family life relationships.  At  [27]  the  judge
         found it "extremely significant" that IS was estranged from her own
         family in  the  UK.  Despite  her  having  suffered  mental  health
         problems "for over 13 years" and having made a suicide attempt  and
         self-harmed in 2006, IS  had  undertaken  "remarkable  efforts"  to
         bring up her daughter and the ISW reported  that  IS  "has  done  a
         fantastic job." IS nevertheless reported to the ISW  that  she  had
         struggled in bringing up her daughter single-handedly  and  had  no
         one to assist her.

      8. At [29] the judge set out the requirements of paragraph  399(a)  of
         the immigration rules. This essentially provides  that  deportation
         would not be in the public interest if its impact would  be  unduly
         harsh on  a  child  with  whom  the  deportee  has  a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship.

      9. At [30] the judge found the SSHD's view  that  there  would  be  no
         unduly harsh impact on the claimant's daughter to be  "perverse  in
         light of the exceedingly  strong,  contrary  [sic]  and  consistent
         evidence" before him.


             In  the  report  of  the  independent  social  worker,  it  is
             indicated that to separate the [claimant's] daughter, from her
             father and the effects that  the  [claimant's]  removal  would
             have on his wife noting her precarious mental health would  be
             significant. The [claimant's] daughter knows England  and  has
             known no other home. She is  at  an  important  stage  of  her
             development. She has continued  to  have  significant  contact
             with her father. Her mother has done [sic] exceptionally  good
             job in raising her in the absence of the [claimant] but it was
             not anticipated that situation could remain in the long  term.
             She was buoyed by the fact that the [claimant] would hopefully
             return and assist her with raising their child in due  course.
             If the [claimant]  was  removed  from  the  UK  and  his  wife
             remained in the UK looking after [their daughter] there  would
             be issues with her ability to cope  and  this  would  possibly
             lead to the requirement of social services  intervention.  The
             negative impact of the [claimant's] removal from the UK on the
             sponsor would have knock-on effects on her ability to  provide
             adequate physical and emotional  support  to  [her  daughter].
             There was a question mark about the sponsor  supporting  knows
             needs [sic] if the [claimant] was removed for an indeterminate
             period.  The  conclusion  of  the   report   is   strong   and
             irrefutable. It is  further  substantiated  by  correspondence
             from the [claimant's] wife's GP. I find that what is  set  out
             before me, particularly  in  the  independent  social  workers
             report  is  a  clear  conclusion  that  the  removal  of   the
             [claimant] would be unduly harsh in respect of the effect that
             it would have on his daughter and wife.


     10. At [31] the judge concluded, with reference to the ISW report, that
         it would be unduly harsh  to  expect  the  claimant's  daughter  to
         relocate to Pakistan. It was noted that both IS and NB had "a close
         network of friends in Slough." The judge stated that social workers
         investigated IS's ability to raise her daughter in  the  claimant's
         absence following his incarceration and that "they  were  concerned
         in the light of her mental health issues." The judge found  in  the
         circumstances  that  the  claimant's  deportation,  and   therefore
         separation from his daughter's  life,  "...  would  either  not  be
         possible or have significant negative effects." It was in NB's best
         interests for the claimant to remain in  the  UK  as  part  of  the
         family unit. The judge said he had regard to appropriate  case  law
         including KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 and MA (Pakistan)  &  Ors,  R
         (on the application of) v Upper Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
         Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705.


     11. At [32] the judge stated,

             I have regard to public interest concerns are [sic] set out in
             S117(c) of the Immigration Rules. In light of the [claimant's]
             rehabilitation in prison, the fact that  a  British  child  is
             involved and that the [claimant] previously worked  and  would
             support his family in the UK and pay tax and that his  removal
             is  likely  to  necessitate  significant  input  from   social
             services and the  whole  services  at  a  cost  of  [sic]  the
             taxpayer, I do not find that the [sic] in the public  interest
             to deport the [claimant] in all the circumstances.


     12. The judge  concluded  that  the  claimant's  deportation  would  be
         disproportionate and allowed the human rights appeal.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     13. The grounds of appeal content that the  judge  failed  to  lawfully
         apply the 'unduly harsh' test and that he was not  entitled,  based
         on the evidence before him and some of his  findings,  to  conclude
         that the test was met. The grounds criticise the  judge's  reliance
         on the ISW report which indicated that the physical  and  emotional
         needs of his daughter were being met and that IS would continue  to
         meet those needs, and that there  was  no  suggestion  that  social
         services thought any intervention  was  necessary.  Whilst  it  was
         accepted that there would be obvious difficulties in providing  for
         NB as a lone parent, there was insufficient evidence to support the
         judge's finding that the impact on IS and NB would be unduly harsh.
         The grounds further submit that the possibility of social services'
         involvement and the potential cost of such involvement was, at  its
         highest, neutral and speculative, and that the  judge  should  have
         proceeded on the basis that if social services support was acquired
         they would perform the duties under the law and  that  this  was  a
         relevant consideration not taken into account.


     14. In his oral submissions Mr Avery submitted that the judge failed to
         appreciate the high threshold needed to demonstrate undue harshness
         and that the judge gave inadequate reasons in support of his  undue
         harshness finding. The medical evidence  relating  to  IS's  mental
         health was  limited  and  the  ISW  report  relied  on  information
         provided by IS (as opposed to any independent  evidence).  The  ISW
         report described the normal consequences of deportation on  IS  and
         NB and did not support the judge's  finding  in  respect  of  undue
         harshness.

     15. Mr Syed Ali relied on his  skeleton  argument  and  invited  us  to
         consider the case  law  surrounding  s.117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act,
         although once it was pointed out to  him  that  s.117B(6)  did  not
         apply in the case of someone subject  to  deportation  he  made  no
         further submissions on the point. He submitted that the  judge  was
         entitled to his factual findings in respect of undue harshness  and
         that the SSHD's grounds amounted to no  more  than  a  disagreement
         with findings rationally open to the judge. The judge was  entitled
         to find, in particular, that IS was "... buoyed by  the  fact  that
         the [claimant] would hopefully return and assist her  with  raising
         their child in due course." Mr Syed-Ali accepted that there was  no
         expert medical evidence relating to IS.

     16. Having considered the submissions we informed  the  representatives
         that we were satisfied the judge erred on a point of law in  making
         his decision such that the decision had to be set  aside.  At  that
         stage there had been no application to adduce any further  evidence
         pursuant to rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 and Mr Syed-Ali could not identify any new evidence that
         showed a change in circumstances or which  could  otherwise  assist
         the Tribunal. We indicated to the parties that we would proceed  to
         remake the decision based on the evidence before the  Tribunal  and
         in line with the Directions issued by the Upper Tribunal  dated  13
         June 2019. We heard brief submissions from Mr Avery and Mr Syed-Ali
         and then reserved our decision.

     17. Following the error of law hearing the Upper  Tribunal  received  a
         letter from Temple  Court  Chambers  and  further  documents.   The
         letter was dated 9  July  2019  and  was  sent  by  fax  at  15:53,
         following the  conclusion  of  the  Tribunal  hearing.  The  letter
         apologised for the "belated forwarding of  the  documents"  but  no
         explanation was given for the failure to make a proper  application
         to adduce the new evidence pursuant to rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal
         Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  or   to   explain   the
         considerable  delay  in  providing  the  documents.  The  documents
         consisted of letter, dated 30 April  2019,  issued  to  arrange  an
         appointment for NB with the Specialist Children's  Service  of  the
         Berkshire NHS Foundation Trust, a  letter  from  Slough  Children's
         Services Trust dated 8 April 2019 and addressed to IS informing her
         that details of NB's needs could be met by other services and  that
         the details had been passed on to Early Help Services, and a Speech
         and Language Therapy Drop-In Clinic Report  dated  18  March  2019.
         Despite the absence of any formal application to  adduce  this  new
         evidence, having regard to the overriding objective in  rule  2  of
         the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  we  decided  to
         admit this further evidence.

Discussion

Error of law

     18. We begin our consideration of the  judge's  decision  by  observing
         that it contains many typographical errors. Whilst not material  to
         our task of identifying a legal error, this does point to a general
         lack of care  for  the  preparation  of  the  decision.  There  are
         additional errors in the judge's description of the applicable law.
         At [28] the judge states that there is a "presumption" in favour of
         the claimant's deportation. Section 32(4) of  the  UK  Borders  Act
         2007 establishes that, for the purpose of section  3(5)(A)  of  the
         Immigration Act 1971, the deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal  is
         conducive to the public good. As the claimant was  sentenced  to  a
         term  of  imprisonment  in  excess  of  12  months  there   is   no
         presumption; his deportation is, by statutory mechanism,  conducive
         to the public good.


     19. The judge found that  the  claimant's  deportation  would  have  an
         unduly harsh impact on IS and NB. The judge's assessment of  unduly
         harsh is made by reference to paragraph 399(a) of  the  immigration
         rules, the substance of which is mirrored in s.117C(5) of the  2002
         Act. The meaning of "unduly harsh" has been considered  in  several
         authorities. In MK Sierra Leone [2015]  UKUT  00223  (IAC)  it  was
         noted at paragraph 46 that "unduly  harsh"  does  not  equate  with
         uncomfortable, inconvenient or merely difficult ... "harsh" in this
         context, denotes something severe, or bleak ... the addition of the
         adverb "unduly" raises an already elevated  standard  higher.  This
         was approved in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53. At  paragraph  23  the
         Supreme Court observed  that  one  is  looking  for  "a  degree  of
         harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved  for  any
         child faced with  the  deportation  of  a  parent"  (see  also  the
         decision in RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness)  Iraq
         [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC)).


     20. Although he makes fleeting reference to KO (Nigeria) the judge does
         not otherwise consider what is meant by unduly harsh. Although this
         does not itself indicate that the judge failed  to  appreciate  the
         nature of the test involved, it does introduce some initial concern
         that  his  assessment  may  not  have  been  tethered  to  judicial
         interpretation of the test. This would not amount to  an  error  of
         law if it was apparent that the judge had in fact lawfully  applied
         the unduly harsh test.

     21. In concluding that the impact of the claimant's deportation on both
         IS and NB would  be  unduly  harsh  the  judge  placed  significant
         reliance on the ISW report. We do not doubt that the  ISW  is  both
         qualified and sufficiently experienced to write a  welfare  report.
         The ISW observed IS and NB, but did not meet the  claimant.  It  is
         not clear what, if any, independent evidence was considered by  the
         ISW. She noted,  for  example,  that  IS  suffered  with  postnatal
         depression and could not return to work, and refers to IS's "mental
         health needs", but no reference is made to any medical evidence  or
         GP or maternity notes. Nor do the GP notes make  any  reference  to
         post-natal  depression.  The  assertions  in  the  welfare   report
         relating to IS's mental health appear to have stemmed from what  IS
         told the ISW rather than by reference to independent evidence.


     22. The ISW  noted  that  IS's  "mental  health  needs",  coupled  with
         loneliness and little support from her family and  the  absence  of
         friends in the local area could "potentially" affect NB. It is  not
         however clear what IS's "mental health needs" were as there was  no
         psychiatric or psychological report, and the claim that  there  are
         no friends in the area was inconsistent with the evidence given  to
         the judge that IS had "a close network of friends in Slough"  [31].
         The medical notes also indicated that one or two of the  claimant's
         friends had rung to offer IS support. In her  evidence  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal IS said she was still estranged  from  her  own
         family, but since her father had died  there  had  been  "a  slight
         thawing of relations" [20].  The  welfare  report  stated  that  IS
         "requires support to help bring up her daughter" but there  was  no
         assessment of any support that could be provided by Social Services
         and the report did not  clarify  what  type  of  support  would  be
         required. Although stating that IS "has struggled  considerably  to
         cope with her mental illness" since the claimant's incarceration no
         details were provided of the nature of IS's mental illness  or  the
         nature of her struggles. We note that the ISW was satisfied that IS
         had a good attachment with her daughter and that NB was thriving in
         her mother's care. According to the welfare report NB "looked happy
         and had no obvious emotional needs."

     23. The ISW reported IS's concerns that she "might" struggle to  manage
         on her own and feared that this "might" affect  her  mental  health
         such that she "might" require medication to manage, and  that  this
         would affect her ability to appropriately look after her  daughter.
         IS was however able to ensure NB's safety  and  welfare  throughout
         the period of the claimant's incarceration. The ISW's concerns were
         also expressed in particularly  speculative  terms.  There  was  no
         assessment of the probability of these  events  occurring,  and  no
         account was taken of the mental health resources available  to  IS.
         We note, with reference to the medical notes, that IS was  able  to
         access support from a crisis team in  April  2018  and  that  there
         appeared to have been a referral to Talking Therapies  in  February
         2019. The medical notes  indicated  that  IS  had  no  thoughts  of
         suicide or self-harm and that her  baby  was  a  strong  protective
         feature.

     24.  We  have  considered  IS's  medical  notes  in  some  detail.   We
         acknowledge that  IS  suffered  from  auditory  hallucinations  and
         suicidal ideation in December 2006. We have however been unable  to
         locate any independent evidence  that  IS  suffered  mental  health
         problems "for over 13 years." The medical notes do not support such
         a finding. A consultation on 20 February 2019 disclosed that IS was
         stressed and anxious about the claimant's immigration circumstances
         but that she was happy with  her  baby,  she  had  no  thoughts  of
         harming herself and was not suicidal. She was prescribed medication
         for insomnia. The medical notes disclosed that in  March  2018  she
         was referred to the community mental health team as she was anxious
         and in a low mood, and medical notes from April 2018 indicated that
         she was seeing a Crisis Team who provided her with weekly  support.
         Her self-harm thoughts were lessened because of  this  support  and
         her daughter was identified as a protective factor.

     25. In her statement IS said she suffered from "mental  health"  issues
         and was under the care of her GP. We acknowledge that the GP  notes
         indicate that  IS  was  stressed  and  anxious  and  suffered  from
         insomnia, and that she was referred to Talking Therapies.  IS  does
         not  however  appear  to  have  been   prescribed   anti-depressant
         medication and there is no medical report detailing the nature  and
         severity of any mental health condition.

     26. The judge stated that social workers investigated IS's  ability  to
         raise  her  daughter  in  the  claimant's  absence  following   his
         incarceration and were concerned in the light of her mental  health
         issues. There was however no independent  evidence  in  support  of
         this finding. The  claimant's  bundle  of  documents  contained  no
         letter, report or other documentation from social services, and  no
         mention was made of any concern by the Social Services in  the  ISW
         report. Indeed the ISW report stated, at  paragraph  23,  that  the
         family was not known to social services.

     27. The ISW stated, "If the [claimant] was removed from the UK and  his
         wife remained in the UK looking after [their daughter] there  would
         be issues with her ability to cope and this would possibly lead  to
         the requirement of social services intervention." The ISW does  not
         however identify the "issues" with IS's ability to cope, there  was
         no mental health report supporting this assertion, and there was no
         independent evidence of any intervention or concern on the part  of
         social services. Nor was there any independent  evidence  that  the
         claimant's deportation would "possibly"  lead  to  social  services
         intervention. The ISW noted that NB had no known health  needs  and
         that she was  thriving  in  her  mother's  care.  The  family  were
         registered with a dentist, GP and optician and  regularly  attended
         healthcare appointments. The ISW stated that NB's parents "have  no
         health needs  which  affect  their  ability  to  look  after  their
         daughter."

     28. For the reasons given above we  are  satisfied  that  the  evidence
         before the judge was incapable of supporting  his  conclusion  that
         the impact on either IS or NB would  be  unduly  harsh.  There  was
         insufficient evidence that  IS's  mental  health  was  sufficiently
         precarious such as  to  undermine  her  ability  to  care  for  her
         daughter, or that the negative impact of his deportation would have
         knock-on effects on her ability to  provide  adequate  physical  or
         emotional support to NB.

     29. We are additionally satisfied that, to the extent that he may  have
         engaged in an assessment under s.117C(6) of the 2002  Act  (whether
         there were 'very compelling circumstances' over and above those  in
         Exception  2  in   s.117C(5)),   the   judge   placed   weight   on
         insufficiently relevant matters. At [32]  the  judge  placed  clear
         weight on the  extent  of  the  claimant's  rehabilitation.  In  RA
         (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence:  seriousness)  Iraq  [2019]  UKUT
         00123 (IAC) the President of the Upper  Tribunal  (IAC)  considered
         arguments on the issue of rehabilitation. At [32] and [33]  he  had
         this to say.
             As the Court of Appeal pointed out in  Danso  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2015]  EWCA  Civ  596,  courses
             aimed at rehabilitation,  undertaken  whilst  in  prison,  are
             often unlikely to bear material weight, for the simple  reason
             that they are a  commonplace;  particularly  in  the  case  of
             sexual offenders.
             As a more general point, the fact that an individual  has  not
             committed further offences,  since  release  from  prison,  is
             highly  unlikely  to  have  a  material  bearing,  given  that
             everyone is expected not to commit crime. Rehabilitation  will
             therefore normally do no more than show  that  the  individual
             has returned to the  place  where  society  expects  him  (and
             everyone else) to be. There is, in other  words,  no  material
             weight which ordinarily falls to be given to rehabilitation in
             the proportionality balance (see SE (Zimbabwe) v Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 256,  paragraphs
             48 to 56). Nevertheless, as so often in  the  field  of  human
             rights, one cannot categorically say that rehabilitation  will
             never be  capable  of  playing  a  significant  role  (see  LG
             (Colombia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]
             EWCA Civ 1225). Any judicial departure from  the  norm  would,
             however, need to be fully reasoned.
     30. RA (Iraq) received approval from the Court of  Appeal  in  (Binbuga
         (Turkey) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2019]  EWCA
         Civ 551), which  indicated  that  rehabilitation  or  lack  of  re-
         offending should carry little or no material weight in establishing
         'very compelling circumstances'. To the extent that the  judge  has
         attached material weight to the claimant's rehabilitation, he erred
         in law. Nor  was  the  judge  entitled  to  attach  weight  to  the
         possibility that  the  claimant's  deportation  would  "necessitate
         significant input from social services and the whole services at  a
         cost of the taxpayer." This was an  overly  speculative  conclusion
         and one unsupported in the evidence.


     31. For the reasons set out above we are  satisfied  that  the  judge's
         decision must be set aside.

Remaking the decision

     32. In his very brief submissions on the remaking of the  decision,  Mr
         Syed-Ali relied on his skeleton argument and invited us to consider
         the documents  in  the  claimant's  bundle,  although  he  did  not
         particularise any particular document.


     33. In assessing whether the impact on NB would be unduly harsh  within
         the terms of paragraph 399(a) of the immigration rules, and whether
         the impact on both NB and IS would be unduly harsh within the terms
         of s.117C(5) of the 2002 Act, we have considered, inter  alia,  the
         statements from the claimant and IS, the oral evidence given before
         the First-tier Tribunal as  recorded  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         decision, and the documents in the claimant's bundle, including the
         medical notes relating to IS, the ISW report, the family  pictures,
         letters and cards, the evidence of the certificates obtained by the
         claimant whilst in prison and his health record.

     34.  Following  the  hearing  we  received  the  additional   documents
         identified at paragraph 17 above. These indicate that NB  has  been
         referred to the Specialist  Children's  Service  of  Berkshire  NHS
         Foundation Trust. A Speech & Language Therapy Drop-In Clinic Report
         dated 18 March 2019 identified  ID's  concerns  with  NB's  general
         development and communication skills. We have found the  report  to
         be of limited assistance. Whilst it indicates some things  that  NB
         finds it difficult to do,  it  does  not  describe  the  nature  or
         severity of any developmental issue. Nor does it suggest  that  the
         developmental issues have occurred as  a  result  of  the  claimant
         being subject to  a  deportation  order,  or  that  the  claimant's
         presence would make any material difference  to  any  developmental
         issue. The report does not suggest that IS is incapable of ensuring
         NB receives adequate support or treatment.

     35. We accept that the claimant has a strong family  life  relationship
         with both IS and NB. We accept, pursuant to s.55  of  the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009,  that  it  is  in  NB's  best
         interests that she remains living in the UK with  both  her  mother
         and father. This stems from the evidence of both the  claimant  and
         IS to the effect that NB has a strong bond with her father and that
         he plays a parental role in her upbringing. This  also  stems  from
         the evidence in the ISW report.

     36. We remind ourselves, with reference to the  authorities  identified
         in paragraph 19 above, of the unduly harsh test.  We  have  already
         considered the ISW report and the evidence relating to  the  impact
         of deportation on IS and NB in detail above. There is little  point
         repeating that analysis. Whilst we are mindful of the fact that  IS
         had serious mental health issues 13 years ago, we are not persuaded
         that any current mental health issues prevent her from ensuring the
         welfare  and  safety  of  her  daughter,  or  that  the  claimant's
         deportation would have a significant detrimental impact on her  own
         mental health. The evidence in support  of  such  a  contention  is
         lacking. We do  not  doubt  that  IS  would  face  difficulties  in
         bringing up her daughter on her own, but the  evidence  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal suggests  that  she  does  have  a  network  of
         support in Slough and she has already been able to avail herself of
         NHS support.  There  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  other  Social
         Services support would not be forthcoming if needed.  We  note  the
         observations in the ISW report that IS  and  her  daughter  have  a
         strong bond, that IS has never neglected her daughter's needs, that
         NB is a happy child and is thriving in her mother's care, and  that
         the family is not known to social services.

     37. We don't doubt that IS and NB will suffer distress if the  claimant
         is deported, and that their lives will in a number of ways be  made
         more difficult than they are at present. However, as  was  recently
         pointed out in SSHD v PG (Jamaica) [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1213,  those,
         sadly, are the  likely  consequences  of  the  deportation  of  any
         foreign criminal who has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
         a partner and/or child in this country. We note  that,  whilst  the
         parental  relationship  cannot  effectively  be  replicated  at   a
         distance, there is nothing to suggest there  would  be  a  complete
         severance of contact  between  the  claimant  and  IS  and  NB.  We
         consequently find that the claimant's deportation would not have an
         unduly harsh impact on either IS or NB.

     38. In determining whether there  are  very  compelling  circumstances,
         with reference to s.117C(6) of the 2002 Act, such as to render  the
         claimant's deportation disproportionate  under  Article  8,  he  is
         entitled to rely on matters identified in  Exception  2  in  s.117C
         (there being no dispute that Exception one does not apply), but  he
         needs to point to features of his  case  of  a  kind  mentioned  in
         Exception  2,  or  features  falling  outside   the   circumstances
         described in that Exception which makes his claim based on  Article
         8 especially strong (NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  662,  at
         [25] to [29]; RA (s.117C:  "unduly  harsh";  offence:  seriousness)
         Iraq [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC), at [20]). We consider the seriousness
         of the claimant's offending. The Sentencing Remarks indicated  that
         the claimant entered a sham marriage and, in addition to  obtaining
         a residence card by deception, he acted  as  a  go-between  for  at
         least one other Pakistani group and  played  a  part  in  arranging
         marriages of convenience in August 2013. The sentence  of  3  years
         reflects the relative seriousness of the claimant's  offending.  We
         accept that the claimant poses a low risk of serious  harm  to  the
         public and a  low  risk  of  reoffending,  and  that  he  has  been
         successfully rehabilitated. We  note  however  that  rehabilitation
         would not usually attract any material weight (see RA (Iraq), above
         at  paragraph  29).  We  again  have   regard   to   our   previous
         consideration of the impact that deportation would have on both  IS
         and NB, the state of health of both IS and NB, the impact on NB  of
         being separated from her father during the formative years  of  her
         life, and the difficulties  that  IS  is  likely  to  encounter  in
         raising a child on her own.


     39. In the Court of Appeal decision in Rhuppiah [2018]  UKSC  Sales  LJ
         referred to the "appropriately high threshold of  application"  for
         the 'very compelling circumstances' test. This chimes with what was
         said in Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 (at [38]) that  'very  compelling
         circumstances' means "a very strong claim indeed." In RA (Iraq),  a
         decision of the President of the Upper Tribunal (IAC), the test  in
         s.117C(6) was described as "very demanding."   Having  holistically
         considered the evidence before us, and for the  reasons  given,  we
         are not satisfied that the high  threshold  for  demonstrating  the
         existence of very compelling circumstances has been met.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contain  an  error  on  a  point  of  law
requiring it to be set aside.

We remake the decision, dismissing MS's human rights appeal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  respondent  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the respondent and to the  appellant.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

D.Blum                                  30 July 2019

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
