

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/12757/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On: 20th September 2017                   |On: 25th September 2017          |
|                                          |                                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between


                          KEHINDE AYOMIPO OGUNNEYE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:


For the Appellant:              Mr Singh, Greater Manchester Immigration
Aid Unit
For the Respondent:             Mr McVeety , Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria born on the 22nd  May  1994.  He
    appeals with permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    EMM Smith) to dismiss his appeal on human rights grounds.


 2. The Appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal was that he had  an
    established family and private life in the United Kingdom. He has lived
    in this country since he was 11 years old, having been brought here  as
    a visitor on the 25th August 2005. Although it was conceded  that  this
    had not been so at the date of application, it was asserted that as  of
    the date of hearing he had lived in this country over half of his life;
    the Respondent  had  not  cited  any  grounds  for  refusal  under  the
    'suitability' criteria and so he prima facie now met  the  requirements
    for leave to remain  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(v).    Although  other
    grounds were relied upon, it was submitted that the  appeal  should  be
    allowed on Article 8 grounds for  that  reason  alone.    Reliance  was
    placed on the ratio of the decisions in Chikwamba v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 40 and R  (on  the  application  of
    Chen) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (Appendix  FM
    -Chikwamba-temporary separation-proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT  00189
    (IAC).


 3. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal on two grounds.    Finding
    that a fresh application would today be successful the  Tribunal  could
    find no justification for allowing the appeal on human rights  grounds.
    Second, as the Appellant's removal was not imminent there was no breach
    to his Article 8 rights.


 4. Principle Resident Judge Martins granted permission on  the  29th  June
    2017. She considered it arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had erred
    in law in respect of both grounds of dismissal.




    Discussion and Findings


 5. The accepted facts are that this young man arrived in  the  UK  on  the
    25th August 2005. On that day he was aged 11  years,  3  months  and  4
    days. He has lived continuously in the UK ever since. On the  day  that
    he made the application for leave to remain  on  human  rights  grounds
    (30th September 2015) he was aged 21 years, 4 months and 9  days.    At
    the date of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal he was  22  years
    and 7 months old.


 6. The relevant parts of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules are  as
    follows:
      276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
      remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date
      of application, the applicant:
           (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in
           Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5. in
           Appendix FM; and
           (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
           grounds of private life in the UK; and
           (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
           (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in
           the UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of
           imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to expect the
           applicant to leave the UK; or
           (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent
           at least half of his life living continuously in the UK
           (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
           (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above,
           has lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there would be very
           significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into the
           country to which he would have to go if required to leave the
           UK.
 7. In her refusal letter dated  the  19th  November  2015  the  Respondent
    expressly accepts that the  Appellant  meets  all  of  the  suitability
    criteria mentioned at (i). It was accepted that he  had  made  a  valid
    application pursuant to (ii). It is accepted that the Appellant is aged
    between 18 and  25.  The  sticking  point  was  that  at  the  date  of
    application he had not yet spent over half of his life in the  UK.   By
    the date of appeal that line had been crossed, and  the  Appellant  met
    the substantive requirements of 276ADE(1)(v).


 8. What then was the First-tier Tribunal to do?


 9. First, the Tribunal was obliged to consider the  relevant  rule.   This
    the Tribunal  did,  noting  that  the  Appellant's  representative  had
    already conceded that the rule could not be met, because the  requisite
    period  of  long  residence  had  not  been  accrued  at  the  date  of
    application, the relevant criteria for success under the rule.


10. Second, the Tribunal had to consider whether there were good reasons to
    proceed to consider Article 8 outwith the framework of the Rules.  This
    it did, at paragraph 22. The reasoning is, with respect,  difficult  to
    follow. The Tribunal directs itself to various cases dealing  with  the
    'near miss' principle and concludes  that  since  the  Appellant  could
    simply submit a new application, there would be  no  justification  for
    considering the case outside of the Rules.  This wasn't a case based on
    a 'near miss'. It was case based on a direct hit. The  question  to  be
    addressed by the Tribunal was simply whether the decision  was  one  of
    such gravity that Article 8 rights were engaged:  MM  (Lebanon)  [2017]
    UKSC 10.  The answer  to  that  question  is  obvious.  The  Respondent
    herself recognises that someone of this age,  who  has  lived  in  this
    country as long as the Appellant has, will have a very well established
    private life: that is implicit in paragraph 276ADE(1)(v).  It  is  long
    established that a refusal to grant or vary leave is a decision capable
    of engaging Article 8, even in the absence of any imminent removal:  JM
    (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402. For those reasons I am  satisfied  that
    the Tribunal erred in its approach to whether Article  8  was  engaged,
    and whether the decision, at the date of this in-country  human  rights
    appeal, could be said to be proportionate.  The decision is set aside.


11. It was accepted by the Secretary of State  that  the  Appellant  has  a
    private life  worthy  of  protection  under  Article  8.   It  must  be
    accepted, in line with caselaw, that a decision to refuse  him  further
    leave to remain would amount to  an  interference  with  it.  The  only
    questions left would be whether the  decision  was  lawful,   taken  in
    pursuit of a legitimate aim and proportionate to that aim,  taking  all
    relevant factors into account. Since it is accepted by  the  Respondent
    that the Appellant meets all of the requirements to be granted leave to
    remain under the published immigration rules,   it  would  follow  that
    there is nothing  on  the  Respondent's  side  of  the  scales  in  the
    balancing exercise. The most that could be  said  would  be  that  good
    administration would require the Appellant to make a fresh application.
    In the circumstances the point of  that,  causing  further  unnecessary
    work for both parties,  is difficult to discern[1].




    Decision


12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    such that it must be set aside.


13. The decision is remade as follows: "the  appeal  is  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds".


14. There is no order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         22nd September 2017
                                                     -----------------------
[1] As it happens the Appellant has made a fresh application which,
unusually, has been accepted as valid and the fee processed (ordinarily
UKVI will not consider applications where there is an outstanding appeal).
He was properly advised to do this in order to protect his position but
given the terms of this decision the Secretary of State will no doubt
exercise her discretion with fairness and pragmatism: I understand that the
Appellant will be withdrawing that application and requesting that the
Secretary of State exercise her discretion and refund the fee.


