
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12025/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th September 2018                        |26th September 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                     R D
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Solanki of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  He was born on 4 May 1978.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's decision dated 20  September  2017
    to refuse him leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 3. Judge N Lodge (the judge) dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the
    respondent's decision because he found that it was proportionate.

 4. The grounds claim the judge erred because in concluding that  paragraph
    EX.1 was not met, the judge  applied  the  incorrect  test.   That  was
    because having identified the correct test at [23] of the decision,  he
    found at [26] that it would in all the circumstances be  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant to return to Zimbabwe.

 5. Paragraph EX.1 provides:

         "(a)

             (i)  the applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a child who-

                  (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of
                      18 years when the applicant was first  granted  leave
                      on the basis that this paragraph applied;

                  (bb) is in the UK;

                  (cc)  is  a  British  Citizen  or  has  lived  in  the  UK
                      continuously for at least  the  7  years  immediately
                      preceding the date of the application; and

             (ii) taking into account their best  interests  as  a  primary
                  consideration, it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the
                  child to leave the UK;"

 6. The question for the judge was whether it was reasonable to expect  the
    children to leave the UK  and  he  made  no  finding  in  that  regard.
    Further, he failed to have regard to S.117B(6) of the  2002  Act  which
    provides:

         "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

 7. In any event, the judge gave inadequate reasons for concluding that the
    appellant had a poor immigration history.

 8. Judge Neville granted permission to appeal on 13 July  2018.   He  said
    inter alia:

         "2.  The issue before the judge was whether, pursuant to  paragraph
             EX.1 of the Immigration Rules and then (although he  does  not
             refer to it) S.117B(6) NIAA 2002, it was  reasonable  for  the
             appellant's qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom.




         3.   The grounds are arguably correct in their assertion  that  the
             judge solely  measured  reasonableness  by  reference  to  the
             impact of separation from the child's remaining parent, rather
             than having any regard to child's best interest as  a  primary
             consideration, the guidance in MA (Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA  Civ
             705,  and  the  significance  placed  by  Parliament  and  the
             authorities on a child's British citizenship."

 9. Mr Melvin handed up his Rule 24 response dated 13 September 2018.   The
    judge's finding regarding the appellant's poor immigration history  was
    open to him on the evidence.  Although not referring to the  same,  the
    judge had followed the guidance in MA Pakistan  EWCA  Civ  705  [2016].
    See also AM Pakistan EWCA Civ 180 [2017] upholding MA.  Whilst  in  the
    best interests of the qualifying children to remain in the UK, the poor
    immigration history of the parents and the  wider  public  interest  in
    immigration control, outweighed the  children's  best  interests.   The
    appellant's poor immigration history was capable of  being  a  powerful
    reason in the "reasonableness" test.

Submissions on Error of Law

10. Ms Solanki relied upon the grounds.  She sought to distinguish a "poor"
    immigration history  from  a  "very  poor"  immigration  history.   The
    distinction arises from [7] of SF and others (Guidance, post-2014  Act)
    Albania [2017] UKUT 120 (IAC) which refers to the guidance "family life
    as a partner or parent and private life, ten year routes".   It  refers
    to guidance regarding whether it would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  a
    British citizen child to leave the UK inter alia as follows:


          "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker must  not
          take a decision in relation to the parent or primary  carer  of  a
          British Citizen child where the effect of that decision  would  be
          to force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age
          of that child.   This  reflects  the  European  Court  of  Justice
          Judgment in Zambrano.


          Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
          or primary carer to return to a country outside the EU,  the  case
          must always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable
          to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that parent
          or primary carer.


          In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to the
          parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the  UK  with
          the child, provided that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
          genuine and subsisting parental relationship.


          It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the
          conduct  of  the  parent  or   primary   carer   gives   rise   to
          considerations of such weight as to  justify  separation,  if  the
          child could otherwise stay  with  another  parent  or  alternative
          primary carer in the UK or in the EU.


          The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:


            . criminality falling below the thresholds set out in  paragraph
              398 of the Immigration Rules;


            . a very poor (my emphasis) immigration history, such  as  where
              the  person  has  repeatedly  and  deliberately  breached  the
              Immigration Rules.


          In considering whether refusal may  be  appropriate  the  decision
          maker must consider the impact on the child of any separation.  If
          the decision maker is minded to  refuse,  in  circumstances  where
          separation would be the result, this decision should  normally  be
          discussed with a senior caseworker and, where appropriate,  advice
          may be sought from the Office of the Children's  Champion  on  the
          implications for the welfare of the child, in order to inform  the
          decision."

11. Mr Melvin relied upon the Rule 24 response.

Conclusion on Error of Law

12. Having arrived lawfully, as of 2004  the  appellant  had  no  leave  to
    remain.  In 2010 he made an asylum claim  which  was  refused  and  his
    appeal against the decision dismissed.  He was appeal rights  exhausted
    on 30 July 2010.  On 23 October 2013 the  appellant  submitted  another
    application which was refused with no right of  appeal.   He  submitted
    his current application in July 2016.

13. The judge described the appellant's immigration history  as  "poor"  at
    [25] of the decision.  I do not accept  there  is  any  distinction  in
    terms of the case law between a "poor" and a  "very  poor"  immigration
    history which would give rise to an error of law on  the  part  of  the
    judge in describing the appellant's immigration history as "poor".

14. The  judge  found  the  appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his partner who has ILR.  The judge took into account
    that the appellant had a genuine  and  subsisting  parent  relationship
    with two British children and correctly  identified  the  issue  as  to
    whether it would be reasonable to expect them to  leave  the  UK.   See
    [23].  The judge took the Home Office guidance into account.  See [24].
     The children are aged 3 and 9 months.  I accept that the judge  failed
    to consider in terms S.117B(6) or MA Pakistan, however, he carried  out
    an appropriate analysis nevertheless.  He took into  account  that  the
    appellant is the main point of contact for Elijah, age 3,  who  attends
    Grasshoppers  Day  Nursery.  He  correctly  identified  and  considered
    whether it would be reasonable to expect the children to leave the  UK.
    He found that there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing outside the UK.  It was simply a  matter  of  choice  as  to
    whether the family  chose  to  relocate  to  Zimbabwe  or  whether  the
    appellant's partner and children chose to remain here.

15. The appellant's circumstances and that of his children can  be  readily
    distinguished from those in MT  and  ET  (child's  best  interests;  ex
    tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 00088 (IAC).

16. Although the judge did not  engage  with  the  best  interests  of  the
    children in terms of return  to  Zimbabwe,  I  do  not  find  he  erred
    materially in that regard.  The children are of such tender years  that
    inevitably, their best interests must be to remain with  both  parents,
    whether that is here in the United Kingdom or Zimbabwe;  there  was  no
    credible evidence before the judge to suggest otherwise. As  the  judge
    correctly identified, the decision of the appellant and his partner was
    their choice to make on behalf of the children.

Notice of Decision

17. The judge did not materially err in his decision which shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart                14 September 2018






