








UPPER Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12666/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 26 June 2019                     | On: 11 July 2019                    |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer



                                   Between

                              Mrs Zarka Shaheen
                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           entry clearance officer

                                                                  Respondent



Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms S Iengar, counsel, instructed by Bushrah Siddique

For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS



   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on  13  September  1989.
      She appeals with permission against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, promulgated  on  10  January  2019,  dismissing  her  appeal
      against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to  grant  her  entry
      clearance as the partner of Mr Muhammad Irfan.

   2. The appellant's appeal was considered on the papers. The  Judge  noted
      that there was an  absence  of  witness  statements  from  either  the
      appellant or her husband, providing details of their lives together or
      their future intentions. He was thus not satisfied that  the  marriage
      is subsisting and there was insufficient evidence that the parties had
      had family life together.

   3. In granting the appellant permission to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Andrew noted that a letter dated 4 January 2019 had been sent to
      the appellant by the respondent indicating that the original  decision
      had been withdrawn and that a recommendation had been made that  entry
      clearance be granted.

   4. However, that letter was unfortunately not drawn to the  attention  of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge prior to promulgation of the appeal  ten
      days later.

   5. The letter sent to the appellant from the respondent  concluded  that,
      on the balance of probabilities, her partner had resided  in  Pakistan
      for five years as stated in  her  application  and  it  was  therefore
      accepted that she met the relationship requirements under Appendix  FM
      of the Immigration Rules.

   6. It was further stated in the letter that it would only be  under  rare
      circumstances that the withdrawal of the decision will not  result  in
      the grant of entry clearance. It was submitted that there is therefore
      no good reason not to permit the withdrawal.  It  was  requested  that
      permission therefore be granted that this appeal be withdrawn.

   7. Ms Iengar submitted at the hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal  on  26
      June 2019, that it is still not clear that  the  original  application
      for entry clearance has been granted. There has been a  lengthy  delay
      since 4 January 2019.

   8. She submitted that as it had  been  concluded  that  the  relationship
      requirements under  Appendix  FM  of  the  Rules  had  been  met,  the
      appellant's appeal before the Upper Tribunal should be allowed.

   9. Mr Walker, on behalf of the respondent, accepted that in light of  the
      concession that the relationship requirements had been met, the appeal
      should be allowed. He submitted that there would have been a different
      outcome had the First-tier Tribunal Judge been aware of the fact  that
      the decision under appeal had been withdrawn as of 4 January 2019.  He
      stated that in the circumstances, the respondent did  not  oppose  the
      appeal.







      Assessment

  10. It is accepted that as at the date of the decision,  the  requirements
      of Appendix FM were met. Accordingly, Article 8  is  engaged  and  the
      public  interest  requirements  no  longer  stand  in  the  way  of  a
      successful appeal. It  is  accepted  that  in  the  circumstances  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal cannot stand.

  11. I accordingly set it aside  and  re-make  the  decision  allowing  the
      appellant's human rights appeal under Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights
      Convention.

  12. In a direction dated 10 April 2019, Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul noted
      that given the fact that  the  decision  under  the  appeal  had  been
      withdrawn on 4 January 2019, there appeared to be no reason to proceed
      to an oral hearing. The parties were reminded that they were  under  a
      duty to notify the Upper Tribunal if leave to enter has been  granted.
      They were directed to notify the Tribunal within ten days of the issue
      of the directions whether leave has been granted or whether either  of
      them wishes to withdraw their appeal. The parties were put  on  notice
      that if the matter proceeds to appeal, it is likely that a costs order
      will be made against the losing party.

  13. Ms Iengar stated that the appellant is to consider  whether  to  apply
      for a wasted costs order.

      Notice of Decision

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law. Having set it aside, I re-make  the  decision
      allowing the appellant's appeal.

      Anonymity direction not made.




      Signed       Dated: 6 July 2019

      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer



