
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  HU/12029/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On 2 July 2020                       |On 14 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     A L
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  As this is  a  case
involving minor children, it is appropriate to continue that order.   Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family. This  direction  applies,  amongst
others, to both parties. Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead
to contempt of court proceedings.

BACKGROUND

1.   The Appellant appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge S P J Buchanan promulgated on 30 December 2019 ("the  Decision").
    The Judge dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision dated 5 July 2019 refusing  his  human  rights  claim  in  the
    context of the making of a deportation order against him.

2.   The Appellant is a national of Albania.  The Appellant  was  convicted,
    on 8 August 2013, of attempting/assisting unlawful immigration into  an
    EU member state.  He was convicted in a different name, claiming to  be
    a Greek national.  There is however no dispute that it is the Appellant
    who was convicted nor that his real name is as now given and that he is
    Albanian and not Greek.  The Appellant was sentenced to  two  years  in
    prison reduced to one year on appeal.  Accordingly, it is not  disputed
    that he is a "foreign criminal" for the purposes of  section  32(5)  UK
    Borders Act 2007, the Immigration Rules and Section 117A-D Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, in particular section 117C of that Act
    ("Section 117C").

3.   The Appellant's human rights claim centres  on  his  relationship  with
    his partner [M], his stepson [K] (born  in  2014)  and  his  biological
    daughter [A] (born in 2016).  [K] was aged nearly six years at the date
    of the Decision and [A] was aged three years.  The  Respondent  accepts
    that the Appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  his
    partner  and  both  children.   It  is  not  disputed  that  [M]  is  a
    naturalised British citizen (of Iranian origin) and that both  children
    are British nationals. The crux of the dispute between the  parties  is
    whether it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in  the  UK
    without the Appellant or to go with him and their mother to Albania.

4.   The Judge accepted that it was in the best interests of  both  children
    that they remain in the UK with  both  parents.  However,  he  did  not
    accept that it would be unduly harsh for the children to either go with
    their parents to Albania or to remain with their mother in the UK.  For
    those reasons, the Judge dismissed the appeal on human rights  grounds.
    I will come to the detail of the reasoning below.

5.   The Appellant appealed the Decision out of time, but time was  extended
    by the Judge granting permission to appeal and I need say no more about
    that.  The grounds of appeal focus on the findings as to the  children.
    In relation to whether it would be unduly harsh  for  the  children  to
    leave the UK, it is submitted that the Judge  has  failed  to  consider
    this question  in  conjunction  with  the  case-law  relating  to  best
    interests.  It is said that the Judge  has  failed  to  consider  their
    British nationality when addressing this question.  As to whether  they
    could remain in the UK without  the  Appellant  it  is  said  that  the
    Judge's findings (at [48] to [54]  of  the  Decision)  do  not  include
    findings about the evidence of [M] as to the impact of the  Appellant's
    deportation on her and has also  failed  to  give  weight  or  adequate
    weight to the report of the independent social  worker,  Ms  Weeks.   I
    point out at  this  stage  that  the  Appellant  can  only  succeed  in
    establishing a material error of law if both grounds are made out.   If
    the Judge was entitled to conclude that it would not  be  unduly  harsh
    either for the children to go to Albania or to remain in the UK without
    the Appellant, then the Appellant's appeal would fail in any event  and
    any error as to one or other conclusion would be immaterial.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  M
    Holmes on 13 March 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:

         "... 3.  Although the grounds suggest that the Respondent  informed
         the Appellant on 11 December 2013 that  deportation  would  not  be
         pursued as a result of his conviction of 27.6.13,  the  grounds  do
         not suggest the Judge fell into error of law  in  failing  to  take
         this into  account  in  his  assessment  of  proportionality.   The
         Appellant may  wish  to  consider  amending  the  grounds  in  this
         respect.

         4.   The grounds, as drafted, argue that the Judge fell into  error
         in his approach to the weight to be given to the  circumstances  of
         the Appellant's partner and children  and  his  relationships  with
         them, pursuant to s117C(5).  It was not in issue  that  these  were
         genuine and subsisting relationships with 'qualifying' individuals,
         and it is arguable that the Judge fell into error in  his  approach
         to whether deportation would be 'unduly harsh' on either or both of
         them.  It is in particular arguable that no specific  consideration
         was given to ability of the British citizenship to  exercise  [sic]
         the privileges of citizenship in the event  of  a  family  move  to
         Albania,  and  that  the  Judge  erred  in  his  approach  to   the
         unchallenged evidence of the independent social worker who  advised
         that deportation would have a detrimental emotional impact  on  the
         children and a significant emotional and  physical  impact  on  his
         partner, and thus in his approach to the assessment  of  the  'best
         interests' of the children."

7.   Based on the merits, time was extended if the application was  in  fact
    out of time.  I note that  there  has  been  no  application  to  amend
    grounds pursuant to what is  said  at  [3]  of  the  decision  granting
    permission  to  appeal  and  nor  is  this  mentioned  in  the  further
    submissions to which I refer below.  The point is  alluded  to  in  the
    initial grounds; it is said that the Respondent informed the  Appellant
    on 11 December 2013 that deportation would not be pursued.  However, in
    the Appellant's original notice of appeal  the  Respondent's  decision,
    the following is said:

         "6.  As a result of this reduced sentence, and on the basis of  him
         using a false Greek identity, the respondent decided not to  pursue
         deportation  as  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  criteria  for
         deportation under the 2006 regulations..."

         [my emphasis]

    The Appellant was convicted as an EEA national.  The original notice of
    deportation in 2013 was issued in that  identity.   It  was  not  until
    September 2018 when the Appellant applied for leave to remain based  on
    his family relationships that he admitted  to  his  real  identity  and
    nationality.  I assume therefore that it is  accepted  that,  factually
    and legally, the position has changed since  the  Respondent  indicated
    that she would not deport the Appellant  and  therefore  the  potential
    challenge to the Decision identified by Judge Holmes is not made out on
    the facts.

8.   By a Note and Directions dated 23 April 2020 and sent on  6  May  2020,
    having reviewed the file, I reached the provisional view that it  would
    be appropriate to determine without a hearing (pursuant to Rule  34  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  -  "the  Procedure
    Rules") the following questions:

    (a)  whether the making of the First-tier Tribunal's decision  involved
         the making of an error of law and, if so

    (b)  whether that decision should be set aside.

    Directions were given for the parties to make submissions in writing on
    the appropriateness of that course and further submissions in  relation
    to the error of law. The reasons for the Note and  Directions  was  the
    "present need to take precautions against the spread of  Covid-19,  and
    the overriding objective expressed in the Procedure Rules".

9.   Written submissions including a copy of the core documents  were  filed
    by the Appellant on 20 May 2020.  On 29 May 2020, the Respondent  filed
    and served submissions in response.  Although those are two days out of
    time, I extend time as the delay is minimal.  No submissions were filed
    by the Appellant in response to what is said by the Respondent.

10.  The  Appellant's  submissions  refer  back  to  and  elaborate  on  the
    original grounds.  The Appellant expressly accepts  at  [18]  of  those
    submissions that "[s]ubject to the respondent's  reply,  the  appellant
    does not see there is a need for an oral hearing to determine the error
    of law".  As I have already noted, the Appellant has not  changed  that
    stance in reply to the Respondent's submissions.  Although it  is  said
    at [20] that "the appellant has been denied to [sic] a  fair  hearing",
    it is my understanding that this unfairness relates to what is said  in
    the body of the submissions about the asserted failure by the Judge  to
    consider and take  into  account  relevant  evidence.   As  such,  this
    submission relates to the forum for the re-making of the  decision  and
    not the error of  law  stage.   The  Respondent  seeks  to  uphold  the
    Decision.  She says at [11] of her submissions that "this error of  law
    matter should be determined on the papers without an oral hearing".

11.  The Tribunal has the power to make a decision without a  hearing  under
    rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.  Rule 34(2) requires me to have  regard
    to the views of the parties.  In this case, neither  party  objects  to
    this  course.   The  exercise  of  my  discretion  is  subject  to  the
    overriding objective in rule 2 to enable  the  Tribunal  to  deal  with
    cases fairly and justly.  The Appellant has had  two  opportunities  to
    set out his challenge to the Decision in writing (and a third to  reply
    to the Respondent's submissions which he has not taken).  Although  the
    grounds are quite concise, the issues raised are narrow and  depend  on
    what is said in the evidence and about that evidence in  the  Decision.
    My attention is drawn in the grounds and  the  further  submissions  to
    those parts of the evidence and the  Decision  which  are  particularly
    relevant, and I have read those carefully when  reaching  my  decision.
    It is difficult to see what more could be said orally in support of the
    grounds if a hearing were to be convened.  Although it is possible  for
    the Tribunal to hold remote  hearings  and  even  limited  face-to-face
    hearings at the present time, its capacity to do  so  is  reduced  from
    what would normally be available.  The convening of an oral hearing  is
    accordingly likely to lead to some delay in the determination  of  this
    appeal.  I have therefore reached the view that it  is  appropriate  to
    deal with the error of law issue on the  papers  and  without  an  oral
    hearing.

12.  At this stage, the issue for me is whether  the  Decision  contains  an
    error of law.  If I conclude it does, I  need  to  consider  whether  I
    should set aside the Decision based on that error.  If I decide  to  do
    so, I would either re-make the decision or  remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to do so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

13.  The Appellant's arguments may be summarised as follows:

    Ground One

       . The Judge has failed to consider cases such as  ZH  (Tanzania)  and
         Zoumbas when looking at the children's best interests;

       . The Judge's finding that the  children  would  suffer  upheaval  in
         their education "could, of itself  or  in  combination  with  other
         factors, reach the threshold of unduly harsh".  The Judge  is  said
         to have excluded this because it was not  raised  in  the  skeleton
         argument or submissions, but the Judge has a duty to safeguard  the
         best interests of the children;

       . The absence of evidence about potential places where  the  children
         could live in Albania is not an answer  to  the  impact  of  taking
         British  children  out  of  their  country  of  nationality.    The
         children's "current circumstances must be the starting  point  into
         any enquiry into their best interests";

       . Reliance on [M]  having  not  learned  Albanian  as  a  ground  for
         concluding that taking British children out of the UK would not  be
         unduly harsh is "manifestly perverse";

       . "Overall,  the  judgement  [sic]  is  demonstrably  obtuse  in  its
         approach to the best interests of qualifying British  children,  in
         respect of whether it would be unduly harsh for them  to  be  taken
         out of the UK.  In this regard, the judge  has  failed  to  conduct
         this legal test with the  best  interests  of  the  children  as  a
         primary consideration and has thereby erred".

    Ground Two

       . Although the Judge has  made  findings  at  [48]  to  [54]  of  the
         Decision regarding the impact of removal of the  Appellant  on  [M]
         and her ability to parent the children,  the  Judge  has  not  made
         findings about [M]'s own evidence and the credibility of it and has
         failed to give reasons why the independent social  worker's  report
         on this issue was given little or no weight.

    Both Grounds

       . The Judge has drawn adverse inferences based  on  what  is  missing
         from the independent social  worker's  report  rather  than  giving
         weight to what is contained in the report;

       . The Judge has failed to adopt a "sensitive fact-finding  approach",
         has failed to consider [M]'s own evidence and has failed to provide
         reasons why the evidence of the independent social worker's  report
         was not taken into consideration.

14.  The Respondent has responded to both grounds  as  one.   Her  arguments
    can be summarised as follows:

       . The Judge took the case at  its  highest  based  primarily  on  the
         independent social worker's report at [34] of the Decision onwards;

       . At [54] of the Decision, the Judge concluded that [M]'s evidence as
         to what would occur was difficult to assess due to "lack of clarity
         on likelihood in the independent assessments";

       . The burden of establishing that deportation was unduly harsh is  on
         the Appellant.  He failed to demonstrate this taking  into  account
         [M]'s evidence which did not suggest  any  previous  mental  health
         problems or that she would be unable to work ([48] and [58] of  the
         Decision);

       . The Judge summarised the reasons why deportation  was  said  to  be
         unduly harsh on both bases at [43] and [46] of  the  Decision.   He
         gave sufficient reasons for his conclusions on those elements.

       . The Judge had regard to "the particularly demanding nature of these
         thresholds"   which   required   the   Appellant   to   demonstrate
         consequences "beyond the normal  impact  of  deportation  on  those
         qualifying parties".  That approach is in accordance with Court  of
         Appeal case-law.

15.  The Judge summarised the issues at [23] of the Decision.  The focus  of
    the Appellant's grounds is on issues (ii) and (iii) as there  set  out.
    I need say no more about the remaining issues.  As is clear  from  what
    is there said, the Judge recognised the need to consider the children's
    best interests  before  moving  on  to  consider  the  issue  of  undue
    harshness.

16.  The Judge set out the independent social worker's conclusion  that  the
    best interests of the children were to  remain  in  the  UK  with  both
    parents.  Although the Judge noted at [36] the absence  of  information
    in the social worker's report about the family's circumstances if  they
    were to go to Albania at [36] of the Decision  nothing  turns  on  that
    because at [37] of  the  Decision,  the  Judge  reached  the  following
    conclusion about the children's best interests:

         "Having regard to the whole evidence in appeal, I am persuaded that
         for each child it would be in his or  her  best  interests  if  the
         appellant remained in the UK.  I reach that conclusion because  (i)
         there is no suggestion that the appellant has not been  a  positive
         influence on the lives of the two children;  (ii)  the  independent
         social worker, Julie  Meek's  conclusion  is  consistent  with  the
         remaining evidence that the children are given parental support  by
         the appellant; and (iii) the respondent's conclusion  at  RFR31  is
         that deportation would have a harsh and  emotional  impact  on  the
         children.  The respondent's contention about  the  consequences  on
         the children, is plainly based on an assessment  that  there  is  a
         strength  of  relationship  and  bond  between  the  appellant  and
         children which forms the basis  of  such  an  assessment.   Nothing
         presented in evidence, including the appellant's criminality,  gave
         me cause to doubt the depth of relationships and bonds."

17.  As is self-evident  from  what  is  there  said,  the  Judge  therefore
    reached the conclusion that it would be in the best  interests  of  the
    children to remain in the  UK  with  both  parents.   He  reached  that
    conclusion before moving on to consider  whether  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the children to accompany their parents to Albania or  remain
    with their mother in the UK.  The best interests of the  children  were
    therefore given the appropriate primacy.  The  real  complaint  of  the
    author of the grounds is that those interests were not given sufficient
    weight when reaching the conclusions as to undue harshness.

18.  Attention is drawn in the grounds to case-law about the primacy of  the
    best interests of children.  However, both cases on which  reliance  is
    placed are cases involving  removal  and  not  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals.  The weight to be given to best interests has to  be  viewed
    in the context of the public interest considerations which  apply.   As
    the Respondent points out, the test whether deportation  outweighs  the
    public interest in terms of its consequences on children is a high  and
    demanding one.  That is consistent with the relevant case-law as  cited
    by the Respondent, in  particular  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v KF (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 2051.  Having determined that
    the best interests of the children lay in remaining with  both  parents
    in the UK, the issue  for  the  Judge  was  whether,  nonetheless,  the
    consequences of deportation for the  children  were  of  "a  degree  of
    harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child
    faced with the deportation of a parent".

19.   For  those  reasons,  there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the   Judge's
    consideration  of  the  children's  best  interests.  That  issue   was
    determined in the Appellant's favour.

20.  Moving on then to the issue  of  undue  harshness,  the  Judge  rightly
    identified, as I have already  indicated,  that  "the  benefit  of  the
    exception  to  the  public  interest   requirement   (that   there   be
    deportation) can only be claimed as regards qualifying children,  where
    both sets of circumstances as specified in paragraph 399(a)(i) (a)  and
    (b) would give rise to undue harshness" ([42]).  In  other  words,  the
    Appellant has to show both that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    children to relocate to Albania with him and [M] and that it  would  be
    unduly harsh for them to remain in the UK with  [M]  and  without  him.
    There is no error of law in that self-direction.

21.  Moving on then to whether it would be unduly harsh for the children  to
    relocate to Albania, the Judge summarised the reasons why it  was  said
    that it would at [43] of the Decision.  In short  summary,  those  were
    that the Appellant did not know where he would live in Albania, the two
    children are respectively at school and nursery  and  doing  well,  [M]
    does not speak Albanian, [M] and both children are British citizens and
    [M] says that she does not intend to  relocate  with  the  children  to
    Albania.  As to that latter reason, the Judge  had  already  discounted
    that because, as he pointed out at [42], the issue is not  whether  the
    family would in fact go to Albania but whether it would be unduly harsh
    to  expect  them  to  do  so.   I  note  that  the  reasons  preventing
    deportation as recorded at [43] of the Decision are taken directly from
    the Appellant's skeleton argument before Judge Buchanan.

22.  The Judge dealt with each of those reasons at [44] of the  Decision  as
    follows:

         "In  my  judgement,  the  factors  claimed  by  the  appellant   to
         constitute unduly harsh consequences for  the  children  living  in
         Albania are not truly unduly harsh.  Factors (2), (3), (5) and  (6)
         having no bearing on whether living in Albania and attending school
         or nursery there would  give  rise  to,  or  materially  contribute
         towards unduly harsh consequences for either child.  Although there
         might  be  an  argument  that  a  move   from   present   schooling
         arrangements could be disruptive for either child or both of  them,
         that argument is not advanced in  the  skeleton  argument  and  not
         advanced at appeal.  As regards factor (1) there is no evidence  of
         any attempt to investigate possible places for the family  to  live
         if the children went  to  live  in  Albania;  and  I  am  far  from
         persuaded, without more, that  ignorance  about  where  the  family
         might live could give rise to, or  materially  contribute  towards,
         unduly harsh consequences for either child.  As regards factor (4),
         there is no evidence of any attempt by [M] to learn  the  language;
         but no evidence of the mother suffering any personal difficulty  in
         picking  up  foreign  languages  in  general  either.    In   these
         circumstances, I am far from persuaded that, without more, the fact
         that mother  does  not  speak  Albanian  might  give  rise  to,  or
         materially contribute towards, unduly harsh consequences for either
         child."

23.  As  I  have  already  pointed  out,  the  burden  of  establishing  the
    interference with human rights lies with  an  appellant.   I  therefore
    start with the evidence  produced.   I  do  not  understand  it  to  be
    disputed that the Appellant's skeleton argument does not deal with  the
    disruption to the children's education other than to note that they are
    doing well at school.  Neither do I understand it to be  disputed  that
    neither of the social worker's reports  deal  with  this  issue.   That
    appears to be because both have  assumed  that  the  family  would  not
    accompany the Appellant.  However, the fact remains that  evidence  and
    argument was not addressed to this issue.

24.  Notwithstanding that lack of evidence, the Judge did consider  what  it
    might mean for the children to relocate to Albania.  As he points  out,
    he was not provided with evidence about where the family might go  and,
    therefore he was not in a position to deal  in  detail  with  what  the
    position would be as to education opportunities.  I note of course that
    both children are very young and have only just begun  their  education
    which is relevant.  It is not suggested that either child  has  special
    educational needs which need to be taken into account.  Whilst I accept
    that disruption to education could render deportation unduly harsh  for
    a child, the position depends on the evidence.  Here, that evidence was
    absent.

25.  The author of the grounds appears to have misunderstood  what  is  said
    about [M]'s inability  to  speak  Albanian.   The  Judge  accepted  the
    evidence that she does not speak Albanian but pointed  out  that  there
    was no evidence that she could not learn it.  That comes in  particular
    from the fact that [M]'s initial statement shows that she is Iranian by
    birth and came to the UK in 2011, then aged nearly 30 years.   She  now
    speaks English.

26.  I turn finally to the point  which  appears  to  have  persuaded  Judge
    Holmes to grant permission on this aspect  namely  the  effect  of  the
    children being British and losing their right to an education in the UK
    and other rights as British citizens.  If this were a removals case,  I
    would certainly agree with that view.  However, the Immigration  Rules,
    Section 117C, the Respondent's policy and,  most  importantly,  binding
    case-law makes it quite clear that the fact of a child being British is
    no barrier to deportation of a foreign criminal parent.  As  the  case-
    law cited by the Respondent makes clear, what is required to  be  shown
    is that the consequences of deportation go beyond  what  would  be  the
    norm for a child impacted by the deportation of a parent.  In the  case
    of a British  citizen  child,  the  removal  of  that  child  from  the
    education system of the UK  is  a  natural  consequence  unless  it  is
    otherwise unduly harsh for them to relocate  to  the  country  of  that
    parent.

27.  For those reasons, the grounds challenging the first conclusion of  the
    Judge that the children could relocate with both parents to Albania  do
    not show an error of law.  Strictly, as I  have  already  pointed  out,
    that conclusion means that any error as to the impact if  the  children
    remain in the UK could not be material and I do not  need  to  consider
    the second ground.  Nonetheless, I do this for completeness.

28.  The reasons the Appellant says that the children and [M] cannot  remain
    in the UK without him are set out at [46] of the Decision as follows:

         "... (1) [M]'s inability to cope with 'being a single mother';  (2)
         [M] would have to leave her job and claim benefits;  (3)  [M]  'has
         previously been in a position  where  her  partner  left  her;  (4)
         father's absence 'negatively  affects  children's  social-emotional
         development particularly by  increasing  externalising  behaviour';
         (5) pronounced effects  if  'father  absence  occurs  during  early
         childhood'; and 'chronic or extreme adversity can interrupt  normal
         brain development'; (6) the appellant's inability  to  cope  alone;
         and (7)  'the  previous  breakdown  in  relationship  [M]  suffered
         resulted in her being unable to properly function without support."

    Once again, what is there  said  is  lifted  in  large  part  from  the
    Appellant's skeleton argument which itself relies in large part on  the
    independent social worker's report.

29.  As the Judge notes at [47] of the Decision, factors (1), (2),  (3)  and
    (7) rely on the impact on [M]'s ability to parent the children  in  the
    absence of the Appellant.  The Judge goes on to deal with the  evidence
    about that at [48] to [58] of the Decision which  I  set  out  in  full
    since most of the complaints made about  the  Decision  in  ground  two
    focus on that evidence:

         "48. At AB2-4, [M] states at WS4 that she would have to  leave  her
         job to look after her children, if the appellant was not living  in
         the UK.  She does not state there what her job  is;  and  does  not
         explain why she  might  be  forced  to  leave  her  job.   In  oral
         evidence, [M] said that she is a company  director  for  a  company
         registered to her address; and that she organises paperwork for the
         business.  She said that the business is a  plumbing  business  and
         that there are three plumbers who work for the company.   She  said
         that she currently works from home.

         49.  When pressed on why [M] would have to give up her job  if  the
         appellant is deported, [M] said: 'My mental  health  is  important.
         If [AL] is deported my mental health would be at risk.  I will  get
         depression.  It would be very difficult for  me  to  cope  with  my
         kids.  He helps with everything in our daily  life.   He's  helping
         raise the kids.  If I was alone it would be so difficult for me.  I
         couldn't cope with anything'.

         50.  At RB1-I, the independent social worker records [M]'s concerns
         about what would happen if the appellant was deported.  At  3.2  it
         is recorded that '[M] advised that it would be hard if [AL] was not
         here with them, he is her main support.  [M] informed me  that  she
         would be worried about becoming depressed if [AL] was not here,  he
         supports her both emotionally and physically'.

         51.  At 5.3 it is opined '..the constant worry of  the  unknown  in
         terms of their future as a family and what  would  happen  to  [AL]
         should he be deported is also having an emotional  impact  on  [M].
         If [M] is not emotionally stable herself then she could potentially
         be unable to recognise and meet the emotional needs of the children
         in relation to the loss of their father should [AL] be deported.

         52.  Although [M] is reported to have been 'hurt a lot by  her  ex-
         husband' [3.1], there is no detail given about what happened to [M]
         and her son at that time.  There are no examples given of the  day-
         to-day impact that her separation had on her; or of the  impact  on
         her emotional stability at that time [using the phrase used by  the
         author].

         53.  There are no examples of [M] being  unable  to  recognise  and
         meet the emotional needs of [K] at any time in  the  past,  to  any
         degree.

         54.  There is no discussion about the degree of likelihood  of  the
         range of potential outcomes  which  might  follow  the  appellant's
         deportation.  I am therefore unable to assess the scale of risk  of
         the stated potential of [M] being unable to recognise and meet  the
         emotional needs of her children.

         55.  I note that the author of the report does  not  conclude  that
         [M] is not 'emotionally stable' either now or at any  time  in  the
         past.

         56.  In the Addendum to the Independent Social Worker's  Report  at
         AB2-56 it is recorded at 3.3 that [M] said, 'she would  be  worried
         about becoming depressed if [AL] was not here, he supports her both
         emotionally and physically'.

         57.  Again the opinion is expressed at 4.4 at AB2-58 that  'if  [M]
         is not emotionally stable herself then  she  could  potentially  be
         unable to recognise and meet the emotional needs of the children in
         relation to the loss of their father should [AL] be deported';  but
         that  expression  of  opinion  does  not  discuss  the  degree   of
         likelihood of that scenario  coming  to  pass;  and  there  are  no
         examples of any past circumstances which resulted in such inability
         to recognise and meet the emotional  needs  of  the  children  from
         which it might have been possible to gauge future prospects.

         58.  There is no medical evidence concerning [M]'s mental health or
         any previous mental  health  issues  showing  a  susceptibility  to
         suffer from depression."

30.  Based on that record of  evidence,  the  Judge  reached  the  following
    conclusions:

         "59. In my judgment, the factual bases relating to factors  (1),(2)
         and (7) are not established in evidence.  I am  not  persuaded  (a)
         that [M] would not be able to cope as a single mother; (b) that [M]
         would have to leave her job;  (c)  that  [M]  was  left  unable  to
         properly function without support on the breakdown of her  previous
         relationship.  In my  judgement,  the  factual  basis  relating  to
         factor (3) is true but there is little detail about  what  happened
         when [M] had to cope as a single parent"

31.  It is not suggested in the grounds that the Judge has misunderstood  or
    failed to record the evidence about the reasons why deportation is said
    to be unduly harsh on the premise that [M] and the children  remain  in
    the UK.  The initial grounds submit that the Judge has failed  to  make
    findings as to credibility of  [M]'s  evidence  and/or  has  failed  to
    explain why the views of the social worker were  given  little  weight.
    There is  a  very  straightforward  answer  to  that  submission.   The
    evidence of [M] and the social worker  was  predicated  on  what  might
    happen if the Appellant is deported.  That has not yet occurred.   This
    is not so much an issue of credibility of the evidence,  therefore,  as
    an assessment of what may transpire  in  the  future.   The  Judge  was
    required to assess the possible outcome based on the facts and all  the
    evidence.   Indeed,  the  level  of  detail  included  in  the  Judge's
    assessment undermines the point made in the further  submissions  about
    the failure to make a fact-sensitive enquiry.

32.  When the passage I have cited is read as a whole, the  Judge  has  made
    sufficient findings based on the facts and evidence in this  case.   He
    takes into account that [M] was in  a  previous  relationship  and  was
    abandoned by her previous partner when [K] was a young child.  Whilst I
    accept that her statement says that the Appellant, as a friend who  she
    had met whilst still married, gave her emotional and  physical  support
    at that time, there is, as the Judge noted, no evidence  that  she  was
    unable to parent [K] on her own at that time.  Nor  is  there  evidence
    that she has had any medical intervention to deal  with  mental  health
    problems. In relation to her job, the Judge noted that  [M]  says  that
    she works from home.  Her own evidence was that she would have to  give
    up work because she would be unable to cope mentally and so the  points
    made by the Judge about the likelihood of that occurring apply equally.
    As such, the Judge was also entitled to reach the conclusion  that  the
    evidence from [M] did not support her assertion that she would have  to
    give up work.

33.  The Judge, when analysing the evidence, has explained why  he  did  not
    accept  that  the  evidence  provided  led  to  the   assessment   that
    deportation of the Appellant and separation from him would have  unduly
    harsh consequences for either [M] or her ability to parent.  The social
    worker's report is predicated on the assumption that the  impact  which
    [M] asserted would come to pass and it  is  self-evident  that  if  the
    Judge did not accept on the totality of the evidence that this was  the
    case, he would give the opinion of the social worker about  the  likely
    impact less weight.

34.  I do  not  understand  the  submission  that  the  drawing  of  adverse
    inferences from the absence of evidence amounts to  an  error  of  law.
    The Judge must make an assessment on the evidence which is produced  to
    him and not evidence which might have been but  was  not  produced.   I
    come back to the point  which  I  made  earlier  that  it  is  for  the
    Appellant to establish the level of interference with his human  rights
    and the rights of those affected by his deportation.  It is not for the
    Judge to assume facts where there is no substantiating evidence.

35.  The complaints raised in  ground  two  as  to  the  Judge's  conclusion
    regarding separation focus on the position of [M] and her  evidence  as
    to what would happen.  I note for completeness that the Judge  did  not
    place reliance on the views of the social worker as to  the  impact  on
    the children of separation from the Appellant because, as the Judge put
    it at [60] of the Decision, those factors are "so  generally  expressed
    by the author of the independent social worker that they would apply to
    all children faced with separation of a responsible and loving parent".
     It will be recalled, as noted by the Judge in the  following  sentence
    that what the Appellant is required to show is  that  the  consequences
    would be "unduly harsh", that is to say beyond the degree of  harshness
    which would normally be expected.   Looked at in the context of what is
    said by the social worker at [5.2] to [5.4] of the report dated 22 July
    2018 and [4.2] to [4.5] of that dated  3  December  2019,  the  Judge's
    description of the  assessed  impact  on  the  children  as  "generally
    expressed" cannot be faulted.  There is no error of law in relation  to
    the weight given to the social worker's views for the reasons he gave.

36.  For those reasons, ground two is not made out.  The Judge was  entitled
    to reach the conclusions he did that the consequences of deportation of
    the Appellant and separation of him from [M] and the children would not
    be unduly harsh.

37.  I do not understand the initial grounds or further submissions to  take
    any issue with the Judge's further conclusions as to whether there  are
    compelling circumstances over and above the two exceptions  in  Section
    117C.  Although part of the Decision in that regard is cited at [8]  of
    the further submissions, the purpose of that citation appears to be  to
    support the point  made  about  drawing  adverse  inferences  from  the
    absence of evidence (with which  issue  I  have  already  dealt).   For
    completeness, I cannot identify any error of law in  what  is  said  at
    [67] to [69] of the Decision in that regard nor in the overall analysis
    in relation to Article 8 ECHR thereafter.

38.  For those reasons, the grounds  do  not  establish  that  the  Decision
    contains any error of law and I therefore uphold the Decision with  the
    consequence that the Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.



DECISION

The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge SPJ  Buchanan  promulgated  on  30
December 2019 does not involve the making of an error on a point of law.   I
therefore uphold the Decision with  the  consequence  that  the  Appellant's
appeal remains dismissed.


Signed   L K Smith     Dated: 2 July 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

