
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12057/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On 1 December 2017                   |On 7 December 2017                   |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                 TASLIMA [B]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Daykin, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW

The appeal

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 8 July 1996. On  17
       July 2015, she married Mr [NM] ("the  sponsor"),  who  is  a  British
       citizen born on 25 February 1978. She then made  an  application  for
       entry clearance as a partner under Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
       Rules, HC395. On 7 April 2016, she was interviewed about her marriage
       and her relationship  with  the  sponsor.  This  disclosed  that  the
       sponsor was suffering from depression and  schizophrenia,  conditions
       which required him to receive personal  care.  The  appellant  stated
       that she was happy to provide that care for her husband. However, the
       Entry Clearance Officer was  not  satisfied  that  the  marriage  was
       genuine, ongoing  or  that  the  couple  intended  to  live  together
       permanently in the  UK.  Furthermore,  it  was  considered  that  the
       appellant had entered a marriage of convenience in order  to  provide
       care for  sponsor.  The  appellant  appealed,  complaining  that  the
       decision was unreasonable and did not accurately reflect what she had
       stated at the interview.

    2.  The  appeal  was  heard  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  sitting  at
       Harmondsworth, on 17 July 2017. This  was  a  'float  case'  and  the
       respondent was unrepresented.  The  judge  heard  evidence  from  the
       sponsor and two of his friends. She directed herself that the  burden
       of proof was on the respondent to show that this was  a  marriage  of
       convenience. However, she considered that the respondent in this case
       had good reason to find  this  was  a  marriage  of  convenience  and
       therefore the burden shifted to the appellant to provide evidence  to
       counter the respondent's reasoning.

    3. The judge recognised that there was no challenge to the oral evidence
       owing to the absence of a presenting officer. She accepted  that  the
       appellant and the sponsor spoke to each other often. She  found  that
       the copies of WhatsApp messages which had been provided did not  show
       much dialogue. I pause to note that it is  true  that  they  do  not,
       although there is expression of affection in them. Returning  to  the
       decision, the judge noted that one of the witnesses, who had seen the
       couple in Bangladesh, was unaware that the appellant  had  stated  at
       her interview that she had  married  the  sponsor  because  she  felt
       sympathy for him.

    4. The judge considered another area of concern was that  the  appellant
       did not know why  the  sponsor  had  divorced  his  first  wife.  She
       reasoned that, if the marriage were genuine and  not  one  which  had
       been entered into in order for the sponsor to have a carer, then  the
       couple would have discussed why  his  previous  marriage  had  broken
       down, especially as the reasons  appeared  to  have  related  to  the
       sponsor's illness. The judge agreed  with  the  respondent  that  the
       interview  record  showed  that  the  appellant  did  not  have  much
       knowledge  about  depression  and  did  not   know   anything   about
       schizophrenia.

    5. It is worth recording at this point that the judge was shown evidence
       of the points awarded to the sponsor by the DWP  in  respect  of  his
       Personal Independence Payment ("PIP") claim. This  showed  he  needed
       help to prepare and cook a simple meal, he needed prompting to eat or
       drink, he needed an aid or appliance  to  manage  his  medication  or
       supervision, he needed assistance from another person to get  in  and
       out of the bath or shower, he needed an aid or  appliance  to  manage
       his toilet needs  or  incontinence  and  he  needed  assistance  from
       another person to dress and undress his lower half. I note  from  the
       appellant's bundle that the sponsor was also found to be able to walk
       no further than 200 metres. That  is  because,  in  addition  to  his
       mental health difficulties, the sponsor has back and knee pain.

    6. The judge accepted the sponsor had visited  the  appellant  on  three
       occasions, including a visit on their wedding anniversary.  She  also
       accepted that funds had been sent  to  the  appellant.  However,  she
       concluded that this  evidence  did  not  rebut  the  finding  of  the
       respondent that the appellant was coming to the UK solely to  be  the
       carer for the sponsor. She dismissed the appeal.

    7. The grounds seeking permission to appeal argued the judge  had  erred
       by failing to place any weight on the unchallenged  evidence  of  two
       witnesses. In relation to one of the witnesses, no reasons  had  been
       given at all for not doing so. The reasons given  for  rejecting  the
       evidence of the other witness were insufficient. The judge had failed
       to approach the evidence from  a  culturally  sensitive  perspective,
       recognising that couples who enter into arranged marriages  may  have
       spent little  time  together  prior  to  the  marriage.  The  grounds
       suggested that the judge's reliance on the appellant's apparent  lack
       of  knowledge  regarding  the   sponsor's   health   conditions   was
       inconsistent with the finding that the appellant was coming to the UK
       as a carer. The grounds suggested the judge's conclusion,  that  this
       was a marriage of  convenience,  was  completely  at  odds  with  her
       acceptance  of  the  sponsor's  visits  to  the  appellant  and   the
       remittance of funds.

    8. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier  Tribunal  because
       it was arguable the tribunal had failed to have  regard  to  material
       evidence, had drawn adverse inferences from matters that had not been
       put to one of the witnesses, and had made contradictory and  perverse
       findings of fact. It was also arguable the tribunal  had  erroneously
       applied a legal, as opposed to an evidential, burden of proof on  the
       appellant.

    9. The respondent has filed a rule 24 response opposing the appeal. This
       argues that the judge gave adequate reasons for findings  which  were
       open  to  her  on  the  evidence  before  her.  The  grounds  seeking
       permission to appeal were mere disagreement with those  findings  and
       attempted to reargue the matter before the Upper Tribunal.

   10. I heard submissions  from  the  representatives  as  to  whether  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law.



The submissions

   11. Ms Daykin, who also  represented  the  appellant  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, built on her written grounds seeking permission to  appeal.
       She reiterated that the evidence of the additional witnesses had  not
       been challenged and one of them, Mr Tariqur Rahman, had travelled  to
       Bangladesh with the sponsor and spent time with the couple there. The
       judge's reason for rejecting his evidence, which was that he had  not
       known what the appellant had said at her interview, was insufficient.
       The matter had not been put to the witness, there was no substance in
       the challenge because there was no reason  he  would  know  what  the
       appellant had said at interview and the judge's reasoning ignored the
       cultural context.

   12. Ms Daykin next argued the judge's finding  that  the  appellant  knew
       little about the sponsor's health conditions  was  inconsistent  with
       her conclusion that the appellant was coming to the UK  as  a  carer.
       However, as I  said  at  the  hearing,  I  did  not  think  that  was
       necessarily the case. The judge had set  out  the  considerable  care
       needs recognised in the  sponsor's  award  of  PIP  and  it  was  not
       suggested these in any way overstated his degree  of  disability.  It
       did not appear to me to be the  case  that  the  judge  believed  the
       appellant was coming as a professional carer or someone who might  be
       expected to have medical training or knowledge. The  judge's  concern
       appeared to have been that the appellant was being brought to the  UK
       as an unskilled carer under the guise of marriage.

   13. Ms Daykin summarised her challenge as being that  the  appellant  had
       provided a lot of evidence supporting her case and the judge had  not
       given sufficient sustainable reasons for rejecting it.

   14. There was also some discussion of the additional  point,  raised  for
       the first time in the grant of permission to appeal, that  the  judge
       may have placed a legal burden on the appellant,  as  opposed  to  an
       evidential  burden.  Ms  Daykin  did  not  pursue  this   with   much
       enthusiasm. She agreed it was  possible  the  judge  had  misdirected
       herself by using the term "rebut" in paragraph 32.

   15. However, as I pointed out at the hearing,  at  paragraph  25  of  her
       decision the judge had correctly directed herself in accordance  with
       Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage  of  convenience)  [2012]  UKUT  38
       (IAC) in which the Upper Tribunal held that there was  no  burden  at
       the outset of an application on a  claimant  to  demonstrate  that  a
       marriage was not a marriage of convenience. The earlier  case  of  IS
       (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT  31  only  established
       that there was an  evidential  burden  on  the  claimant  to  address
       evidence justifying reasonable suspicion that the marriage  had  been
       entered into  for  the  predominant  purpose  of  securing  residence
       rights. The Upper Tribunal made it clear throughout the decision that
       they did not accept there was a burden, as  such,  on  the  appellant
       and, at paragraph 39, stated,

           "... in summary, our understanding is that, where the  issue  is
           raised in an appeal, the question for the judge  will  therefore
           be in the light of the totality of the  information  before  me,
           including the assessment  of  the  claimant's  answers  and  any
           information provided, am I satisfied that it  is  more  probable
           than not this is a marriage of convenience?"

   16. I said I did not consider the judge  had  fallen  into  error  simply
       because she  used  the  word  "rebut".  She  followed  precisely  the
       approach described in Papajorgji. All she was saying in paragraph  32
       was that the appellant had not provided sufficient evidence  at  that
       point in the case to succeed on the issue because  her  evidence  was
       outweighed by the matters put forward earlier  in  the  case  by  the
       respondent. That is a classic  example  of  the  shifting  evidential
       burden.

   17. In reply to Ms Daykin's submissions, Ms Everett accepted this  was  a
       "tricky case". However, her overarching submission was that the judge
       had given cogent reasons for her conclusion, which was not  perverse.
       She argued there was an internal  contradiction  in  the  appellant's
       case. Whilst it was presented as an  arranged  marriage  in  which  a
       couple might not have known much about each other in  the  beginning,
       the appellant's case was also put forward on the basis that they knew
       each other very well. In the light of that, it was legitimate for the
       judge to find it significant that the appellant  had  not,  in  fact,
       known anything about the appellant's illnesses.

   18. As Ms Everett had raised it, I asked Ms Daykin whether her  challenge
       was that the judge's decision was perverse.  She  confirmed  it  was,
       even though this had not been expressly mentioned  before.  I  remind
       myself that, in R (Iran and Others v SSHD) [2005] EWCA Civ 982 Brooke
       LJ set out the test for perversity as follows -

           "11.   ... It is well known that "perversity" represents a  very
           high hurdle. In Miftari v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ  481,  the  whole
           court agreed that  the  word  meant  what  it  said:  it  was  a
           demanding concept. The majority of the court (Keene and  Maurice
           Kay LJJ) said that it embraced decisions that were irrational or
           unreasonable in the Wednesbury  sense  (even  if  there  was  no
           wilful or conscious departure from the rational),  but  it  also
           included a finding of fact that was wholly  unsupported  by  the
           evidence, provided always that  this  was  a  finding  as  to  a
           material matter.."

   19. I reserved my decision as to whether the decision of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal should be set aside for material error of law in  accordance
       with section 12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.



Decision on error of law

   20. I start by making clear that it has never  been  suggested  that  the
       sponsor lacked capacity to marry. Most cases seen in the tribunals in
       which the sponsor has significant mental or physical disabilities are
       centred  on  the  issues  of  genuineness  and  intentions.   In   my
       experience, and I think in that of  the  representatives  also,  this
       case is unusual in including an  allegation  that  the  marriage  was
       entered into with  the  predominant  purpose  of  securing  residence
       rights for the appellant. Such allegations are usually made where EEA
       rights are in issue. The judge in this case confined her reasoning to
       the issue  of  whether  this  was  a  marriage  of  convenience  and,
       logically, this disposed of the issues of genuineness and  intentions
       as well. The judge concluded this was not a genuine marriage  because
       it had been arranged in order to provide the sponsor  with  a  carer,
       rather than a marriage partner.

   21. As it has been raised, I must address the perversity challenge first.
       I have already set out the high threshold for success on this  ground
       and, as noted, Ms Daykin held back from expressing her  arguments  in
       those terms until pushed. Was  the  judge's  decision  irrational  or
       unreasonable in the sense that the judge's conclusion was not one  it
       was possible for her to reach on the  evidence?  Was  her  conclusion
       that this was a marriage of convenience  when  it  was  entered  into
       wholly unsupported by the evidence?

   22. I find the judge's decision was not perverse. I  accept  that,  faced
       with this evidence, many  judges  would  have  come  to  a  different
       conclusion but that  is  not  the  point.  The  judge  was  evidently
       persuaded by the appellant's apparent ignorance of the true nature of
       her husband's illnesses and also the reasons for the breakdown of his
       previous marriage that, despite the evidence pointing the other  way,
       this was a marriage  of  convenience.  That  was  not  an  irrational
       decision and not one which was wholly unsupported by evidence.

   23. I have also explained why I do not  consider  the  judge  misdirected
       herself as to the incidence of the burden of proof or that  she  made
       contradictory findings with regard to the  appellant's  knowledge  of
       the sponsor's health problems.

   24. The grounds argue that the judge  erred  by  failing  to  put  to  Mr
       Tariqur Rahman the reason which led her to  discredit  his  evidence.
       This challenge might fall within the category of unfairness. However,
       to my mind, this issue goes to the question of  whether  the  judge's
       reasons for her conclusion were adequate. It can be considered within
       Ms Daykin's overarching submission that  the  judge  failed  to  give
       adequate reasons for concluding this was a marriage of convenience in
       the face of the strong evidence to  the  contrary  and  the  cultural
       context applicable to this particular couple.

   25. The rule 24 response made the important point that mere  disagreement
       with the decision is not an error of  law.  In  R  (Iran)  Brooke  LJ
       listed the types  of  error  of  law  most  commonly  encountered  as
       including failing to give adequate reasons for findings  on  material
       matters. That was the main thrust of Ms Daykin's challenge.

   26. I remind myself of the Upper Tribunal's decision in MK (duty to  give
       reasons) [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC):

           "5.    ... Given the  context  of  the  present  appeal,  it  is
           appropriate to draw attention  to  the  further  principle  that
           evidence is relevant if it  goes  to  proving  or  disproving  a
           matter in issue. Furthermore, what is relevant in any given case
           is decided by the application of logic, common  sense,  fairness
           and human experience (Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th Edition Re-
           Issue, Vol 17 (1), para  409).  It  is  also  useful  to  recall
           another basic principle:

                "The weight to be given to a particular item of evidence  is
                a matter of fact which will be decided, largely on the basis
                of common sense, in the light of the  circumstances  of  the
                case and of the  views  formed  by  the  [tribunal]  on  the
                reliability and credibility of the witnesses and  exhibits."
                [Halsbury, para 417]

           6. There is a related duty to explain the tribunal's  assessment
           of the more important pieces of evidence and to provide  reasons
           for choosing to give (as the case may be) no,  little,  moderate
           or substantial weight thereto. Properly analysed, this  discrete
           duty and the principles highlighted in paragraph [5]  above  are
           aspects of two overarching duties of  hallowed  importance.  The
           first is the duty of every  court  or  tribunal  to  afford  the
           parties a fair hearing, within the parameters of  the  governing
           legal rules and principles. The second is the  long  established
           judicial duty to provide a reasoned  decision.  It  matters  not
           whether these are separate duties or two sides of the same coin,
           forged together by the common law principle of fairness. Each of
           these duties is properly described as elementary in nature."

   27. After giving this matter very careful consideration, I have concluded
       that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does contain a  material
       error of this sort and that it must be set aside. My reasons  are  as
       follows.

   28.  It  is  important  to  recognise  the  judge  was   presented   with
       unchallenged evidence owing to the absence of a  presenting  officer.
       It is not suggested she erred by  not  adjourning  for  a  presenting
       officer to be available and I note she was informed by an experienced
       presenting officer at the hearing centre on the day that there was no
       application to adjourn on that basis. The  judge  was  not  bound  to
       accept evidence simply because it was unchallenged but  her  duty  to
       give reasons for rejecting it became especially  important  in  order
       for the parties to know why the appeal was dismissed.

   29. It appears that the evidence presented  to  the  judge  included  the
       following:

         . Evidence the couple  were  cousins  and  that  they  had  become
           friends in 2014 during the sponsor's visit to Bangladesh;

         . Evidence that the appellant's  mother  gave  the  appellant  the
           opportunity to reflect  on  whether  she  wanted  to  marry  the
           sponsor before agreeing to the marriage;

         . Evidence that the appellant was aware before  she  married  that
           there was an age gap and  that  the  sponsor  had  been  married
           before and had three children;

         . Evidence she was aware of the sponsor's health  problems  before
           she agreed to marry him;

         . Evidence from the appellant's mother that the appellant  entered
           the marriage willingly;

         . Evidence that the sponsor spent nearly four months in Bangladesh
           at the time of the wedding;

         . Evidence that the sponsor had returned to Bangladesh three times
           in less than a year between the wedding and the application  for
           entry clearance;

         .  Evidence  that  the  couple  kept  in  touch  through  WhatsApp
           messaging and by means of the sponsor calling the  appellant  by
           telephone;

         . Evidence of the sponsor making remittances to the appellant; and

         . Oral evidence from a witness, Mr Tariqur  Rahman,  that  he  had
           travelled to Bangladesh with the sponsor and spent time with the
           couple in Bangladesh.

   30. The judge focused very much on the interview record.  She  noted  the
       appellant's complaint that the interpreter was  not  using  the  same
       dialect of Bengali as her but she does not appear to have  considered
       this should alter the impact of the appellant's answers  as  recorded
       in the transcript, parts of which the judge set out in her  decision.
       The judge was entitled to proceed in this  way  given  the  appellant
       raised no issues about the  interpreting  at  her  interview  despite
       being given the opportunity to do so at the beginning and the end.

   31. As noted, the judge was mainly concerned about two  issues:  (1)  the
       appellant not knowing why the sponsor's previous marriage had  broken
       down (see paragraph 30), and (2) the  appellant  did  not  know  much
       about depression or anything about schizophrenia (see paragraph  31).
       I do not consider that the judge gave sufficient reasons for  finding
       the appellant's answers at interview showed that, in the face of  the
       evidence listed above, the couple had  entered  into  a  marriage  of
       convenience.

   32. In relation to the sponsor's previous marriage, the appellant  showed
       that she knew when he divorced, how long he had been married and  who
       was looking after his three children. Asked why the  marriage  ended,
       she said that the sponsor's ex-wife left him but she did not like  to
       ask him because he has "mental problems". She clarified this meant he
       became upset when they talked about  the  subject.  The  interviewing
       officer then put it to the appellant that it was important she should
       know the reasons for the break-up. At question 13 she  answered,  "He
       told me that she could not adjust to his mental problems."  In  other
       words, the appellant knew full well that the reason for the  marriage
       break down after nine years of marriage  was  that  the  ex-wife  was
       unable to cope with the sponsor's mental health problems.

   33. The  judge  considered  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  adduce
       sufficient evidence to counter the respondent's  concerns  over  this
       issue, which were set out in the refusal  letter  in  terms  that  it
       seemed  "unusual  that  you  would  not  wish  to   know   the   full
       circumstances of why [the sponsor's] previous marriage  had  failed."
       It is clear to me  that  this  characterization  of  the  appellant's
       answers at interview, which the judge adopted in her  reasoning,  did
       not fairly reflect what the appellant had said.  She  had,  in  fact,
       been perfectly candid in stating that the marriage  had  broken  down
       due to the sponsor's mental health problems.

   34. Understandably, the question arose as  to  why  the  appellant  would
       agree to marry the sponsor under such circumstances. Whilst this  was
       an arranged marriage in the sense it came about  as  a  result  of  a
       suggestion from the parents, it was also clear that the appellant was
       given a choice in the matter and that she accepted of  her  own  free
       will. The sponsor's health conditions appear to be severe  given  the
       entitlement to PIP. It was legitimate to question why  the  appellant
       who is able-bodied and much younger than the sponsor, would  consider
       this a suitable match.

   35. Again, it is important to note the appellant's answers  at  interview
       with care. At question 21, she correctly said the sponsor has  severe
       pain in his backbone, depression and schizophrenia. She also said  he
       was short-tempered. The appellant was then pressed to  say  what  she
       understood about depression. It is fair to say  her  answers  do  not
       show very much in the way of knowledge of the signs and  symptoms  of
       depressive illness. For example, while she said he had "a problem  in
       his head", she also said his hair  fell  out.  She  admitted  to  not
       knowing anything about schizophrenia. It is perhaps this part of  the
       interview which caused the appellant to complain in her statement  in
       terms that she felt she was being interviewed as if she were applying
       for a job as a doctor.

   36. I can see why the appellant's ignorance might have led the  judge  to
       have real concerns about the purpose of the marriage. However, in  my
       judgment, it is not sufficient to  reason  that  ignorance  of  these
       serious mental health conditions should lead to the  conclusion  that
       this is a marriage of convenience. That is because the context of the
       interview was that a young woman was being asked questions which  she
       might well not have felt it necessary to ask herself. The judge  does
       not say anything about her level of education or experience.

   37. Furthermore, the appellant did  show  appropriate  knowledge  of  the
       appellant's behaviour and care needs. In addition to the point  about
       him being short-tempered, which she repeated at questions 27 and  45,
       she said he sometimes would become  quiet  and  refuse  to  take  his
       medication. She recognised he needed massages for his painful  knees,
       needs to take his medicine on time and needs accompanying to  medical
       appointments. This level of knowledge would be  consistent  with  the
       amount of time the sponsor had spent with the  appellant  during  his
       visits to Bangladesh.

   38. I would add that the appellant tried to explain why she would  choose
       to marry a man like the sponsor, explaining that  she  felt  sympathy
       for him and she wanted to look after him.

   39. In conclusion, bearing in mind the unchallenged evidence  tending  to
       show this  was  a  genuine  marriage  notwithstanding  the  sponsor's
       previous marriage break-down and multiple health difficulties, it was
       incumbent on the judge to provide more detailed reasons by  reference
       to the whole of the evidence showing how she came  to  conclude  this
       was a marriage of convenience.

   40. The appellant's appeal is allowed to the extent the decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

   41. I was unable to remake the decision. The respondent  would  naturally
       have questions to put to the sponsor and the other witnesses  but  Ms
       Daykin told me the sponsor had not been  well  enough  to  attend.  A
       complete rehearing is necessary in the First-tier Tribunal by another
       judge.

NOTICE OF DECISION

       The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law and
       her decision dismissing the appeal is set aside.

       The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing by  a
       differently constituted tribunal. The appeal should  not  be  floated
       and should preferably be heard first in the list.

       An anonymity direction has not been made.




                               Signed   Dated 7 December 2017


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Froom
