
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/12348/2018
                                                               HU/12343/2018
                                                               HU/12346/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 July 2019                      |On 6 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'MG'
                                    'JC'
                                    'VC'
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by three appellants, the lead appellant; his wife and
    their daughter, against the decision  (the  'Decision')  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Graham (the 'FtT') promulgated  on  12  March  2019,  by
    which she dismissed their appeals against the respondent's  refusal  on
    22 May 2018 of their human rights claims  on  the  basis  of  the  lead
    appellant's participation in what is referred to as a 'TOEIC' deception
    and the family's ability to return to the Philippines, the  appellants'
    country of origin.  The minor appellant was born in the United  Kingdom
    on 13 April 2014 but remains a national of the Philippines.

 2. In essence, the  appellant's  claims  involved  the  following  issues:
    whether the respondent had discharged the  initial  burden,  using  the
    evidence of a 'look-up' tool of showing that  the  lead  appellant  had
    been involved in a TOEIC fraud; if so, whether the lead  appellant  had
    provided a satisfactory explanation; and the obstacles to the  family's
    integration in the Philippines.  The  core  points  taken  against  the
    appellants by the respondent related to a stated 'invalid' test  result
    and the fact that the couple had only ever had limited leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom and there were no  identified  obstacles  to  the
    adult dependants returning to the Philippines where they had lived  for
    the majority of their lives including into their adult years  and  that
    their young child, not yet of school age, could return with them.

The FtT's Decision

 3. It is clear that the FtT  made  a  careful  analysis  of  the  evidence
    running from paragraphs [9] to [33] of the Decision. The  FtT  was  not
    impressed by various aspects of the evidence, noting the 'invalid' look-
    up tool result, as well as the fact that the lead appellant's  previous
    lawyer was said to have  arranged  the  TOEIC  test  and  yet  had  not
    produced any statement as to the circumstances in which  the  test  had
    been taken.  The FtT adopted a balance sheet  approach,  in  concluding
    that refusal  of  leave  to  remain  was  proportionate  and  that  any
    friendships  or  family  relations  could  be  re-established  in   the
    Philippines.

The Grounds of Appeal and Grant of Permission

 4. The appellants lodged grounds of  appeal  which  are  essentially  that
    there was good evidence that the lead  appellant  could  speak  English
    well  before  the  TOEIC  test;   the   look-up   result   was   merely
    'questionable' rather than 'invalid' and the FtT had erred  in  failing
    to consider the public interest in the appellants' removal  beyond  the
    TOEIC issue.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith (as he then  was)
    refused permission, noting  an  'invalid'  result  but  permission  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun on 17  June  2019.   Judge  Eshun
    concluded that it was arguable that the FtT had erred in  finding  that
    the test result was 'invalid' which infected  the  rest  of  the  FtT's
    decision.  The grant of permission was not limited in its scope.

The Hearing Before Me

 5. Whilst the respondent was represented by Mr Tarlow, the appellants  did
    not attend and were not represented.  They  failed  to  attend  without
    explanation.  I checked the notice of hearing which  had  gone  to  the
    address which the appellants  had  provided  in  the  applications  for
    permission to appeal.  In essence, the  appellants  had  been  provided
    with the opportunity of a  fair  hearing  today  and  had  provided  no
    explanation whatsoever for their failure to attend.  As a  consequence,
    they have been able to participate in a fair hearing and I regarded  it
    as appropriate to proceed.

 6. In terms of submissions on the respondent's part, Mr Tarlow had  little
    more to add to the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Smith  in
    refusing to permission, and in particular in relation to the  'invalid'
    look-up tool result.

Decision on Error of Law

 7. I concluded that there are no errors of law in the  Decision.  Contrary
    to the grounds submitted to Judge Smith, the 'look-up' test result  was
    not 'questionable' but  was  in  fact  'invalid',  something  that  was
    clearly indicated at page [87] of the  appellants'  bundle,  and  which
    Judge Smith correctly identified.  Whilst the  look-up  test  score  at
    page [89] had a wider set of results, not just for  the  appellant  but
    for others  who  took  the  test,  some  of  which  were  questionable,
    nevertheless the record for the appellant himself related to  it  being
    'invalid'.  The assertion in the grounds to the contrary is unsupported
    by any evidence and is simply no more than that, namely an assertion.

 8. As the FtT was entitled to find, and in particular where the  appellant
    had legal representation at the time that he arranged  the  TOEIC  test
    and could have obtained evidence from that firm to support his  account
    as well as seeking a copy of the voice recording, that the  explanation
    provided by the appellant was not credible. The  finding  discloses  no
    error of law.

 9. On the wider appeal in terms of article 8 of the European Convention on
    Human Rights ('ECHR') and proportionality, nothing has been  identified
    as to the obstacles, let alone very significant obstacles to the family
    returning as a whole to the Philippines, or  any  error  in  the  FtT's
    assessment of proportionality.  The  FtT  carried  out  an  appropriate
    balance sheet assessment of the appellants' circumstances in the  case,
    and once again was unarguably  entitled  to  conclude,  notwithstanding
    that the third appellant is a minor child, that the public interest  in
    refusing leave was significant where  the  appellants  have  never  had
    settled leave to remain in the UK.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   J Keith                             Date         31 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed        J Keith                        Date         31 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

