
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/12630/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21 April 2017                          |On 11 May 2017                    |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                            Oloidi Mayowa Olaniyi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Adewusi, Solicitor, Crown & Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   In a decision made on the papers sent  on  15  August  2016  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) Judge Thorne dismissed the appellant's appeal against  a
    decision made by the respondent on 16 November 2015 refusing him  leave
    to remain.  The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.

2.   The sole ground of challenge is that the judge erred in law by  hearing
    the appeal in the  absence  of  the  appellant  who  had  requested  an
    adjournment in writing.  It was submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to
    mention the adjournment request or to say  he  was  refusing  it  "even
    though the court clerk phoned our office on the day of the hearing  and
    was told that the instruction to request for adjournment still  stood".
    Mr Adewusi confirmed that this observation was in respect of the day of
    the hearing that had been earlier fixed for 29 July 2016.

3.   The only documents on file  that  relates  to  adjournment  concerns  a
    request made on 28 July from Crown and Law Solicitors stating that they
    have been instructed and were requesting an adjournment of the  hearing
    scheduled for 29 July 2015 in Manchester as they were trying  to  raise
    the necessary funds to pay for legal representation.   In  response  to
    this request the hearing  was  adjourned  on  29  July.   However,  the
    handwritten note on the file states  "adj  29/7/16  Treat  as  a  paper
    case".  Before the word "paper" the word "float" has been crossed  out.
    As far as is discernible from  the  file,  therefore,  the  appellant's
    application for an adjournment of his oral  hearing  was  granted,  but
    this was never formally communicated to  him  or  his  representatives.
    The case then appears to have ended up - as a result of  the  direction
    written on the file - for consideration by a FtT Judge on  the  papers.
    I find it very surprising that there is nothing on file to indicate any
    attempt by the appellant or his solicitors to establish either (i) what
    had happened about their adjournment request, or (ii) when  the  appeal
    would be relisted for a hearing.  I would have gone further and said it
    was unprofessional, but on the strength of what Mr Adewusi told  me  it
    may have been that they thought they had been told to await  a  letter.
    However, it remains very difficult  to  follow  why  at  the  stage  of
    adjournment on 29 July 2016 the case was classified as a 'paper  case'.
    The appellant had requested an oral hearing and  had  paid  the  appeal
    fee.

4.   In the circumstances I consider that the grounds  of  appeal  are  made
    out.  Given that the FtT had decided to adjourn the appeal on  29  July
    2016,  it  was  necessary  in  the  interests  of  fairness  and   good
    administration for the parties to have been notified what would  happen
    next.  If a case management decision to treat it as a  paper  case  had
    been made, the appellant and his solicitors - and indeed the respondent
    - should have been given notice of this, so as to have  an  opportunity
    to comment on that decision before the case went before a FtT judge for
    promulgation.

5.   It is not clear to me whether FtT Judge Thorne was fully sighted as  to
    the previous history of this appeal but whether or not Judge Thorne was
    blameless there was a procedural  irregularity  which  negated  a  fair
    hearing.

6.   Accordingly I conclude that the FtT Judge materially erred in  law  and
    that his decision should be set aside.

7.   The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date: 8 May 2017

            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


