
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13380/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd October 2019                 |On 3rd June 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                  NOEL [E]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Jones, Direct Access pro bono
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hone promulgated on 26th June 2020, dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal against the refusal by the  Secretary  of  State  on
    25th July  2018  of  the  appellant's  human  rights  claim  against  a
    deportation decision under Section 32(5) of the UK  Borders  Act  2007.
    The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 29th December  1974,  and
    on 7th  January  2019  was  convicted  and  sentenced  to  four  year's
    imprisonment for possession with intent  to  supply  a  class  A  drug,
    namely crack cocaine.  The matter has a complicated legal  history  and
    not least that as recorded in the decision of Judge Hone the matter was
    heard on 21st November 2019 before another Immigration  Judge  who  was
    unable to produce a decision owing to health issues.

 2. The grounds for permission to appeal set out  that  the  appellant  had
    four British children: child J aged 16, child D aged 15, child S aged 5
    and child N aged 4.  Child J was profoundly disabled and  in  permanent
    social care and the remaining children resided in  separate  households
    each from the  other  but  enjoyed  contact  with  their  half-siblings
    through the appellant.

 3. The appellant is married to a British citizen, Ms Coley,  whose  health
    is  said  to  be  poor  following  strokes  and  period  of   prolonged
    hospitalisation mostly in 2019.

 4. It was conceded that the appellant had  a  number  of  convictions  for
    lesser offences from 2019.

 5. In essence, in  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal,  it  was
    submitted that the judge had erred in his approach to the assessment of
    the impact of deportation on the  appellant's  children.   I  take  the
    three grounds in turn.

 6. In the first ground it was asserted that  the  judge  recorded  in  his
    determination the respondent  had  accepted  the  appellant  enjoyed  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with each of his four  children  at
    paragraph 81.  The judge proceeded erroneously to find contrary to that
    concession that the children did not enjoy  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with the appellant, at paragraph 85 and 87,  and  then  to
    conclude, that given the appellant's relationship with the children was
    not significant enough, it  would  not  be  unduly  harsh  for  him  to
    separate from them.

 7. I have noted the Secretary of State's refusal  decision  recorded  that
    there were no personal details of the children's domestic circumstances
    provided and thus the Secretary of State was unable to  consider  these
    children in the decision.

 8. I raised the issue with Mr Jones as to whether this was a new matter or
    not but Ms Cunha conceded that it was not a new matter as the issue  of
    the children was evident at the outset and as Mr Jones identified there
    was evidence in the file and from live witnesses.

 9. I can locate no record of  a  concession  recorded  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings but the judge clearly records a concession by the Secretary
    of State at paragraph 81 of the determination that the  respondent  had
    accepted that the appellant enjoys a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with all four children.

10. The judge then proceeds to make a conflicting finding stating  that  at
    paragraph 87 his involvement with their lives is limited.  At no  point
    does he appear to raise the fact that he is intending to go behind  the
    concession recorded and put this  to  the  appellant's  representative.
    Indeed, at paragraph 29 the judge recorded that "it is accepted that he
    has a relationship with each child".

11. This interacts with second ground, that  the  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of the appellant's children  was  flawed  because  the  judge
    failed to consider the individual circumstances of the three  remaining
    children D, S and N when determining the implications of deportation of
    the appellant, ruling out the significance of the same  solely  on  the
    basis that the  children's  relationship  with  their  father  was  not
    significant.

12. As the grounds illustrate the judge nowhere averred to  or  recorded  a
    finding on the evidence of Ms Brown, mother of the child S, speaking to
    the impact of the child's separation from her father with reference  to
    her statement dated 9th July 2020.  The judge also failed  to  consider
    the written evidence of Ms James, mother of child D,  who  attested  to
    the child's deteriorating behaviour which she attributed to the loss of
    his father.  In oral evidence Mr Jones submitted that the  evidence  of
    Bianca McLean, one of the children's former carers,  had  also  made  a
    statement which had not been addressed.

13. In view of the guidance given in HA (Iraq) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1176,
    I find that  the individual  circumstances  of  the  children  must  be
    considered when assessing whether the decision to deport the  appellant
    would have an "unduly harsh" effect on the children.

14. I appreciate, as Mr Jones indicated, that the preparation of  the  case
    had been somewhat haphazard, and the background complicated  which  did
    not assist the judge.  However, I find that there was an error  of  law
    in failing to address the relevant evidence and to the  legal  approach
    to the position of the children by a failure to  resolve  the  conflict
    within the decision as  to  the  appellant's  relationship  with  those
    children and a  failure  to  consider  all  the  relevant  evidence  as
    explained in the first two grounds.  There were material errors of law.

15. The third ground of appeal was in relation to the appellant's wife  and
    whether it would be unduly harsh for her to relocate  to  Jamaica.   As
    the judge found in the alternative and that  it  would  not  be  unduly
    harsh for the spouse to remain in the UK, the challenge in relation  to
    the relocation is not sustainable, but it is apparent  that  the  judge
    did not consider the evidence of the appellant's wife's sister  to  the
    effect that she could no longer assist her.  Thus, the  impact  of  the
    appellant's removal on the wife is in  issue.  Whether  the  appeal  is
    ultimately successful on  this  basis  is  debatable  but  there  is  a
    material error of law because the judge failed to  address  a  relevant
    piece of evidence.

16. I find therefore that the judge has materially erred in  law  and  that
    the decision should be set aside.  Both parties agreed that the  matter
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

17. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Helen Rimington                     Date 18th November 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington





