
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13005/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th January 2017                           |On 25th January 2017          |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                malkit chand
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Singh of Kenneth Jones Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female British Overseas Citizen (BOC) born  on  29th
    June 1967.  The Appellant first entered the UK in December  1967  as  a
    dependant of her mother.  She was subsequently issued a BOC passport on
    4th April 2002, which was re-issued on 7th July 2014.  On 10th February
    2003 the Appellant was convicted of the offence of arson and  sentenced
    to four years' imprisonment.  As a consequence, a deportation order was
    made against the Appellant on 25th August 2015.  The order was made  on
    the basis that the Appellant was not a British citizen, and she had not
    produced the evidence to show that she had been resident in the  UK  on
    1st January 1973 and for a continuous period of five years prior to the
    decision to deport her.   The  Respondent  considered  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 ECHR human rights, but decided to deport  the  Appellant  for
    the reasons given in the Respondent's Notice  of  Decision  dated  25th
    August 2015.  The Appellant appealed, and her appeal was heard by Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal G Tobin (the  Judge)  sitting  at  Stoke-on-
    Trent on 3rd June 2016.  He decided  to  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules for the reasons given in his Decision dated 17th June
    2016.  The Respondent sought leave to appeal that decision and on  12th
    October 2016 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.  Leave to appeal was not
    granted on any of the grounds given in the application for  leave,  but
    the Judge granting leave did so on the basis that there was a "Robinson
    obvious" point as to whether the Appellant had a right of appeal  under
    Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. At the hearing before me, Mr Mills helpfully informed the Tribunal that
    he could not argue the ground upon which leave had  been  granted.   He
    could think of no reason why the Appellant did  not  have  a  right  of
    appeal,  particularly  as  the  Respondent  had  made  a  human  rights
    decision.

 4. In the circumstances, I indicated to Mr Singh that I did  not  need  to
    hear from him.

 5. I find no error of law in the decision  of  the  Judge.   As  Mr  Mills
    explained, clearly the Appellant had a right of appeal under  the  2002
    Act.  The decision of the Judge is therefore not set aside.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so and indeed find no reason to do so.




Signed                              Date 25/01/2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
