
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13285/2016
     HU/15137/2016
     HU/15143/2016
     HU/15145/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th September 2018                        |On 9 October 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                            DC (first Appellant)
                            LC (second Appellant)
                            JC (third Appellant)
                            RC (fourth Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms K Reid, Counsel instructed by Marsh and Partners
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the  Appellants  against  the  decision  of  Judge
    Gurung-Thapa, promulgated on 2nd May 2017,  to  dismiss  their  appeals
    against refusal of their applications for leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom on private life grounds.  The first two Appellants are  husband
    and wife and the third and fourth Appellants are their children.

 2. The background to this appeal is very neatly summarised at paragraphs 3
    and 4 of Judge Gurung-Thapa's decision, which I quote:

         "3.  The first appellant entered the  UK  illegally  in  2000.   He
             returned to Albania and he claims to have illegally re-entered
             the UK in 2003.  He has never had valid leave in the UK.

         4.   The second and third appellants entered the  UK  illegally  in
             2006 (or 2005) and they never had valid leave in the UK.   The
             fourth appellant was born in the UK in 2014.   She  has  never
             had any valid leave in the UK."

 3. The judge considered their cases through the lens of those parts of the
    Immigration Rules that encapsulate the Secretary of State's view of the
    operation of Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention in  private  life
    cases, specifically, paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  So far
    as the first, second and fourth Appellants  were  concerned,  the  only
    prospect of them succeeding under that paragraph was if they were  able
    to show that they would face 'very significant difficulties'  to  their
    integration on return to Albania.  However, in the case  of  the  third
    Appellant (JC) he was only required  to  show  that  it  would  not  be
    'reasonable' to expect him  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.  This  was
    because he had resided in the United Kingdom for some eleven years  and
    was thus qualified for special  consideration  under  the  Rules.   The
    judge accordingly focussed almost entirely upon his position, for if he
    could not succeed then it was difficult to see how the other appellants
    could do so.

 4. It is unnecessary to recite the Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    in full. This is because the essence of each of them is that the  judge
    misdirected herself as to the reasonableness of JC leaving  the  United
    Kingdom.

 5. The leading case on  the  correct  approach  to  the  question  of  the
    'reasonableness' of a 'qualifying child' leaving the United Kingdom  is
    MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  705.   Prior  to  that  decision,  this
    Tribunal had held that the question of reasonableness depended upon  an
    entirely child-centric analysis. However, it  is  now  clear  that  the
    question of reasonableness involves balancing the best interests of the
    qualifying  child  against  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  the
    economic  wellbeing  of  the  country  through  effective   immigration
    controls.  In summary, where  a  child  is  a  qualifying  child  under
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules (or, for that  matter,  under
    Section EX of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules or  Section  117B(6)
    of the 2002 Act) the law recognises that children who have been in  the
    United Kingdom for at least seven years are likely  to  have  put  down
    strong roots. Moreover, the longer that the child has been residing  in
    the United Kingdom and the older the  child  is  at  the  time  of  the
    analysis,  the  stronger  those  roots  are  likely  to  have   become.
    Accordingly, a 'qualifying child' should be granted leave to remain  in
    United Kingdom unless there are strong reasons for not doing so.

 6. The above summary is based upon paragraph 46 of  the  judgment  of  the
    decision in MA (Pakistan) in which, under  the  heading  "applying  the
    reasonable test", Elias LJ said this:

         "Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the  fact  that  a
         child has been here for  seven  years  must  be  given  significant
         weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise.  Indeed, the
         Secretary of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form of
         Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled 'Family  Life  (as  a
         partner or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes' in which it is
         expressly stated that once the seven years'  residence  requirement
         is satisfied, there need to be 'strong reasons' for refusing  leave
         (para 11.2.4).  These instructions were not in force when the cases
         now subject to appeal were determined, but in my view  they  merely
         confirm what is implicit in  adopting  a  policy  of  this  nature.
         After such a period of time the child will have put down roots  and
         developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
         to leave the UK.  That may be less so when the  children  are  very
         young because the focus of their lives will be on  their  families,
         but  the  disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get  older.
         Moreover, in these cases there must be a  very  strong  expectation
         that the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
         his parents as part of a family unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a
         primary consideration in the proportionality assessment."

 7. With this in mind, I turn now to the judge's self-direction in relation
    to this issue. It appears at paragraph 64 of her decision:

         "In the case of MA (Pakistan), the court held that where the 'seven
         year rule' is satisfied, all this amounts to  for  the  purpose  of
         section 117B is that it is a  factor  of  some  weight  leaning  in
         favour of leave to remain being granted.  It is not a determinative
         factor."

 8. It is undoubtedly the case that residence by a child in the  UK  for  a
    period of seven years is not "a  determinative  factor".   However,  to
    state that it is simply  a  factor  "of  some  weight"  is  not  in  my
    judgement an accurate restatement of the  passage  from  MA  (Pakistan)
    that I have just recited.  It  in  my  judgement  falls  far  short  of
    accurately representing the weight attaching to the  best  interests  a
    child who is a 'qualifying  child'  for  these  purposes.   This  error
    resulted in the judge failing to identify any "strong reasons" that may
    have been capable of justifying refusal of  leave  to  remain  and  the
    consequent dismissal of the appeal from that refusal.

 9. The remaining question is whether the evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pointed to the existence of strong reasons that justified  its
    decision notwithstanding its failure to  identify  them.  Having  first
    invited submissions from the representatives upon the  matter,  I  have
    concluded that such reasons did  in  fact  exist.  My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

10. The immigration history of the first and second Appellants - summarised
    at paragraphs 3 and 4 of the  decision  of  the  judge  and  quoted  at
    paragraph 2 above - was in my view  a  sufficiently  strong  reason  to
    justify the refusal of the application for leave to remain and thus the
    dismissal of the appeal against that decision.  Indeed, it is difficult
    to imagine a worse immigration history.  Ms Reed  characterised  it  as
    one of "overstaying". That is  not  however  an  accurate  description.
    Save for the younger of the two children (who was born in the UK)  each
    of the appellants entered illegally. None of the  appellants  has  ever
    had leave to remain in the United Kingdom and cannot therefore be  said
    to have 'overstayed' it. There is  accordingly  a  very  strong  public
    interest in not appearing to give the impression that if  such  conduct
    is persisted in for a sufficiently long period it will be rewarded with
    settled status.

11. I was reminded by Ms Reed that JC is  now  older  and  has  spent  even
    longer in the UK than was the position at the time  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing. I nevertheless conclude that this  is  outweighed  by
    the public interest considerations set out above. I also bear  in  mind
    that the family's relocation to Albania would  inevitably  entail  some
    disruption to the education of the children. However, this also  occurs
    when parents voluntarily choose to relocate and the  evidence  in  this
    appeal does not suggest that the child appellants are  currently  at  a
    critical stage of their education. I also  bear  in  mind  the  factual
    findings  of  Judge  Gurung-Thapa,  noting  in  particular   that   she
    disbelieved the claim of the adult appellants that there had  not  been
    contact with their  respective  parents  in  Albania  for  many  years,
    preferring instead the evidence of JC to  the  effect  that  there  was
    daily telephone contact between them. She also found that JC  had  some
    limited  facility  in  Albanian  language.  That,  perhaps,   was   the
    inevitable consequence of living in a household with  Albanian-speaking
    parents.

12. I have therefore concluded that whilst the First-tier Tribunal made the
    error of law that I  identified  at  paragraph  8  (above)  it  is  not
    appropriate in the circumstances to exercise my discretion  by  setting
    aside its decision to dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 8th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly
