
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13291/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 13 October 2017                      |On: 01 December 2017             |
|                                         |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       MR ALVIN Walter ODHIAMBO OWOUR
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:          Mr P Duffy, Counsel Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss C Jaquiss of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the  Secretary  of  State  for
   the Home Department and the respondent is a citizen of Kenya born  on  28
   July 1975.  However, for the sake of convenience,  I  shall  continue  to
   refer to the latter as the "appellant" and to the Secretary of the  State
   as  the  "respondent",  which  are  the  designations  they  had  in  the
   proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.



2.    The appellant's appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  against  the
   decision  of  the  respondent  dated  30  November  2015  to  refuse  his
   application for indefinite leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  20  years
   continuous residence, pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention on
   Human Rights.



3. A Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, Metzer,  allowed  his  appeal.  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Martin in a decision  dated  3  August  2017  granted  the
   respondent permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, it being found  to
   be arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  in  law  by  giving
   wholly inadequate reasons to grant the appellant leave to remain  in  the
   United Kingdom based on his private and family life  and  by  failing  to
   engage with section 117B.




4.  Thus, the appeal came before me.



       First-tier Tribunal's Findings


   5. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appellant's appeal, concluding, in
      summary, the following. The parties agreed that  the  appellant  could
      not meet the immigration rules as at the date of application,  but  he
      now has been present in the United Kingdom for over 20 years.  He  has
      significant private and family life in the United Kingdom including  a
      relationship with Miss David which has lasted for some years  and  the
      sole  issue  for  my   determination   was   whether   it   would   be
      disproportionate for the appellant  to  be  returned  to  Kenya  under
      Article 8 (2) of the European Convention on Human Rights.






   6. The appellant has been in the United Kingdom for a period of  over  20
      years although at the time of the application he fell short of the 20-
      year residence. There is no challenge to the period the appellant  has
      been in the United Kingdom and that he is in  a  serious  relationship
      with Miss David although there were some  challenges  as  to  when  it
      commenced and when they began living together. The appellant  has  now
      spent half of his life in the United  Kingdom  and  undoubtedly  could
      make another application under the 20-year rule, if he needed to.




   7. In considering the appellant's application I need to take into account
      the  respondent's  legitimate  interest  in  immigration  control  and
      considered the five limb test in Razgar [2004] UK HL 27  in  paragraph
      117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  in  relation
      to the public interest. The appellant can speak English and would  not
      be a burden on taxpayers as his partner is  in  full-time  employment.
      The  appellant  is  fully  integrated  into  United  Kingdom   society
      particularly in light of the fact that he has spent 20  years  in  the
      United Kingdom and now has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
      his partner and has taken on  a  parental  role  in  relation  to  her
      daughter.




   8.  Taking  all  the  evidence  into  account  and  paragraph  117B,  the
      appellant's exclusion would be a  disproportionate  interference  with
      the appellant's rights under article 8 (2) of the European  Convention
      on Human Rights to be returned to a country where he has not been  for
      over 20 years and with which he has no  present  social,  cultural  or
      family ties.




       The grounds of appeal



9. The respondent in her grounds of appeal  states  the  following  which  I
   summarise. It is submitted that the decision is not adequately  reasoned.
   The judge failed to consider the matter through the prism  of  the  rules
   and failed to conduct a proper proportionality balancing exercise.  As  a
   result, he gave inadequate weight to the public interest  in  immigration
   control and fails to attach weight to the appellant's failure to meet the
   rules. There are also no adequate  consideration  of  whether  there  are
   compelling/exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave  outside
   the rules. The judge failed to consider that it would be appropriate  for
   the appellant  to  return  to  Kenny  to  seek  entry  clearance  as  the
   spouse/partner of a settled person.




    The hearing




10.  I heard submissions from both parties as to whether there is  an  error
   of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.




       Decision on the error of law




11.  Having  considered  the  decision  as  a  whole,  I  find  the  Judge's
   consideration of the appellant's appeal in respect of Article  8  is  not
   materially flawed. The Judge accepted that the appellant  does  not  meet
   the requirements of the Immigration Rules as at the date  of  application
   and then went on to consider Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
   Human Rights and allowed the appeal based on the appellant's family life,
   with his partner and his private life in the United  Kingdom.  The  Judge
   stated that the appellant had spent 20 years in the United Kingdom and it
   would not be proportionate for him to return to a country where which  he
   no longer belongs to.




12. As at the date of the hearing, the appellant had  established  residence
   in the United Kingdom for 20 years although at the date  of  application,
   he fell short of 20 years. As this is an in-country appeal, the Judge was
   entitled to consider evidence as of the date of hearing. At the  date  of
   the hearing the appellant met the requirements of the  immigration  rules
   as he had been in the  country,  albeit  unlawfully  for  20  years.  The
   respondent took no issue with the fact that the appellant  has  lived  in
   this country for 20 years.




13. The appellant either satisfies the Immigration Rules or he does not.  In
   this case the appellant did not meet the requirements of the  Immigration
   Rules for leave to remain as at the date of application  but  as  at  the
   date of the hearing, he did.




14. Even if I was to conclude that the Judge erred in law in his  evaluation
   of the appellant's appeal pursuant to Article 8, I find that it is not  a
   material error.


DECISON

The respondent's appeal is dismissed.


Signed by

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal








