
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number
HU/13822/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 September 2017                      | On 25 September 2017             |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                kuljeet singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Bull, instructed by Just Legal Group
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Kuljeet Singh, was born on 14 April 1985 and is  a  male
    citizen of India.  By  decision  dated  26  May  2016,  the  respondent
    refused the appellant's application for further leave to remain on  the
    basis of his  family  and  private  life.   He  appealed  against  that
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Mohan) which, in a  decision
    promulgated on 4  July  2017,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant
    appealed against that decision and was granted permission to appeal  as
    did the Secretary of State.

 2. I was assisted by Mr Mills, who appeared for the Secretary of State  at
    the Upper Tribunal hearing, who provided me with  the  results  of  his
    investigation of the English language  test  which  the  appellant  had
    undertaken.  Mr Mills' investigation using the sources available to the
    Secretary of State revealed that, contrary  what  is  asserted  in  the
    refusal letter of 26 May 2016, there exists no evidence  to  show  that
    the appellant had fraudulently obtained a TOEIC  certificate  from  ETS
    (Educational Testing Service).  The ETS test analysis which was in  the
    respondent's bundle indicated there was no evidence  available  in  the
    usual Excel format.  The respondent's bundle contains  an  exchange  of
    emails in 2012 between the Secretary of State's officer and ETS Global.
     ETS Global stated that, having checked its databases, it had no record
    of  the  appellant  having  undertaken  English  language  tests   with
    TOEIC/ETS in the UK.  However, as Mr Mills pointed out, ETS Global is a
    different organisation from ETS  in  the  United  Kingdom;  there  was,
    therefore, no evidence either way to show whether the appellant had  in
    fact  undertaken  a  test  with  a  third   party   organisation.    In
    consequence, whilst the evidence in this case may cast doubt  upon  the
    validity of the certificates obtained by the appellant, it did not cast
    the doubt upon which the Secretary of State had relied in refusing  the
    application, namely that the appellant had fraudulently used a proxy to
    undertake a test which had  consequently  been  declared  invalid.   In
    those circumstances, Mr Mills submitted, the Secretary of State's cross
    appeal should never have been lodged.

 3. This brings  me  to  the  appellant's  own  appeal.   Judge  Mohan  had
    correctly recorded [15] that  the  evidence  in  the  bundle  "did  not
    support the respondent's contention that [the appellant]  had  taken  a
    test by proxy".  That is a finding supported by the submissions made to
    me today by Mr Mills.  The judge was, therefore,  correct  to  conclude
    [17] that the evidence was "insufficient for me to  be  satisfied  that
    the  appellant  obtained  his  English   language   test   by   fraud".
    Thereafter, however, the judge did fall into error.  In  assessing  the
    appeal on Article 8  ECHR  grounds,  he  concluded  [42]  that  it  was
    "proportional (sic) and reasonable for the appellant to go to India  to
    make his application for entry clearance even though this will  involve
    separation between his wife and his child".  Mr  Mills  submitted  that
    that analysis was incorrect.  The judge had failed to  have  regard  to
    Section  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  (as  amended)  and  also  to  the
    respondent's current policy.  That the judge should have had regard  to
    the policy is confirmed by the Upper Tribunal decision in SF (guidance,
    post 2014 Act)  Albania  [2017]  UKUT  00120  (IAC).   Given  that  the
    appellant's wife and  child  are  both  British  citizens,  the  public
    interest does not require the appellant to leave the country to make an
    application from India.  That remains the case notwithstanding the fact
    that the appellant is an overstayer who has established a  private  and
    family life in the United Kingdom when he had no right to  be  in  this
    country.  Both representatives  agreed  that  the  appeal  against  the
    immigration decision should be allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  4  July
2017 is set aside.  I have remade the  decision.   The  appeal  against  the
decision of the respondent dated 26 May 2016 is allowed on  Article  8  ECHR
grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 22 September 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
