
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13685/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd March 2019                            |On 30th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  Alaba [J]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Peer, Peer & Co (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Graham,  promulgated  on  2nd  August  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 25th June 2018.  In the decision, the judge dismissed the
    appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant  subsequently  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nigeria,  and  was  born  on  8th
    December 1972.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 18th October 2017 refusing his application for
    leave to remain in the UK as the partner of [AS], and as the parent  of
    [AM], a child present in the UK.

The Basis of Refusal

 3. The letter of  refusal  dated  18th  October  2017  was  based  on  the
    contention that the Appellant did not meet the definition of a  partner
    as he and [AS] were not married and had not been living together  in  a
    relationship akin to marriage for at least two years prior to the  date
    of the application.  Moreover, he did not have sole responsibility  for
    the child and failed to provide evidence that  he  had  access  to  the
    child.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that the matter was listed for an oral hearing but that:-



         "There was no Home Office Presenting Officer at the  hearing.   The
         appellant  was  not  legally  represented  at  the  hearing.    The
         Appellant did not attend  the  hearing,  neither  did  any  of  his
         witnesses.  I am satisfied the appellant was aware of  the  hearing
         as a notice of the time date and place of hearing was sent by first
         class post to the appellant and  his  representative  on  21st  May
         2018" (paragraph 5).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The Grounds of Application state that there has been a procedural error
    because neither the Appellant  nor  his  solicitors  actually  received
    notification of a hearing.  When  they  had  last  appeared  in  court,
    before the Tribunal, they had asked for  an  adjournment  on  17th  May
    2018, before IJ Anthony at Birmingham Priory Court.  This  was  on  the
    basis that they had a letter dated 16th May 2018 that their son was  in
    hospital for a cancellation operation to remove his tonsils.  This  had
    previously been cancelled.  The mother and the ex-partner were  due  to
    give evidence at the Tribunal with the son in hospital.  The judge  had
    stated  that  there  was  no  evidence  from  the  hospital  but   that
    nevertheless the  matter  was  adjourned  with  a  direction  that  the
    evidence of the operation should be served.  Thereafter, the next thing
    that the Appellant heard was that Judge Graham had actually  determined
    the appeal and had decided against the Appellant.

 7. Second, there had been a material change  in  the  circumstances  which
    needed consideration in that an application was now before  the  Family
    Court for contact with the child that needed further consideration.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on 23rd August 2018.  This was on  the
    basis that before Judge Anthony on 17th May  2018,  the  Appellant  had
    attended with  his  representative.   The  appeal  was  then  adjourned
    because of the inability of the child's mother to attend due to the ill-
    health of the child.  The hearing was then relisted  for  Monday,  25th
    June 2018 before the judge.  Notice of the hearing  was  said  to  have
    been sent to the Appellant and to his representatives on 21st May 2018.
     There was no indication on the Tribunal file that either  had  changed
    their address.  Yet neither the Appellant nor  the  representative  had
    attended the hearing on 21st May 2018.  However, if the  Appellant  had
    not received a Notice of Hearing, then that was a different matter.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 22nd March  2019,  Mr  Peer,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that he would state  today  in  open
    court as "the officer of the court" that neither he nor his client, the
    Appellant, received any notification of a hearing.  Earlier, before the
    hearing, Mr Whitwell, who appeared on behalf  of  the  Respondent,  had
    helpfully handed up a note, that  had  been  taken  by  the  Presenting
    Officer on 17th May 2018.  It set out the fact  that  the  parties  had
    asked for an adjournment because the child's mother  could  not  attend
    the hearing as the  child  was  in  hospital,  although  there  was  no
    evidence   of   the   hospital   appointment   before   the   Tribunal.
    Nevertheless, what the note did was to make it clear  that  the  matter
    was adjourned with a direction that the evidence of  the  operation  be
    provided.  This letter ends with the statement "Next hearing date  25th
    June 2018".  However, Mr Peer submitted that both he and the  Appellant
    were in the court room when the matter was adjourned.   They  had  then
    left the courtroom.  They know full well that at no stage did the judge
    actually announce that the next hearing date would be 25th  June  2018.
    If that had been done, it was arguable that  there  had  been  an  oral
    communication of the next hearing so that they had notice of it.  That,
    however, Mr Peer submitted, was not the case.

10. Second, and more significantly, Mr Peer submitted that he  had  sent  a
    fax dated 2nd July 2018, on 3rd July 2018, at 12:41 hours from his firm
    to the Tribunal asking why they had still not been informed  about  the
    next hearing date.  This letter states:-

         "We attended court  on  the  17th  May  2018  and  the  matter  was
         adjourned.  We have not had a further listing of this  case  and  I
         would be grateful if you would be kind enough  to  confirm  whether
         the court has relisted this matter, and  if  the  matter  has  been
         relisted, kindly send us a full notice of hearing."

11. Mr Peer submitted that he would not be writing in those  terms,  if  he
    was not anxious to find out the date of the hearing.

12. Third, the letter that he had sent by fax on 3rd July 2018, was, in any
    event, at least a  month  before  the  decision  of  Judge  Graham  was
    promulgated, having been heard on 25th June  2018.   At  no  stage  did
    anyone in the Tribunal service see it fit  to  inform  the  Appellant's
    representative that there was a free listed hearing now  on  25th  June
    2018.

13. For his part, Mr Whitwell submitted that it remained the case that  not
    only was the Appellant not represented  at  the  hearing  before  Judge
    Graham,  but  that  neither  was  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State
    represented.  There was no  HOPO  on  that  day.   That,  however,  was
    irrelevant.   What   was   significant   was   that   the   Appellant's
    representative had made no enquiries for at least  six  weeks,  and  he
    could have acted with expedition earlier on.  Also,  it  appeared  that
    the Appellant's representative had moved address  from  Villa  Road  to
    their new address at Witton Road, Birmingham.  At this  stage  Mr  Peer
    made it clear that the firm was at the earlier address at 95 Villa Road
    in Birmingham until 21st May 2018.  Therefore,  had  notification  been
    sent earlier, informing the Appellant's representative of the  date  of
    the hearing, they would have been able to receive this at their  former
    address.  But in any case, no such notification was received by them.

Error of Law

14.  I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007), such that I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reason is as follows.

15. First, this is a case where, Mr Whitwell accepts, that  the  note  from
    the Presenting Officer, Anna Brown, dated 17th May 2018,  with  respect
    to the hearing before IJ Anthony in Birmingham on 17th May 2018, is not
    a verbatim and contemporaneous note written at the hearing.   It  is  a
    summary.  It ends with the statement that "Next hearing date 25th  June
    2018".  That being so, I am prepared to find that  during  the  hearing
    itself the judge had not announced the next date.  That remained to  be
    sent to the parties in due course in the normal manner.

16. Second, I find that the Notice of  Hearing  thereafter  for  25th  June
    2018, was not sent.  The judge's finding (at paragraph 5)  is  that  it
    was sent and it was sent by first class  post.   However,  neither  the
    Appellant nor his legal representative received it.

17. Third, and in any event, on 3rd July 2018 Mr Peer sent a fax, dated 2nd
    July 2018, enquiring about the free listed date and expressing  concern
    at not having any knowledge of it.  Given that this  was  the  case,  I
    find that there was a procedural error on the part of the Tribunal,  in
    not informing the Appellant and his representative of the hearing.   As
    Mr Peer submitted, he had nothing to gain, and everything  to  lose  by
    not attending court.  Today  all  the  witnesses  were  in  attendance,
    having travelled from Birmingham, and they would certainly have done so
    when the hearing was in Birmingham on 25th June 2018.

Notice of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007), such that I  should
    set aside the decision and remake the decision.  I remake the  decision
    on the basis of Practice Statement 7.2(a)  of  the  Practice  Direction
    because the Appellant has not  had  a  fair  hearing  and  this  matter
    properly ought to  return  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be
    determined by a judge other than Judge Graham.

19. No anonymity direction is made.

20. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                                 25th  April
2019

