
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13247/2018
                                                               HU/13257/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 1 July 2019                     |On 4 September 2019                     |
|                                   |                                        |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

                                   Between

                                  AAK  (1)
                                   OA  (2)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Moran, of Alex Moran Immigration & Asylum
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. An anonymity order was made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on
        16th October 2018 and for the avoidance of any  doubt,  that  order
        continues.  The appellants are granted anonymity  throughout  these
        proceedings.  No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
        indirectly identify them.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the
        appellant and to  the  respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
        direction could lead to proceedings being brought for  contempt  of
        court.


     2. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  Judge  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Herlihy (the judge),  promulgated  on  16th  October
        2018, dismissing the appellants appeals  against  the  respondent's
        decisions dated 26th May  2018,  refusing  their  applications  for
        entry clearance to the UK under  appendix  FM  of  the  immigration
        rules, on the basis of  their  family  life  with  their  daughter,
        ("RAK")


Background


     3. The appellants are both nationals of Syria.   The  first  appellant
        ("AAK") was born in January 1936 and  is  now  83  years  old.  The
        second appellant ("OA") was born in January  1944  and  is  now  75
        years old. They have two sons and one daughter, none  of  whom  are
        dependent upon the appellants. Their eldest son, ("RA") was born in
        Syria in 1969 and he continues to live in Damascus  with  his  wife
        and three daughters.  The appellant's other son, ("GA") was born in
        1982 and he is a dual national of Syria and  Canada.  He  currently
        lives in Canada. The appellant's daughter  was  born  in  1973  and
        until October 2015, she lived with her parents in Damascus. In 2015
        she  was  given  a  scholarship  to  do  a  Masters  at   Edinburgh
        University, and she arrived in the UK in  October  2015.  In  April
        2017, she was granted refugee status, and she has the benefit of  a
        residence permit that is valid until 27 April 2022.


     4. In August 2015, shortly before their daughter left Syria  to  study
        in the United Kingdom, the appellants went to live with their  son,
        GA in Saudi Arabia, where he was working.  GA  was  later  informed
        that his employment contract in Saudi Arabia would not  be  renewed
        when it ended on 30 April 2018, and  he  began  to  make  plans  to
        relocate to Canada where he has a permanent residence  permit.  The
        appellants applied for a visa to visit Canada  and  when  that  was
        refused, plans were made for the appellants to join their  daughter
        in the United Kingdom. In May 2018, they made applications  to  the
        respondent for entry  clearance  to  the  UK,  as  adult  dependent
        relatives. Their applications were refused in May 2018 and  it  was
        those refusals that gave rise to the appeal before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal ("FtT").


     5. It is relevant to note at this  point  that  the  applications  for
        entry clearance made by the appellants were  supported  by  witness
        statements signed by the appellants' son, GA, and  their  daughter,
        RAK. When those statements were made the appellants were living  in
        Saudi Arabia with their son. In her statement dated 1 May 2018, the
        appellants' daughter states ".. Clearly my parents cannot return to
        Syria. Their home is in near eastern Ghouta, an area which has seen
        intense fighting. Not only is it far too  dangerous  for  them  but
        there is only limited access to medical care..".  In  that  witness
        statement it is also said that  the  appellants  cannot  return  to
        Syria to live with their son, RA, who lives in a small  two-bedroom
        house with his wife and three teenage  daughters.  In  his  witness
        statement, GA confirms that that he had wanted his parents to  move
        with him to Canada so that he could continue to support  them,  but
        the applications were refused by the Canadian  Embassy.  He  states
        that "..It is inconceivable that they move back to Syria, given the
        situation is much worse than when they left, and that they are much
        older and weaker."  He confirmed his commitment to  supporting  his
        parents financially.  The position had however changed by the  time
        that the appeal  was  heard.   On  or  about  9  August  2018,  the
        appellants had indeed returned to Damascus.


The decision of the FtT Judge


     6. The Judge refers in her decision to the  reasons  provided  by  the
        respondent for refusing the applications.  At paragraph [2] of  the
        decision, the FtT Judge sets out the relevant immigration rule, and
        the  requirements  for  entry  clearance  as  an  adult   dependent
        relative.  At paragraph [1.5], the Judge refers  to  the  documents
        that were provided to the Tribunal and at paragraphs [5.1] to [5.5]
        of her decision, the Judge carefully sets out the evidence given by
        the appellant's daughter.  The  findings  and  conclusions  of  the
        Judge are set out at paragraphs [6.1] to [7.2] of the decision.


     7. At paragraph [6.1] of the decision, the Judge notes that it is  not
        disputed that the sponsor in the UK (the appellant's  daughter)  is
        unable to financially support the appellants. The Judge  noted  the
        submission made  on  behalf  of  the  appellants  that  there  was,
        nevertheless, credible evidence of the  availability  of  financial
        support from the appellants' son in Canada.


     8. At paragraph [6.2] of the decision, the  Judge  considered  whether
        the appellants can satisfy the requirement to show that as a result
        of age, illness or disability, they require long-term personal care
        to perform everyday tasks.  The Judge states:


             ".. The evidence shows that the first appellant is aged 82 but
             does not disclose that he needs personal care from the sponsor
             to perform everyday  tasks.  There  was  no  medical  evidence
             submitted in respect  of  the  first  appellant  and  all  the
             medical  evidence  related  to  the  second   appellant,   the
             sponsor's mother who is aged 74. This discloses that  she  was
             examined shortly after returning to Syria from Saudi Arabia by
             a psychiatrist in Syria in September  2018  who  has  recorded
             that she has a diagnosis of PTSD following a missile that fell
             on her house  and  recurrent  fighting  and  bombardment.  The
             evidence from the psychiatrist at page 51 of the appeal bundle
             also  indicates  that  the  second  appellant  has  a   severe
             depressive disorder which he categorises as daily episodes  of
             crying and severe sadness and loss of  interest  in  life  and
             lack of appetite and fatigue et cetera, and that she has  been
             prescribed medication and  referred  for  psychiatric  therapy
             sessions. The psychiatrist recommends that she moves away from
             emotional and mental traumas and joins her daughter."


     9. The Judge refers to other medical  evidence  regarding  the  second
        appellant at paragraph [6.3] of the decision.  She  notes  that  at
        page 117 of the appeal bundle there is a medical report prepared by
        a Doctor in Syria following  the  second  appellant's  return  from
        Saudi Arabia which is dated 24 February 2018. The Judge  summarises
        that evidence as follows:


             ".. This indicates that the second appellant is suffering from
             osteoporosis,  spondylosis   with   a   prolapsed   disc   and
             hyperthyroidism and that she suffers chronic  pain,  back/neck
             and shoulder pains with weight loss and has  limited  mobility
             in her range of movements and needs assistance with activities
             of daily living, showering, cleaning, shopping and cooking and
             that she also suffers from depression with  emotional  changes
             in chronic headaches, the medical report says that the  second
             appellant needs assistance in performing daily activities."


    10. The Judge noted that the appellants had travelled to  Saudi  Arabia
        in August 2015 and had remained there until they travelled back  to
        Syria on 9 August 2018.  At paragraph [6.4] of  her  decision,  the
        Judge states:


             "...They had remained for three years  in  Saudi  Arabia  with
             their son [GA]. There is no evidence  before  me  that  whilst
             living in Saudi Arabia that either of  the  appellants  needed
             help from their son with their day-to-day care.  The  evidence
             before me was that the son was working full-time. The  medical
             evidence does not specify precisely what help is  required  by
             the second appellant but there was no evidence before me  that
             such help could not be obtained in Syria."


    11. At paragraphs [6.6] and [6.7], the FtT Judge concludes as follows:


             "I also note that the evidence shows that both appellants have
             another son [RA] living in Damascus with his family. There was
             evidence that [RA's] wife had been in a car accident  in  2016
             and that she suffered visual impairment.  In  considering  the
             totality of the evidence I am not  satisfied  that  the  first
             appellant has established that he requires long-term  personal
             care to perform everyday tasks.  With  regard  to  the  second
             appellant, where the medical evidence indicates that she  does
             require assistance with daily living, I am not satisfied  that
             it has been established that such care could not  be  obtained
             to the required level in Syria where she is currently  living.
             There was no evidence before me to  indicate  that  such  care
             would not be available for the second appellant if she and the
             first appellant sought to apply for settlement with their  son
             in Canada.


             However I am not  satisfied  that  the  second  appellant  has
             provided satisfactory evidence  that  she  requires  long-term
             personal care to perform everyday tasks from  the  sponsor  as
             she is presently being supported  by  her  husband  the  first
             appellant, and their son, [RA], and was  previously  supported
             by their son [GA], who has moved to Canada. I'm not  satisfied
             in  considering  the  totality  of  the  evidence   that   the
             appellants  have  established  that  they  require   long-term
             personal care to perform everyday tasks."


    12. The Judge noted that it was common ground between the parties  that
        the sponsor does not have sufficient funds to meet the costs of the
        appellant's care in the United Kingdom. Having  considered  whether
        the requirements of the immigration rules were met, the  FtT  Judge
        considered the Article 8 claim outside  the  rules.   At  paragraph
        [7.2], the Judge states as follows:


             "I  find  that  the  appellants   have   not   submitted   any
             satisfactory evidence that they enjoy  family  life  with  the
             sponsor in the United  Kingdom.  Relationships  between  adult
             children and their parents do not  amount  to  a  family  life
             unless there is a degree of dependency. It is quite clear that
             the appellants and the sponsor have been  living  apart  since
             2015 when the sponsor came to the UK and the  appellants  then
             travelled to Saudi Arabia to live with their son [GA].  It  is
             clear also that the sponsor has  been  able  to  maintain  her
             relationship  with  the  appellants  without  any   difficulty
             notwithstanding they are separated by a considerable  distance
             and that they continue to do so. The decision does not  affect
             the status quo. I am not satisfied that  the  appellants  have
             established that they are emotionally or financially dependent
             on the sponsor. I do not  find  the  existence  of  compelling
             circumstances to justify discretionary grant  of  leave  given
             that the appellants cannot satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
             immigration rules....".


The appeal before us


    13. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley
        on 20th February 2019.  At the end of  the  hearing  before  us  we
        reserved our decision and informed  the  parties  that  a  decision
        would follow in writing.


    14. The appellant advances nine grounds of appeal, many  of  which  are
        inter-linked. They can broadly be categorised, first as a challenge
        to the Judge's  consideration  and  analysis  of  the  evidence  in
        reaching her decision  that  the  appellants  do  not  satisfy  the
        requirements of  the  relevant  immigration  rule,  and  second,  a
        challenge to the decision that Article 8 is not engaged.


    15.  It is perhaps useful to begin by considering the  criticisms  made
        in respect of the  FtT  Judge's  consideration  of  the  appeal  by
        reference to the requirements set out in the immigration rules. The
        appellants claim that having referred to  the  relevant  rule,  the
        Judge fell into numerous errors, when applying  the  rules  to  the
        facts of the case.


    16. Mr Moran submits that paragraph E-ECDR.2.4 of Appendix FM  requires
        that an applicant or, if the applicant and their  partner  are  the
        sponsor's parents, the applicant's partner, must  as  a  result  of
        age, illness or  disability  require  long-term  personal  care  to
        perform everyday tasks.  He submits that the  appellants  were  not
        required to establish that both require long-term personal care  to
        perform everyday tasks. It was sufficient  to  establish  that  the
        second appellant,  as  a  result  of  age,  illness  or  disability
        requires long-term personal care to  perform  everyday  tasks.   Mr
        Avery does not disagree.


    17. Mr Moran submits that the Judge made conflicting findings  on  that
        key issue.  He submits that at paragraph [6.3], the FtT Judge noted
        that the medical  report  says  that  the  second  appellant  needs
        assistance in performing  daily  activities.   However,  the  Judge
        concluded, at [6.7], that she was not  satisfied  that  the  second
        appellant has provided satisfactory evidence that she requires long-
        term personal care to perform everyday tasks".   Mr  Moran  submits
        that those conflicting findings, cannot be reconciled.


    18. In our judgement, the Judge does not reach conflicting findings. At
        paragraph [6.3] of the decision the Judge  refers  to  the  medical
        report that is to be found at page 117 of  the  appellants'  appeal
        bundle. The Judge refers, at [6.3], to the content of that  medical
        report and properly notes that the report confirms that the  second
        appellant has limited mobility in her range of movements, and needs
        assistance with activities of daily living.  Paragraph [6.7] of the
        decision must be read as a whole. In that paragraph, the Judge  was
        not simply addressing whether the second appellant  requires  long-
        term personal care to perform everyday tasks, but noted,  that  she
        was  not  satisfied  that  the  second   appellant   has   provided
        satisfactory evidence that she requires long-term personal care  to
        perform everyday tasks from  the  sponsor,  noting  also  that  the
        second appellant is presently being supported by  her  husband  the
        first appellant, and their son RA. The finding as  to  whether  the
        second  appellant  requires  long-term  personal  care  to  perform
        everyday tasks, is in fact  set  out  at  paragraph  [6.6]  of  the
        decision. The Judge states:


             "... With regard to the second  appellant  where  the  medical
             evidence indicates that she does require assistance with daily
             living, I am not satisfied that it has been  established  that
             such care cannot be obtained to the required  level  in  Syria
             where she is currently living...."


        The Judge did not therefore seek to go behind the medical  evidence
        that was before her.


    19. Mr Moran submits  that  the  FtT  Judge  made  findings  which  are
        unsupported by the evidence. He submits that  at  paragraph  [6.4],
        the Judge states that "there is no evidence before me  that  whilst
        living in Saudi Arabia that either of the  appellants  needed  help
        from their son with day-to-day care.".  Mr Moran submits  that  the
        FtT Judge fell into error in two significant respects.  First,  the
        Judge proceeds, at paragraph [6.3], in the mistaken belief that the
        medical report at page 117 of the appeal bundle was prepared  by  a
        doctor in Syria following the second appellant's return from  Saudi
        Arabia.  Second, having understood that the medical report had been
        prepared by a doctor in Syria, the FtT Judge erroneously concluded,
        at [6.4], that there is no evidence that  whilst  living  in  Saudi
        Arabia, either of the appellants needed help from  their  son  with
        their day-to-day care.  He  submits  that  if  the  FtT  Judge  had
        properly recognised that the appellants had been receiving help  to
        perform everyday tasks from their son whilst they lived with him in
        Saudi Arabia, the Judge is likely to have accepted that the  second
        appellant  in  particular,  requires  long-term  personal  care  to
        perform everyday tasks.


    20. Although we accept that the FtT Judge erroneously refers, at [6.3],
        to the report being prepared by a Doctor in Syria, that error is in
        our judgement immaterial.  As we have already set out, at paragraph
        [6.6] of the decision, the Judge accepted that the medical evidence
        indicates that the second appellant does  require  assistance  with
        daily living. The medical report confirms that her limited mobility
        has resulted  in  the  second  appellant  needing  assistance  with
        activities of daily living like showering, cleaning,  shopping  and
        cooking.  The Judge properly  noted,  at  [6.4]  that  the  medical
        evidence does not specify precisely what help is  required  by  the
        second appellant.  It was in our judgement reasonable for  the  FtT
        Judge to query precisely  what  help  is  required  by  the  second
        appellant. The assistance identified in the  medical  report  could
        conceivably be met by the provision of limited care for  a  limited
        number of hours each week. In the absence of such evidence, it  was
        impossible for the FtT Judge to consider what was  happening  on  a
        day to day basis, and what care provision is reasonably required.


    21. Mr Moran submits  that  in  then  considering  the  requirement  in
        paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 of Appendix FM, the FtT Judge failed to  apply
        the guidance provided by the Court of Appeal in Britcits  -v-  SSHD
        [2017] EWCA Civ 368.  He submits that  the  focus  should  properly
        have been on whether the care  required  by  the  appellants  could
        "reasonably be provided to the required level in  Syria",  and  the
        question as to the reasonableness, must be addressed  by  reference
        to the perspective of the provider and the appellants. Furthermore,
        the standard of care must  be  what  is  required  for  the  second
        appellant.  He submits  that  the  appellants  contended  that  the
        current care arrangements that have been made for  their  care  are
        "unreasonable", from the perspective of the  appellants'  son,  RA,
        who lives on the other side of Damascus, and whose  wife  has  care
        needs resulting from a car accident in 2016.


    22. As Sir Terence  Etherton,  MR,  noted  at  paragraph  [59]  of  his
        judgment in Britcits -v- SSHD, the focus of the  relevant  rule  is
        whether the care required by an adult  dependant  relative  can  be
        reasonably provided,  and  to  the  required  level,  in  the  home
        country.  What is reasonable is to be objectively assessed.   Here,
        the FtT Judge found, at [6.4] that the medical evidence before  the
        Tribunal did not specify precisely what help  is  required  by  the
        second appellant.  We have carefully considered the medical  report
        that is at page 117 of the appellants' bundle for  ourselves.   The
        report confirms that the second appellant's  limited  mobility  has
        "..resulted in her needing  assistance  with  activities  of  daily
        living like showering, cleaning, shopping and cooking."  The extent
        of the assistance required is not identified.  What  care  is  both
        necessary and reasonable for the second  appellant  to  receive  in
        Syria, can only be considered by reference to the  evidence  before
        the FtT as set out in the evidence, and particularly,  the  medical
        evidence.  At paragraph [5.1], the FtT Judge set out  the  evidence
        of the appellants' daughter.  She gave evidence that her father  is
        old and is barely able to manage and that  her  mother  needs  help
        preparing meals and  showering,  and  she  cannot  stand  for  long
        periods. It was in our judgement open to the FtT Judge to find,  at
        [6.6], that having considered the totality of the evidence, it  has
        not been established that such care that is required by the  second
        appellant, cannot be obtained to  the  level  required,  in  Syria,
        where she is currently living. There was as  the  FtT  Judge  notes
        repeatedly, no evidence before the Tribunal  that  such  assistance
        that the second appellant might need  with  daily  living,  is  not
        available in Syria.  The FtT Judge noted, at [6.7], that the second
        appellant is presently being supported by  her  husband  the  first
        appellant and their son RA.


    23. We accept, as Mr Moran submits, that the FtT Judge erroneously  had
        regard to whether the appellants  could  apply  for  settlement  in
        Canada with their son GA. The question under the relevant  rule  is
        whether the applicant is able to obtain the required level of  care
        in the country where she is living.  The Judge did not accept  that
        the appellants had applied for,  and  been  refused  settlement  in
        Canada. The Judge found that they had been refused  an  application
        for a visa to visit Canada.  The Judge's finding and conclusion  in
        that respect, was immaterial to the outcome of the appeal.


    24. We have carefully considered the criticisms made by  the  appellant
        regarding the Judge's consideration and analysis of  the  evidence.
        It is clear from a careful reading of what is set out at paragraphs
        [6.4] to [6.7] of the decision, that in the end, the appeal  failed
        for two reasons.  First, although there was some  medical  evidence
        that indicates that the second appellant  does  require  assistance
        with daily living, the medical evidence does not specify  precisely
        what help is required by the second appellant.  Second,  there  was
        no evidence before the FtT, that the  second  appellant  could  not
        obtain the required level of  care  in  Syria  because  it  is  not
        available even if the appellants son RA, cannot reasonably  provide
        it.


    25. The Judge was  not  satisfied  that  the  requirement  set  out  at
        paragraphs E-ECDR.2.4. and E-ECDR.2.5.  of  Appendix  FM  are  met.
        There was, as Mr Moran accepted before us,  no  evidence  that  the
        required level of care is not available in Syria.  Mr Moran submits
        that it would be difficult for an applicant in the position of  the
        appellants to adduce evidence of something that is  not  available.
        That misses the point. The appellants  have  been  able  to  obtain
        medical evidence to support their application and appeal.  At  page
        51 of the appellants' bundle, there is a  letter  from  Dr  Mohamed
        Qasim Al Shukairy, a psychiatrist and neurologist.  That letter was
        considered by the FtT Judge.  The letter confirms that  the  second
        appellant has PTSD and that she suffers from  a  severe  depressive
        disorder.  The  letter  confirms  that  she  has  been   prescribed
        appropriate medication and has been referred to psychiatric therapy
        sessions. There is no suggestion in that  letter  that  the  second
        appellant, is unable to obtain the required level of care in Syria,
        because such care is not available. There was  no  evidence  before
        the Tribunal as to the availability of, and  the  extent  to  which
        domestic care could be arranged, to  assist  the  second  appellant
        secure the required level of care in Syria. That is  evidence  that
        should have been readily available.  In her witness statement,  the
        appellants' daughter states that her parents cannot return to Syria
        because their home is near eastern Ghouta, an area which  has  seen
        intense fighting.  She states that not only is it too dangerous for
        them, but there is only  limited  access  to  medical  care.   That
        statement was made at a time when  the  appellants  were  in  Saudi
        Arabia, but they have since  returned  to  Syria.   The  appellants
        might well be  reluctant  to  bring  in  other  help  for  fear  of
        criminals but that is not to say that suitable domestic care is not
        available, or could not be safely arranged.


    26. It is now well established that the issues which  the  Tribunal  is
        deciding and the basis on which the Tribunal reaches  its  decision
        may be set out directly or by inference. The weight  that  the  FtT
        Judge  attached  to  the  evidence  was  a  matter  for  her.   The
        obligation on a Tribunal Judge is to  give  reasons  in  sufficient
        detail to show the principles on which the Tribunal has  acted  and
        the reasons that have led to the decision. An appellant is entitled
        to know the basis of fact on which the conclusion has been reached.
        Appellate courts should not rush to find such misdirection's simply
        because they might have reached a different conclusion on the facts
        or expressed themselves differently.  In our judgement, it was open
        to  the  FtT  judge  to  conclude  that  the  requirements  of  the
        immigration rules cannot be met.


    27. Turning then to the Article 8 claim, the FtT Judge found  that  the
        appellants have not submitted any satisfactory evidence  that  they
        enjoy family life with the sponsor in the  UK.  Mr  Moran  concedes
        before us that there was no evidence  before  the  FtT  as  to  the
        frequency of contact between the appellants and their  daughter  in
        the UK, and there was no evidence adduced before the FtT  regarding
        any particular emotional ties between them, that  might  go  beyond
        the normal emotional ties that  one  expects  between  parents  and
        adult children. Mr Moran submits that the  immigration  rules  make
        provision for adult dependent relatives to join children in the UK,
        and that is a strong indication that in such circumstances there is
        likely to be a family life between the applicants and their sponsor
        in the UK.


    28. The submission made by Mr Moran was rejected by the Court of Appeal
        in Britcits -v- SSHD.  At paragraph [74], Sir Terence Etherton,  MR
        (with whom Lord Justice Davis agreed) said:

                  "Firstly,  as  I  have  said,  I  reject  the  appellant's
                  submission that there is family life which engages Article
                  8 in every case where a UK sponsor wishes to  bring  their
                  elderly parent to the UK to look after them. As Sedley  LJ
                  said in Kugathas at [18], [24] and [25] with regard to  an
                  adult, neither blood ties nor the  concern  and  affection
                  that  ordinarily  go  with  them  are,  by  themselves  or
                  together, enough to constitute family life;  there  is  no
                  presumption that a person has a family life, even with the
                  members of a person's immediate family. The court  has  to
                  scrutinise  all  the  relevant  factors.  There  must   be
                  something more than normal emotional ties. As Lord Bingham
                  said in Huang at [18]:


                      "Matters such as the age, health and vulnerability of
                      the applicant, the closeness and previous history  of
                      the  family,  the  applicant's  dependence   on   the
                      financial and emotional support of  the  family,  the
                      prevailing cultural tradition and conditions  in  the
                      country of origin and many other factors may  all  be
                      relevant."

    29. Lord Justice Sales added, at [86]:


                  "...For the reasons given by the Master of  the  Rolls  by
                  reference to the  Kugathas  case,  I  cannot  accept  Miss
                  Lieven's submission  that  Article  8  rights  are  always
                  engaged in the cases covered by the ADR  rules  and  hence
                  cannot accept her submission that application of the rules
                  will invariably involve an  interference  with  Article  8
                  rights. In my view there is likely  to  be  a  significant
                  number of cases even within the paradigm type of situation
                  involving elderly parents abroad  (on  which  Miss  Lieven
                  focused her submissions) in which Article  8  rights  will
                  not be engaged and where for that reason  the  application
                  of the ADR immigration rules would not contravene  Article
                  8. The position  becomes  clearer  still  when  the  wider
                  categories of adult dependant relatives to which the rules
                  apply outside  that  paradigm  situation  are  taken  into
                  account, in  relation  to  which  it  will  often  not  be
                  possible to show that there is any recognised family  life
                  for the purposes of Article 8."


    30. It is well-established in the authorities that there is no relevant
        family life for the purpose of Article 8 simply because there is  a
        family relationship between two adults (such as a parent and child)
        who live in different countries. There must be something more  than
        normal emotional ties: see Kugathas v Secretary of  State  for  the
        Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  That is plainly  the  starting
        point that was adopted by the FtT Judge at paragraph [7.2]  of  her
        decision. It  was  uncontroversial  that  the  appellants  and  the
        sponsor have been living apart since 2015 when the sponsor came  to
        the UK and the appellants then travelled to Saudi  Arabia  to  live
        with their son GA. We accept that another  Judge  might  well  have
        concluded that Article 8 is engaged, but this  is  an  issue  which
        faces Judges of the specialist immigration  Tribunals  on  a  daily
        basis.  The Judge here, was not satisfied that the appellants  have
        established that they are emotionally or financially  dependent  on
        the sponsor. That was in our judgement, a conclusion that was  open
        to the FtT Judge on the  evidence  before  the  FtT.   The  finding
        reached by the Judge was neither irrational nor unreasonable in the
        Wednesbury sense, or a finding that was wholly unsupported  by  the
        evidence.


    31. It follows that in our judgement, the decision of FtT Judge Herlihy
        is not infected by a material error of law capable of affecting the
        outcome and the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


    32. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
        of an error on a point of law.


    33. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.



                                                          4th July 2019

Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
