
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13654/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th January 2018                          |On 6th February 2018          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mrs Fatma Turk
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr R Chowdhury (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary  of  State  in
    relation to a Decision and Reasons of Judge Majid  promulgated  on  1st
    June 2017 after a hearing on 24th April at Taylor House.  The Appellant
    before Judge Majid is a citizen of Turkey and she appealed  a  Decision
    to refuse her leave to enter to join her husband,  who  is  in  the  UK
    under the terms of the standstill provisions in the Ankara Agreement.

 2. The Secretary of State relies  in  part  on  a  Decision  by  the  Vice
    President and others of this Tribunal where several Decisions  by  this
    particular Judge were looked at and found severely lacking.  They  also
    refer to his reasoning being inadequate.

 3. Mr Chowdhury argued with some force that this is not a  Decision  which
    is without engagement with the evidence or  analysis  or  findings  and
    that it does not contain misdirections of law because the Judge set out
    the law he is applying.

 4. At paragraph 3 the Judge says:

         "I put on record that in considering this appeal I  shall  bear  in
         mind the  legal  provisions  of  the  relevant  paragraphs  of  the
         Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as amended).  They are  detailed  but  I
         have borne every provision of these paragraphs in mind meticulously
         during the assessment of the Appellant's case.  I  am  taking  into
         account all of the relevant law including the recent changes in the
         Immigration Acts 2014 and 2016."

    The Judge says that but nowhere does he specify precisely what it is he
    is looking at and finding.  He makes no mention of Section 117B of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This is a human rights appeal and the
    Judge is required by Section 117 to take certain matters  into  account
    and he ignores that completely.  Notwithstanding that he  says  he  has
    taken all relevant law into account he plainly has not.

 5. Again, notwithstanding Mr Chowdhury's submissions I cannot  agree  that
    this Decision and Reasons contains an analysis  of  the  evidence.   It
    simply says "I accept what has been said" and in terms of the balancing
    exercise, quite frankly, there is not one and as in other Decisions  by
    this particular Judge there are  rambling  statements  which  go  to  a
    political view which have no place in a judicial Decision.

 6. Furthermore, at paragraph 17 the Judge says:

         "A review of all of the evidence adduced by the Appellant convinces
         me that the appeal should be allowed.  Wherever one feels that  the
         case misses the point marginally  the  judicial  discretion  should
         help in light of the factors detailed in paragraph 12 above."

    That is a clear misdirection.  There is no such thing as a  near  miss.
    He has to carry out a balancing exercise starting through the  lens  of
    the Rules and taking into account Section 117. He does none of that.

 7. I therefore set the Decision aside in its entirety and remit it to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing in front of a different Judge.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for a full rehearing on all issues.

No anonymity direction is made.


Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin                                           2nd
February 2018
