
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/13753/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 11 December 2017                        | On 11 January 2018              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, UKRAINE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           mr Oleksandr Bashkiriev
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, HOPO
For the Respondent:    Ms S Bashkireva


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Entry Clearance Officer appeals with leave against the decision  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Devittie  to  allow  the  appeal  of   the
    respondent on Article 8 grounds, following refusal of  his  application
    for entry clearance as a visitor.

2.   The respondent will from herein on be referred to as the applicant  for
    ease of reference.

3.   The applicant made an application to visit his daughter, Ms  Bashkireva
    and grandson in the United Kingdom.  The ECO's reasons for the  refusal
    read as follows:

    You state that you will travel to the UK for six months  and  that  you
    are retired.  You have not declared your monthly income but  state  you
    spend 40 per month on living costs.  I note that  you  were  previously
    issued a visit visa in October 2013, valid from 9  October  2013  to  9
    October 2015.  You visited the UK between 25 October 2013 and 20  April
    2014 (six months) and again between 9 November 2014  and  19  May  2015
    (six months).  Now following a visa refusal last month in November, you
    are again seeking a 2-year visit visa in order to visit the UK for  six
    months.  The Immigration Rules provide in 1V4.2 that an applicant  must
    satisfy the decision maker that they are a genuine visitor.  This means
    that the applicant will not live in the UK for extended periods through
    frequent or successive visits, or make the UK their main home.


    In light of the above I am not satisfied that you are genuinely seeking
    entry as a visitor or that  you  therefore  meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix V4.2 of  the  Immigration  Rules.   I  therefore  refuse  your
    application  because  I  am  not  satisfied  that  you  meet  all   the
    requirements of the United Kingdom Immigration Rules.

4.   The judge heard evidence from the applicant's daughter.

5.   The judge said  it  was  not  contested  that  the  applicant  met  the
    maintenance and accommodation requirements under the Immigration Rules.
     The sole ground on which the application  was  refused  was  that  the
    frequency of the applicant's visits to the UK gave  rise  to  concerns,
    that successive visits had the effect of making the United Kingdom  the
    applicant's main home.

6.   The judge stated that in the context of this case, this is  a  76  year
    old pensioner who is apparently in good health and who deems it fit  to
    visit his daughter once every year in the United Kingdom.  There was no
    suggestion that he did not have any other family members in the Ukraine
    and that he would need to make the United Kingdom his main home.  There
    was no suggestion that he was without adequate means  in  the  Ukraine.
    He has scrupulously adhered to the terms of his  previous  visas.   The
    judge found that to deny him a visitor visa in this instance, would  in
    effect be to impose upon him a penalty that is not warranted.

7.   The judge was satisfied having regard  to  the  evidence  as  a  whole,
    including the evidence of the applicant's sponsor,  who  gave  credible
    evidence as to the applicant's intentions at the hearing, that  it  has
    been demonstrated that the applicant intends to return to  the  Ukraine
    and that he does not intend to make the United Kingdom his main home.

8.   The judge held as follows at paragraph 6

    This is an immigration appeal.  In considering the  proportionality  of
    the refusal of entry clearance under the Immigration Rules  the  extent
    to which the applicant meets the requirements of the Immigration  Rules
    is a relevant  consideration.   In  this  instance  I  found  that  the
    applicant does meet the requirements of the migrations.  He seeks entry
    clearance to visit his daughter.  Having  regard  to  previous  visits,
    there can be no doubt that the refusal does interfere with family  life
    as the appellant has become accustomed to visiting his daughter  on  an
    annual basis.  The public interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control is not in  my  view  a  significant  factor  in  my
    assessment of proportionality - nor, is the economic wellbeing of  the
    UK,  as  the  sponsor's  resources  in  terms  of   accommodation   and
    maintenance are not in contention.

9.   Consequently, the  judge  found  that  in  all  the  circumstances  the
    refusal  to  grant  the  applicant  entry   clearance   constituted   a
    disproportionate interference with a right to family life under Article
    8 of the ECHR.

10.  Permission was granted to the appellant ECO on the  basis  that  it  is
    arguable that the judge erred in his assessment as there was no  reason
    for concluding that Article 8 family life exists between the two adults
    concerned.

11.  The ECO's grounds relied on case law, such as MS (Article  8 -  family
    life - dependency - proportionality) Uganda [2004]  UKIAT  00064  and
    Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ  31.   Both  cases  establish  that  in
    circumstances where family life is put forward as existing  between  an
    adult child and his parents, there needs  to  be  further  elements  of
    dependency involving more than  emotional  family  ties.   The  grounds
    argue that there was no finding of additional dependency or ties beyond
    normal emotional ties such as to amount to family life for the purposes
    of Article 8.

12.  I agreed with Mr Deller that the judge applied a flawed approach.   The
    judge failed to follow the step by step principles in Razgar.  Further,
    I find that the judge failed to  identify  what  there  was  about  the
    relationship between the applicant, his daughter and his grandson  that
    warranted the protection of Article 8(1).  In other  words,  the  judge
    failed to identify whether  something  more  existed  than  the  normal
    emotional ties between an adult parent and  his  adult  child  and  his
    grandson.

13.  The judge's failure to identify whether legally there was  family  life
    between the applicant and his daughter  and  grandson  meant  that  his
    decision was flawed and could not stand.

14.  I remake the decision on the evidence that is before me.

15.  Ms Bashkireva accepted that there was no financial  dependency  between
    her and her applicant father.  She  said  that  family  life  does  not
    switch off or cease when a child reaches the age of 18.  I accept that.



16.  She said her reason for having this  arrangement  with  her  father  is
    that she works as a contractor and is unable to take leave in order  to
    visit her father in the Ukraine.  This is because if she  takes  annual
    leave she does not get paid.  Her son is 13 years old and loves to have
    a  discussion  on  physics  with  her  father.   Her  father's   visits
    contribute to the  social  and  educational  interests  of  the  child.
    Although they are not financially dependent on  each  other,  they  are
    dependent on each other emotionally.  Further, as the child's  paternal
    grandparents are deceased, the applicant  is  now  the  only  surviving
    grandparent.  Her son needs the  support  of  his  grandfather  in  his
    social development.

17.  Having heard from the sponsor and  having  considered  the  submissions
    made by Mr Deller, I am not persuaded that the evidence of the  sponsor
    demonstrates that there is family life between her  and  the  applicant
    that engages Article 8(1).

18.  The sponsor accepted that there was  no  financial  dependency  between
    her and her father.  I find  that  there  is  an  emotional  dependency
    between the applicant and his daughter.  His daughter is his only child
    and as a result there is a strong emotional bond between them.  I  find
    that the social and educational support given by the applicant  to  his
    grandson forms part of the normal relationship  between  a  grandparent
    and a grandchild. I do not find that it takes the  relationship  beyond
    the normal emotional ties such as to amount  to  family  life  for  the
    purposes of Article 8. Consequently, I find that Article  8(1)  is  not
    engaged.  This means that there was no need for me to  go  through  the
    remaining steps in Razgar.

19.  The appeal of the applicant is therefore dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                                  Date:  10 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

