
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13817/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th December 2018                          |On 25th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                         Mr KARTIK ARVINDBHAI PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on  19th  January  1981.   The
    Appellant has an extensive immigration history dating back  to  January
    2006 when he was granted entry clearance as a student.  On  27th  March
    2017 the Appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain on the  basis
    of ten years' long residence.

 2. The appeal came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Rothwell
    sitting at Harmondsworth on 26th July 2018.  In a decision and  reasons
    promulgated on 17th August 2018 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed on
    human rights grounds.

 3. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  29th
    August 2018.  On 15th October 2018 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lambert
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Lambert noted that  the  Appellant
    had been found not to meet the requirements of lawful  residence  under
    paragraph 276A because his residence as the spouse of an  EEA  national
    did not count  under  paragraph  276B  and  that  the  judge  had  also
    concluded that he was not entitled to  permanent  residence  under  EEA
    Regulation 15.

 4. The grounds took issue with the findings made by the judge  as  to  the
    exercise of treaty rights, in particular the fact that the judge failed
    to receive from  the  representative  the  requested  schedule  of  the
    evidence on which he sought to rely, amidst a 462 page  bundle.   Judge
    Lambert considered that it was unclear from paragraph 6 of the  grounds
    whether the schedule of documents submitted after the hearing, but  not
    received  by  the  judge,  included  additional  documentary  evidence.
    Insofar as the grounds sought to rely on evidence not provided  at  the
    hearing, the judge could not be argued to have been in error.

 5. Judge Lambert thereafter concluded  that  whilst  the  absence  of  the
    schedule itself did not necessarily mean that the judge had  failed  to
    consider the relevant evidence in the Appellant's bundle,  the  judge's
    findings at paragraph 29 suggested a relatively narrow period from 18th
    February 2018 to 30th April 2018 during which the Sponsor's  employment
    record was found lacking and that this may have been capable  of  being
    resolved by closer examination of the documents described in paragraphs
    14 and 15 of the grounds.  On  that  basis  he  granted  permission  to
    appeal.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.   The  Appellant  appears  in  person.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home Office  Presenting  Officer,  Mr
    Bramble.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. I explained the  process  in  some  detail  to  the  Appellant  and  he
    indicated that he understood the purpose of us being  here.   This  was
    important because Mr Bramble's initial submission is that there  is  no
    appeal extant before me.  He reminds me that the application  that  was
    made was under the Rules on the basis of long residence  and  that  the
    Appellant, as a family member of an EEA national, did not lawfully have
    leave and therefore the ten year Rule  did  not  apply  but  there  was
    discretion to consider the ten  year  period  and  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant's partner had been exercising treaty rights.

 8. However, Mr Bramble takes me to paragraph 24 of the  judge's  decision.
    That paragraph is of importance and I set it out:

         "Both parties agreed that I ought to consider whether the Appellant
         is entitled to permanent residence under  Regulation  15.   It  was
         agreed that  because  of  the  Appellant's  EEA  spouse's  mother's
         illness and her trips to Slovakia and the problem with the  English
         course, that the relevant dates are 1st May 2013 until  30th  April
         2018".

 9. Mr Bramble reminds me that the Appellant  was  legally  represented  at
    that hearing.  He points out that the ten year period  commenced  after
    the Appellant's arrival in the UK in January 2006 and therefore the ten
    year period would run to January  2016.   He  notes  consequently  that
    there was a gap when  it  was  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    exercising  treaty  rights  and  that  the  ten  year  period  was  not
    sustainable.  He submits that the judge's analysis at paragraph 23  was
    wrong, and that this is not material because as there is an agreed  gap
    therefore it is never possible for the  Appellant  to  succeed  because
    there is  never  a  ten  year  period  of  residence.   The  judge  was
    consequently correct not to go on to consider further periods.

10. Mr Patel in person advises that he gave evidence relating  to  the  ten
    year Rule and then states, and I did not interrupt him, firstly that he
    formed a company in 2015 and  that  he  had  filed  accounts  for  that
    period, therefore there was a reason for him to produce evidence as  to
    what he was doing in 2015.  He indicates that the company deals with IT
    support and design software for taxi companies.

11. Secondly he states that evidence  was  produced  that  the  Appellant's
    Sponsor was paid a dividend but he does not know why the judge did  not
    see this document and that the Sponsor  now  works  full-time  for  the
    company.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.



Findings on Error of Law

14. All findings made in this matter by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  are
    findings that relate to  an  application  under  the  EEA  Regulations.
    There is however before me no EEA application nor so far as I can  make
    out was there  ever  one  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and
    consequently there is no right  of  appeal  generated  although  it  is
    appropriate to take into account  all  the  circumstances.   This  case
    comes down to the Appellant's relationship with an EEA national  and  I
    emphasise as is put to me indeed by Mr Bramble  and  to  the  Appellant
    that there is no right of removal against him anyway.

15. The correct way of dealing with this matter  is  to  find  consequently
    that there is no material error of law in the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  So far as the way in which the  judge  has  dealt
    with it that would certainly appear to be correct.  It was agreed by Mr
    Bramble that in such circumstances the correct  approach  was  for  the
    Appellant to make a fresh application.  That is not a  matter  that  is
    before me.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains no material error  of
law and the appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           10th January 2019




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           10th January 2019

