
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
HU/13651/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27 November 2017                        |On 25 January 2018             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Ogechi Ugorji
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Abekoya, Atlantic Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   As in these proceedings the Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    has been granted permission to appeal against the decision by the First-
    tier Tribunal to allow Mr Ugorji's appeal, it is the Secretary of State
    who is  the  Appellant  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  However,  it  is
    convenient to refer in this decision to the parties as they were before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 17  September  1982.   He
    appeals against the Respondent's decision to refuse  his  human  rights
    claim dated 15 April 2016 and the decision of 21 May 2015  refusing  to
    revoke the deportation order made under Section 5(1) of the Immigration
    Act 1971.


The Appellant's immigration history

3.   The Appellant arrived in the UK some time in  June  or  July  2004.  In
    2005, he submitted a visa application in a slightly different name  and
    date of birth. The application was refused and the passport  impounded.
    On 1 September 2007, the Appellant presented a false Nigerian  passport
    containing a false indefinite leave to remain  vignette  to  a  nursing
    agency to seek employment. On 18  September  2007,  the  Appellant  was
    arrested at his employer's address. On arrival at the police station he
    stated that his real name was Ugorji Ogechi and his date of  birth  was
    17 December 1982. He was subsequently charged with four offences. On 10
    October 2007, he was convicted at Norwich Crown Court and sentenced  to
    ten months' imprisonment for each offence,  to  run  concurrently,  and
    recommended for deportation.  The  Appellant's  application  under  the
    assisted voluntary return - early release scheme  was  approved  on  21
    November 2007.

4.   On 26 February 2008, the Appellant's representative  submitted  further
    submissions based on Article 8 of the  ECHR.  On  14  March  2008,  the
    Appellant  was  removed/returned  to  Nigeria.  On  3  June  2008,  the
    Appellant was excluded from the UK by the Secretary of State on grounds
    that his presence was not conducive to the public good for  reasons  of
    criminality. However, the Home Office were unable  to  confirm  whether
    the Entry Clearance security systems were updated with this information
    or whether the Appellant was made aware he was excluded from the UK.

5.   On 21 August 2008, the Appellant submitted a visa application,  as  the
    spouse of a British citizen, to the Entry Clearance Officer  in  Lagos.
    On 18 September 2008, his visa application was refused because  of  his
    criminality in the UK and because checks revealed that he  had  made  a
    previous application in a slightly different name and  date  of  birth.
    He was given a right of appeal which he exercised. On 9 September 2009,
    his appeal was allowed. The judge found that the Appellant's wife was a
    credible  witness  despite  concerns  over  the  Appellant's   criminal
    convictions, illegal entry and use of someone else's identity  to  gain
    employment. On 5 October 2009, the Appellant was granted leave to enter
    which expired on 5 January 2012.

6.   On 3 February 2011, the Appellant was convicted of  disorderly  conduct
    and he received a conditional discharge.   On  19  December  2011,  the
    Appellant applied for further leave to remain under Article  8.  On  20
    February 2012, the Appellant was arrested on  suspicion  of  theft  and
    issued with a notice as an overstayer, but this was withdrawn in  light
    of his outstanding application. On 16 February 2015, the Appellant  was
    served with a decision to make a deportation order in  accordance  with
    Section 5(1) of the Immigration  Act  1971.   On  17  March  2015,  the
    Appellant's representative raised submissions under Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.

7.   The application for leave to remain on the basis of  Article  8,  dated
    19 December  2011,  was  refused  under  paragraph  322(5A)(b)  of  the
    Immigration Rules on 18 May 2015. It  was  undesirable  to  permit  the
    Appellant to remain in the UK because he was a persistent offender  who
    showed disregard  for  the  law.  There  was  no  concession  that  the
    Appellant would otherwise meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules. The application to revoke  the  deportation  order  was  refused
    because the Appellant's human rights claim had been refused.

8.   The Appellant has a son who is a British citizen  born  on  3  February
    2008. In the decision of 18 May 2015, the Respondent concluded that the
    Appellant did not have a Zambrano derivative right of residence and  in
    considering Article 8 the  Respondent  looked  at  paragraph  A362  and
    paragraphs A398 to 399D of the Immigration Rules and Sections  117A  to
    117D of the 2002 Act. The decision letter is based on the fact that the
    Appellant is a foreign criminal. Further, the decision  to  refuse  the
    Appellant's human rights claim was certified under Section 94B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the Appellant has been
    removed from the UK.

9.   The Respondent sent a further decision letter to  the  Appellant  dated
    15 April 2016 taking into account the  further  submissions  made.  The
    Respondent considered the Appellant's Article 8 family and private life
    and the contact he had with his young son.  It was  concluded  that  it
    would not be unduly harsh for his son  to  remain  in  the  UK  in  the
    primary care of  his  mother  whilst  the  Appellant  was  returned  to
    Nigeria.  The decision to deport was maintained.

The First-tier judge's preserved findings

10.  The Appellant's appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Colvin
    on 23 May 2017. On 28 September 2017, I found that there was  an  error
    of law in the decision to allow the appeal because the judge failed  to
    deal with Article 8. The appeal was limited  to  one  on  human  rights
    grounds. I set the decision aside.

11.  The following findings were preserved:
    (a)  The deportation order was made on the  basis  of  the  Appellant's
         conviction in October 2007 when he used false documents  to  obtain
         work. He was sentenced to 10 months' imprisonment  and  recommended
         for deportation by the sentencing  judge.  The  sentencing  judge's
         remarks were not available some 10 years later.
    (b)  The first time a deportation order was considered was in May  2015
         on the grounds that the Appellant's  presence  in  the  UK  is  not
         conducive to the public good.  The  Appellant  was  not  liable  to
         automatic deportation.
    (c)  The Appellant returned to Nigeria in March  2008  on  a  voluntary
         basis. He was granted entry clearance in 2009  after  a  successful
         appeal to the Tribunal. There was no  evidence  to  show  that  the
         Appellant or the Tribunal were aware of any  exclusion  order.  The
         Appellant's previous conviction in 2007 did not  prevent  him  from
         obtaining entry clearance.
    (d)  It was not reasonable to uphold the deportation  decision  on  the
         grounds that the Appellant's presence in the UK is  not  considered
         to be conducive to the  public  good  solely  in  relation  to  the
         conviction in 2007.
    (e)  The Appellant was not a persistent offender and the refusal  under
         paragraph 322(5A)(b) was unlawful.
    (f)  The Appellant and his ex-partner have a son, F, born on 3 February
         2008  who  is  a  British  citizen.   His  parents  remained  in  a
         relationship until August 2010. The Appellant made  an  application
         to the Family Court in December 2010 and a  court  order,  made  in
         October 2012, granted the Appellant supervised contact with his son
         for two hours a month at Great Yarmouth Family Contact Centre.
    (g)  The Appellant complied with this order and in March 2016, a review
         by the Great Yarmouth Family Contact Centre stated, "Over the  last
         few months it has become apparent that contact  between  Mr  Ugorji
         and his son has progressed immensely. There is  clear  evidence  to
         suggest that they have become closer and F enjoys time  spent  with
         his father. There is a bond between father and son and one  that  I
         feel will become stronger as time goes on."
    (h)  The Appellant had sought more contact hours with his son  and  was
         about to enter into mediation with his ex-partner in  2016  at  the
         time he was deported. There was evidence that he  had  remained  in
         contact with his son since his  removal  in  May  2016  and  he  is
         genuine in stating that he wishes to play a role in his son's life.

Submissions

12.  The Appellant did not submit any further evidence  in  accordance  with
    directions and relied on the material before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Mr Abekoya relied on a postage receipt and submitted that the Appellant
    had sent a card to his son on 5 September 2017 and 16 November 2017. He
    submitted that the issue was whether the Appellant could be said to  be
    exercising family life with his child in the UK. There was evidence  in
    the Appellant's bundle that he bought gifts and other items for his son
    and he contributed to his upkeep. The Appellant had regular contact for
    two hours per month and this would have increased had  he  remained  in
    the UK. The Appellant remained actively involved with his son.

13.  Mr Melvin submitted that the decision to deport  was  lawful,  although
    he accepted that section 117C did not apply.  The  Applicant  had  been
    erroneously allowed to enter the UK as a spouse. It was  only  when  he
    committed a further offence that deportation action  was  pursued.  The
    Appellant had lived with his child and mother for only  18  months  and
    the marriage failed before the expiry of his visa.  The  Appellant  had
    contact with his son for two hours per month since October 2012.  There
    was little evidence  from  F  who  was  now  10  years  old.  This  was
    insufficient evidence  to  show  that  family  life  was  engaged.  The
    Appellant would have to show that there was evidence that he  would  be
    granted further access. Two hours contact a month did not outweigh  his
    criminality. The Appellant did not have a genuine parental relationship
    and did not have a major influence  in  his  child's  life.  There  was
    little evidence of contact since the Appellant returned to Nigeria. The
    Appellant's Article 8 rights did not outweigh the deportation order.

14.  Mr Abekoya submitted that the deportation order was not made  until  19
    February 2016. It could not have  been  made  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant's presence in the UK was not conducive to  the  public  good.
    The deportation order was unlawful.  The  Appellant  had  made  genuine
    efforts to have contact with his son and had established  family  life.
    It was in the best interests of his son to  maintain  his  relationship
    with his father.

Discussion and conclusions

The deportation order

15.  The Respondent's decision to deport  the  Appellant  was  made  on  the
    basis of his conviction in 2007 for which he was sentenced to a term of
    imprisonment of  10  months.  He  was  not  subject  to  the  automatic
    deportation provisions and he was not a foreign criminal. The Appellant
    was not a persistent offender  and  the  Respondent  did  not  rely  on
    section 117C of the 2002 Act.

16.  In her letter of 21 May  2015,  the  Respondent  states  that  she  has
    decided to make a deportation order because the Appellant's presence in
    the UK is not conducive to the public good (section 3(5)  of  the  1971
    Act). However, the deportation order relies on section 3(6) of the 1971
    Act; he is liable for deportation following the recommendation  by  the
    judge.

17.  I am of the view that the Respondent cannot rationally rely on  section
    3(5) because the Appellant has been granted leave to enter the UK as  a
    spouse  notwithstanding  his  conviction  in  2007.  The  Appellant  is
    eligible for deportation because the court made  a  recommendation  for
    deportation. But this means only that power arises under  section  5(1)
    of the 1971 Act in that the Respondent may make  a  deportation  order.
    The reason given for her deciding to do so, that  the  Appellant  is  a
    persistent offender, is now accepted to  be  unsustainable.  Therefore,
    the decision to make a deportation order is fatally flawed.


Article 8

18.  Despite that, the Appellant cannot succeed under the Immigration  Rules
    on suitability grounds: he is currently the subject  of  a  deportation
    order.

19.  The Appellant is  the  father  of  a  British  citizen  child  born  in
    February 2008 and they lived together as a family  until  August  2010.
    The court ordered that Appellant have supervised contact with  his  son
    for two hours per month from October 2012. There was  no  contact  from
    November 2012 to February 2014. Since then the Appellant  has  had  two
    hours contact per month until he was deported to Nigeria in May 2016.
20.  I find that the Appellant has established family  life  with  his  son.
    The Appellant's deportation amounts to an interference with family life
    and the consequences are of such gravity so as to engage Article 8. The
    Appellant's  son  is  deprived  of  his  father's  presence  and   from
    developing his relationship with him.  There  is  professional  opinion
    evidence before me to the effect that the parental relationship between
    the Appellant and his son is genuine and is one  that  has  "progressed
    immensely".

21.  Given my conclusions above, the interference is in accordance with  the
    law and necessary in a  democratic  society.  The  issue  therefore  is
    whether the interference with family life, that would be brought  about
    by the decision under challenge, is proportionate. I  have  taken  into
    account section 117B of the 2002 Act in coming to my conclusions.

22.  It is in the best interests of the Appellant's son,  F,  to  remain  in
    the UK with his mother. She is his primary carer and he has lived  with
    her all his life. F will not be required to leave the UK as a result of
    the Appellant's deportation. It would not be reasonable to expect F  to
    leave the UK.

23.  It is F's best interests to be able to continue to  have  contact  with
    his father. The Appellant's relationship with  F's  mother  has  broken
    down and she prevents the Appellant from having telephone contact  with
    F. His only means of contact since his removal to Nigeria has  been  by
    several cards sent by post. The  Appellant's  partner  visited  him  in
    Nigeria in September 2017 and brought back items for F.

24.  There was significant delay since the original application was made  in
    2011.  During  this  time,  the  Applicant  has  developed  a   genuine
    relationship with F and bought him toys and items of clothing.  He  has
    also sent money to F's mother on a weekly basis by standing order  and,
    on occasion, larger amounts by cheque. It is reasonable to assume  that
    if the Appellant had not  been  removed  in  May  2016  he  would  have
    continued contact with his son.

25.  The Appellant is in a genuine relationship with his son and  they  have
    begun to form a close bond. I acknowledge  that  two  hours  supervised
    contact per month at the Great Yarmouth Family Contact  Centre  is  not
    sufficient to show that the  Appellant  is  actively  involved  in  F's
    upbringing and their family life is limited. However, the Appellant  is
    F's father and he has taken all necessary steps to keep in contact with
    his son notwithstanding the breakdown  of  his  relationship  with  F's
    mother. I find that the Appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship with his son. The Appellant's  deportation  means  that  F
    will no longer be able to see his father once a month.

26.  The weight to be attached to the  public  interest  in  deportation  is
    significant and substantial. I am not assisted by the  absence  of  the
    sentencing remarks, but the Appellant has been convicted of  a  serious
    crime. I find that the weight to be attached to the public interest, as
    engaged by the Appellant's offending, is  reduced  by  the  eight  year
    delay in making the deportation order and in part by  his  re-entry  to
    the UK, notwithstanding his  conviction.  The  judge  who  allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the refusal of entry clearance was aware  of
    his conviction and, presumably, the recommendation of the  court  since
    this was  part  of  his  sentence  and  the  Respondent  refused  entry
    clearance on the basis of his criminality.

27.  This is  an  unusual  case  and  one  which  is  finely  balanced.  The
    Appellant committed a serious offence ten years ago. Since he committed
    that offence he has been allowed to re-enter  the  UK.  He  received  a
    conditional discharge for a further offence in 2011. It was not similar
    to the offence that led to his deportation. I find that the  weight  to
    be attached to the public interest is reduced  by  the  delay  and  the
    Appellant's re-entry into the UK.

28.  The weight to be attached to the Appellant's family life  is  similarly
    limited. He has had two hours contact  with  his  son  at  the  contact
    centre from February 2014 to May 2016. The Appellant is F's father  and
    he has developed a genuine relationship with him. It  is  in  the  best
    interests of a child to be with both parents. F has a relationship with
    his father worthy of protection. I find on balance  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant.

29.  Put another way, for the reasons I have set  out,  there  is  protected
    family life between the Appellant and his son  so  that  Article  8  is
    engaged. It is in the best interests of the child that he has  face  to
    face contact with his father. That contact has  been  limited  but  the
    evidence establishes that the relationship continues to develop and  is
    of importance to the child. In striking a balance between the competing
    interests  in  play  the  only  matters  speaking  in  favour  of   the
    Respondent's case are  the  fact  of  the  deportation  order  and  the
    consequence that the Appellant cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. But the significance of the deportation order  falls
    away, as I have explained, because the deportation order is accepted to
    be not sustainable as the Appellant is not, and should  not  have  been
    regarded as a persistent offender.

30.  I have regard to the provisions and ambitions of  section  117B(6).  In
    the case of a  person  who  is  not  liable  to  deportation  (and  the
    Respondent accepts that  the  deportation  order  in  place  cannot  be
    justified, having accepted that section 117C does not apply) the public
    interest does not require a person's removal  where,  as  is  the  case
    here, he has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child and it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to
    leave the UK.

31.  Taking into account all the evidence before me, I find  that  F's  best
    interests and the Appellant's right to family life outweigh the  public
    interest. I allow the appeal on human rights grounds.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed


No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 24 January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

