
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/13632/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 11th October 2017                   |     On 18th October 2017            |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               mrs sabita din
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Ahmed instructed by House of Immigration
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  of  20th
    November 2015 to refuse her application for leave to remain in  the  UK
    on the basis of her private and family life.  First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Obhi allowed the Appellant's appeal and  the  Secretary  of  State  now
    appeals to this Tribunal with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Woodcraft on 7th August 2017.

 3. At the hearing before  me  it  became  apparent  that  there  were  two
    versions of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision, however it  seems
    that the differences between them were in formatting only, and  it  was
    agreed at the hearing that the final and  appropriate  version  of  the
    decision is the one that was promulgated on 30th January 2017.

 4. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant came to the  UK  on
    12th October 2006 with entry clearance as a student  valid  until  31st
    January 2010.  Her leave to remain was  extended  until  30th  November
    2011 and again extended as a Tier 1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant  until
    19th December 2013.  On 7th July 2012 she married Amir Yousaf  Din  and
    they have two children, a son born on 2nd January 2013 and  a  daughter
    born on 20th June 2016.  The Appellant made an application for leave to
    remain in the UK as a spouse but that application was refused  on  17th
    December 2013 and the Appellant chose not to exercise a right of appeal
    against that decision.  On 20th November 2014 the  Appellant's  husband
    was granted discretionary leave to remain until 20th November 2017. The
    Appellant submitted a Statement of Additional Grounds on  2nd  November
    2015 which was considered as a  fresh  application  for  permission  to
    remain. That application was refused on 20th November 2015 and  is  the
    subject of this appeal.

 5. The judge heard oral evidence from the Appellant and her husband.   The
    judge noted in  her  findings  that  both  parties  accepted  that  the
    Appellant did not meet the requirements of  Appendix  FM  or  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules, noting that the Appellant is unable  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules because of her husband's  immigration  status
    as he is in the UK on a discretionary basis.  The judge said  that  the
    Appellant's husband's parents are British nationals  and  his  siblings
    have indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  UK.   It  appears  that  the
    Appellant's husband was given discretionary  leave  to  remain  as  his
    mother's carer.  He has  lived  in  the  UK  for  seventeen  years  and
    although he is a national of Pakistan he has never lived in Pakistan as
    he spent the first part of his life in Libya.  The  Appellant  and  the
    children are Pakistani nationals.

 6. The judge went on to look at whether  she  could  consider  the  appeal
    under Article 8 outside the Rules noting the fact  that  the  Appellant
    cannot meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  is  a  strong
    factor against her.   In  considering  whether  there  are  exceptional
    circumstances in this case the judge  looked  at  the  decision  in  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ  387.   The  judge  identified  the  compelling
    reasons why the case should be considered outside the Immigration Rules
    as being the fact that the only part of the Rules  that  the  Appellant
    cannot satisfy relates to the immigration status  of  her  husband  and
    that this was an unusual situation in that if the husband  had  been  a
    student or a temporary migrant his wife's wish to enter and  remain  in
    the UK would have been dependent upon and in line with his.  The  judge
    also considered that it is likely that the Appellant's husband will  be
    granted indefinite leave to remain  after  his  permission  expires  in
    November 2017.  The judge also accepted that if the Appellant had  been
    aware of the refusal of her application for leave to remain in February
    2014 she is likely to appeal against it and  that  this  was  the  only
    possible blemish on an otherwise satisfactory immigration history.

 7. The judge considered that these were exceptional circumstances and went
    on to consider the appeal in accordance with the guidance in  the  case
    of Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27.   Having  found  that  there  would  be  an
    interference with the Appellant's  family  life  the  judge  considered
    proportionality and Section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

 8. The judge's engagement with proportionality took place at paragraphs 28
    and 29 of the decision.  At paragraph  28  the  judge  noted  that  the
    Appellant has been in the UK for over ten years  and  the  majority  of
    that time has been lawful, noting that she married her husband in  2012
    when she did have permission to be in the UK.  The judge noted that  it
    is arguable that the Appellant's position was precarious at that  point
    in that she had limited leave to remain.  The judge also noted that the
    Appellant's husband was and still is in  a  precarious  situation,  but
    considered that the husband is likely to be granted at the  very  least
    further discretionary leave, but  more  likely  indefinite  leave  upon
    renewal of his permission to stay in the UK.  The judge noted that  the
    Appellant and her husband do not fall foul of Section 117B as they both
    speak  English,  are  self-sufficient  and   the   husband's   business
    activities ensure that they are integrated  into  the  community.   The
    judge took into account that the husband has never  lived  in  Pakistan
    and he currently has no right to go to Libya, the country that  he  was
    born and raised until he was 17 years old.  The judge took into account
    that the  husband's  parents  are  also  in  the  UK  and  are  British
    nationals. The judge considered that there was a degree of exaggeration
    in the evidence of the Appellant and her husband  and  did  not  accept
    that  the  husband's  mother  requires  the  care  that  the  Appellant
    ostensibly gives to her.  However, the judge did accept that the family
    have lived as an extended family inter-dependent  on  each  other,  and
    that if the  Appellant  and  the  children  are  required  to  leave  a
    significant part of the family will be  severed  from  it.   The  judge
    considered that  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  was
    exaggerated in relation to the husband's education and skills not being
    transferable, but did not think it reasonable to expect  him  to  leave
    and to re-establish himself in another country.  The  judge  considered
    that the husband's position is "pivotal" to this appeal and  considered
    that it was disproportionate to require him to go and live in  Pakistan
    even for a short period as his business will suffer and so  will  those
    who depend upon him.

 9. The judge went on then to consider  whether  the  Appellant  should  be
    required  to  return  to  Pakistan  to  apply  for   entry   clearance,
    considering that this would involve the children being  separated  from
    their father and their grandparents, their friends, and the judge  also
    noted that the Appellant would be unable to apply for  entry  clearance
    until the husband has indefinite leave and it was not clear  when  that
    will be.  The judge concluded that when balancing the  public  interest
    in treating all the factors set out in Section 117B with the impact  of
    the decision on the Appellant, and  taking  into  account  her  largely
    positive history, the judge was satisfied that the balance falls in the
    Appellant's favour and that the Appellant and the  children  should  be
    given permission to  remain  in  line  with  that  of  the  Appellant's
    husband,  and  this  would  be  a  proportionate   response   to   this
    application.

The grounds of appeal

10. The Secretary of State contends in the Grounds of Appeal that the judge
    made a material misdirection of law in that she has not established any
    compelling reason  why  the  case  should  be  considered  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  It is contended that the reasons highlighted by the
    judge at paragraph 24 do  not  demonstrate  anything  of  a  compelling
    nature and it was a misdirection to use the failure of an Appellant  to
    satisfy an aspect of the  Rules  as  an  element  in  her  favour  when
    considering whether there are compelling reasons to consider  the  case
    outside of the Rules.  It is contended that this decision involved  the
    judge speculating as to whether the Appellant's husband is likely to be
    granted indefinite leave to remain.  On the evidence before  the  judge
    it is contended that the Sponsor's leave was precarious at the date  of
    the hearing as it was given on a  discretionary  basis  and  that  this
    could not amount to a compelling reason to consider  the  case  outside
    the Immigration Rules and is thus a misdirection.

11. The second ground contends that the judge failed  to  provide  adequate
    reasons why it would be unreasonable to expect the Appellant's  husband
    to return to Pakistan, his country of nationality, with  the  Appellant
    and the children.  Having found that the Sponsor  had  exaggerated  the
    care required in the UK by his mother and that the evidence given about
    his education  and  skills  not  being  transferable  to  Pakistan  was
    disingenuous, the judge therefore misdirected herself in  finding  that
    the  Sponsor's  work  and  family  connections  in  the  UK   make   it
    unreasonable to expect him to resume family life in  Pakistan.   It  is
    contended that the Appellant and her husband's status in the UK has  at
    all times been temporary, and the presumption would be that they  would
    all return to Pakistan at some point.  It is contended  that  there  is
    nothing advanced that would make their relocation unduly  harsh,  given
    the fact that the Appellant's family remain there and the  Sponsor  has
    transferable skills.

12.  In  granting  permission  Designated  Judge  Woodcraft  considered  it
    arguable that the judge has failed to explain why an inability to  meet
    the Rules is of itself a good reason to allow the appeal.

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that  the  judge
    erred in her approach and the weight  given  to  the  matters  and  the
    failure to identify adequate reasons why the approach  was  taken.   Ms
    Willocks-Briscoe relied on the decision in Agyarko [2017] UKSC  11,  in
    particular paragraphs 40 and 48.  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that
    the judge speculated as to whether the  Appellant's  husband  would  be
    granted indefinite leave to remain.  In her submission it was not clear
    how  the  Appellant's  husband's  immigration  status  amounts   to   a
    compelling  feature  as  that  should  carry  limited  weight  in   any
    assessment. In her submission the judge has not  identified  compelling
    circumstances for consideration outside of the Rules.  Her  alternative
    submission was that the judge erred in her approach to  proportionality
    in her assessment of Article 8.  She submitted that at paragraph 8  the
    judge approaches the whole of Article 8 in an incorrect basis, starting
    with the immigration history of the Appellant. In  her  submission  the
    judge failed to  recognise  that  the  Appellant's  status  was  always
    precarious as when she had leave to remain it was limited.   The  judge
    speculated as to the Appellant's partner being granted indefinite leave
    to remain in the  future.   The  judge  considered  the  factors  under
    Section 117B including the fact that the Appellant and her partner  can
    speak English and are self-sufficient and the  business  activities  of
    the husband, however in her submission the judge failed to recognise in
    accordance with the  decision  in  Rhuppiah  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  803  at
    paragraphs 59 to 64, but these are neutral factors.

14. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that  the  judge's  finding  that  it  is
    disproportionate for the Appellant's husband to go and live in Pakistan
    because of the effect on his business flies in the face of case law and
    she relied on paragraphs 36 and 60 of Agyarko.  In her  submission  the
    position of the Appellant here was very different in that  her  partner
    had discretionary leave to remain.  Although he was  working  this  was
    not sufficient to show that it was not reasonable for him  to  relocate
    to Pakistan.  The judge  needed  reasons  which  were  absent  in  that
    paragraph to justify a finding that that would be disproportionate.  In
    terms of the consideration of a temporary separation at  paragraph  29,
    Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the Appellant's partner is the  same
    nationality as the Appellant and  the  children.   The  judge  made  no
    findings that the children would not be able to integrate into life  in
    Pakistan.  The judge made a sweeping conclusion that  separation  would
    have an adverse impact on the family but the fact  that  the  Appellant
    does not meet the  Rules  is  not  enough  to  demonstrate  exceptional
    circumstances.

15. In relation to the children Ms Willocks-Briscoe relied on the  case  of
    Azimi-Moayed and Others (decisions affecting children; onward  appeals)
    [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC) where the Tribunal noted that seven years  from
    the age of 4 is likely to be more significant to a child than the first
    seven years of life, noting that very young  children  are  focused  on
    their parents rather than their peers and are adaptable.  The  children
    in this case are not of that age and she submitted that  all  of  these
    factors point to the limited weight to  be  attached  to  the  positive
    factors which would not outweigh the public  interest.   She  submitted
    the fact that the judge has not applied relevant case law  leads  to  a
    material error of law.

16. In his submissions Mr Ahmed said that he represented the  Appellant  in
    the First-tier Tribunal and submitted  that  he  had  accepted  on  the
    Appellant's behalf  that  it  is  likely  that  any  application  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) would have been refused as  the  Appellant  had
    been in the UK for less than twenty years and would  struggle  to  show
    that there  would  be  insurmountable  obstacles  to  her  family  life
    continuing  in  Pakistan.   He  submitted  that   it   was   in   these
    circumstances that it was agreed  that  the  Appellant  would  need  to
    establish exceptional circumstances outside  the  Rules.  He  submitted
    that  the  judge  had  properly  considered   that   were   exceptional
    circumstances which merited consideration outside the Immigration Rules
    as identified in paragraphs 22 and 24 where the judge considered mainly
    the circumstances of  the  Appellant's  husband.   Having  gone  on  to
    consider the case outside the Rules, in his submission the judge  noted
    positive and adverse factors in  relation  to  the  Appellant  and  her
    husband at paragraph 28.  The judge noted that the Appellant's  husband
    has never lived in Pakistan and has no right to go to Libya.  The judge
    noted that the Appellant's husband's parents are  in  the  UK  and  are
    British nationals.  The judge took into account that although the claim
    for care had been exaggerated, there was a caring responsibility and  a
    relationship of dependence.  In his submission the judge was  right  to
    have allowed the appeal to the extent  that  the  Appellant  should  be
    granted leave to remain in line with that of her husband up to November
    2017.  In his submission the findings were open to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence

17. In response Ms Willocks-Briscoe argued that the fact  that  the  276ADE
    was conceded was  a  relevant  factor  as  it  would  have  included  a
    consideration of barriers to integration in Pakistan which were matters
    that were not considered by the judge.  This would  have  affected  any
    consideration in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  husband.   She  again
    referred to the case of Agyarko where it was  found  that  it  was  not
    unreasonable for a British citizen to relocate, here the judge did  not
    consider whether the Appellant and her husband  could  replicate  their
    family life in Pakistan.  She submitted that the judge has given weight
    to matters that she should not have and has failed to  apply  the  case
    law. She submitted that the judge failed to give reasons,  for  example
    she failed to identify  the  evidence  to  show  that  the  Appellant's
    husband's business would be adversely  affected  by  his  departure  to
    Pakistan, therefore there was an absence of  evidence  to  substantiate
    the findings made.  She submitted that there was no  challenge  to  the
    exercise of discretion by the Secretary of State  in  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter and if it was the view that the exercise  of  discretion
    was irrational, challenge should have been made in relation to that  in
    terms of the grant of discretionary leave to the Appellant in line with
    that of her husband.

Discussion and Conclusions

18. At paragraph 40 in Agyarko the court set out the  correct  approach  in
    relation to the removal of non-settled migrants as follows:-

         "The European Court of Human Rights has considered in a  number  of
         judgments the application of article  8  to  the  removal  of  non-
         settled migrants (that is, those without a right of residence)  who
         have  developed  a  family  life  with  a  partner  while  residing
         unlawfully in the host state. In Jeunesse v Netherlands, the  Grand
         Chamber analysed the situation of such a person, consistently  with
         earlier judgments of the court, as raising the question whether the
         authorities of the host country were  under  a  duty,  pursuant  to
         article 8, to grant the person the necessary permission  to  enable
         her to exercise her right to family life on  their  territory.  The
         situation was thus analysed not as one in which  the  host  country
         was interfering with the person's right to respect for her  private
         and family life, raising the question whether the interference  was
         justified under article 8(2). Instead, the situation  was  analysed
         as one in which the person was effectively asserting that her right
         to respect for her private and family  life,  under  article  8(1),
         imposed on the host country an obligation to permit her to continue
         to reside there, and the question was whether  such  an  obligation
         was indeed imposed. In the light of this approach, counsel for  the
         Secretary of State submitted that the refusal of leave to remain in
         the UK to persons unlawfully  resident  here  should  similarly  be
         analysed as raising the question  whether  the  state  is  under  a
         positive obligation to permit the applicant to  remain  in  the  UK
         rather than whether the refusal of the application can be justified
         under article 8(2)."

19. Paragraph 60 of Agyarko says:-

         "It remains the position that the ultimate question is how  a  fair
         balance  should  be  struck  between  the  competing   public   and
         individual interests involved, applying a proportionality test. The
         Rules and Instructions in issue in the present case do  not  depart
         from that position. The Secretary of State has not imposed  a  test
         of exceptionality, in the sense which Lord  Bingham  had  in  mind:
         that is to say, a requirement that the  case  should  exhibit  some
         highly unusual feature, over and above the application of the  test
         of proportionality. On the  contrary,  she  has  defined  the  word
         'exceptional', as already explained, as meaning  'circumstances  in
         which refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for
         the individual such that the refusal of the application  would  not
         be proportionate'. So understood, the provision in the Instructions
         that leave can be  granted  outside  the  Rules  where  exceptional
         circumstances  apply  involves  the  application  of  the  test  of
         proportionality to the circumstances of the  individual  case,  and
         cannot be regarded as incompatible with article 8. That  conclusion
         is fortified by the express  statement  in  the  Instructions  that
         'exceptional' does not mean 'unusual'  or  'unique':  see  para  19
         above."

20. The first ground of appeal challenges the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision to go on to  make  a  freestanding  assessment  of  Article  8
    outside the Rules. The judge identified a number of factors around  the
    status  of  the  Appellant's  husband  as  amounting   to   exceptional
    circumstances.  At paragraph 24 the judge gave reasons for  identifying
    these factors, including indicating that she accepted  the  submissions
    made by the Appellant's representative and  accepted  that  there  were
    sufficient reasons which had not  already  been  considered  under  the
    Rules to go on to consider Article 8. In my view the judge followed the
    approach set out in SS (Congo) in identifying what  in  her  view  were
    matters which had not already been sufficiently dealt  with  under  the
    substantive provisions of the Immigration Rules [23].  In my view  this
    was sufficient to enable the judge to go  on  to  consider  the  appeal
    outside the Rules.  The first ground has not been made out.

21. The second ground contends that the judge erred in her approach to  the
    proportionality assessment.  This is a more difficult argument for  the
    Secretary of State, in my view.  As set out above the judge  considered
    all  of  the  evidence   before   her.    The   judge   conducted   the
    proportionality assessment at paragraphs 28 and 29.  The judge set  out
    the factors for and against the Appellant in these paragraphs.   Whilst
    the judge sets out Section 117B  noting  that  the  Appellant  and  her
    husband "do not fall foul of  Section  117B  at  all",  contrary  to  a
    submission from Ms Willocks-Briscoe it is  not  clear  that  the  judge
    attached undue significant weight to these factors as positive  factors
    rather than neutral factors.

22. The judge did not accept parts of the evidence of the Appellant and her
    husband in relation to the extent of  care  given  to  the  Appellant's
    husband's mother and in relation to the prospects  of  the  Appellant's
    husband's education and skills being transferable. However it is  clear
    that the judge did accept that there was an extended  family  who  were
    inter-dependent on each other and also found that it was not reasonable
    to expect the Appellant's husband to leave and re-establish himself  in
    another country.  Whilst the Secretary of State clearly does not  agree
    with that assessment, in my view this assessment was open to the  judge
    on the basis of the evidence.

23. Of particular significance in my view is the fact that  the  judge  was
    not making a finding that the Appellant  should  be  granted  leave  to
    remain indefinitely in the UK, or even for a long  period,  but  simply
    that the Appellant and the couple's children should be granted leave to
    remain  in  line  with  that  of  her  husband.    In   my   view   the
    proportionality assessment is  clearly  made  in  the  context  of  the
    ultimate conclusion that it is proportionate to grant the  Appellant  a
    temporary period of stay in line with that of her husband.

24. In that context the findings at paragraph  29  that  it  would  not  be
    proportionate for the Appellant to return to apply for entry  clearance
    were also open to the judge who made those findings based on  the  fact
    that the husband has discretionary leave and the uncertainty  in  terms
    of an application  for  entry  clearance  in  those  circumstances  are
    highlighted.

25. These findings must be viewed in the context of  the  judge's  decision
    that in order to comply with Article 8, all that is required is for the
    Secretary of State to give permission to the Appellant and the children
    permission to stay in the UK for a temporary period in line  with  that
    of the Appellant's husband.  Whether he is granted indefinite leave  to
    remain is a question for the future, but the  proportionality  decision
    is based on a short-term period of leave.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date: 17th October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I maintain the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed                              Date: 17th October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


