








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13918/2017



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16th July 2019                  |On 25th July 2019                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                              Mr   Nayan Biswas

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Shah, instructed by Taj Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judges Meah and Bibi promulgated on the 7th March 2019 whereby
    the judges dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the
    respondent to refuse the appellant's claims based on Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Keith on 12th June 2019. Thus the  case  appeared  before  me  to
    determine whether or not there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

 4. The decision in the First-tier Tribunal has dealt very succinctly  with
    the issues in the case on the basis that a number of  concessions  were
    made by the appellant's representative. The extent of those concessions
    was a matter of concern to Judge Keith.

 5.  In order to clarify the issues and to ascertain what had  happened  in
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge Keith had given specific  directions  for
    the appellant's new representatives to  seek  counsel's  notes  of  the
    proceedings to establish what had been the concession made by  Counsel,
    Ms Popal, at the hearing. Judge Keith  had  given  detailed  directions
    including what complaint had been made, if any, if Ms Popal  had  acted
    without instruction.

 6. There is a response made by the solicitors  currently  acting  for  the
    appellant. It suggests that they cannot obtain the  notes  of  evidence
    made by Ms Popal, although no adequate reason has been given for  such.
    The current solicitors rather than  contacting  Ms  Popal  directly  or
    obtaining the file of papers from  the  previous  solicitors  directly,
    allowed the appellant to do so.

 7. The current solicitors have taken a statement  from  the  appellant  in
    which the appellant seeks to argue  that  he  had  not  agreed  to  the
    withdrawal of the present appeal.

 8. Judge Keith has raised whether any withdrawal was only to one aspect of
    Article 8 whether that be family life or private life.

 9. In part the matter is answered by examining what exactly took place  at
    the proceedings.

10. In the first instance Ms Popal  was  seeking  to  have  the  respondent
    consider the application made by the appellant on the basis of  the  10
    year long residence rule. That was not the original application made by
    the appellant. The indication by the respondent was that they would not
    consider the application under the 10 year rule as it was a new  matter
    not raised previously. The appellant 's representative  indicated  that
    the appellant intended to make an application on the basis of 10  years
    lawful residence.

11. There then appeared to be issues relating to the family life ground  of
    the appeal. In issue was whether or not the appellant's spouse  or  any
    of his children had any right to remain in the United  Kingdom.  Issues
    arose as to what had happened to an application and decision in respect
    of "the wife's" appeal. Whilst directions  had  been  given  that  that
    appeals should be joined to this appellant's  appeal  if  "the  wife's"
    appeal had been remitted, it transpired that the wife's appeal had been
    dismissed both in the First-tier Tribunal and that  decision  had  been
    maintained thereafter.

12. It appears that it was conceded at the time that the appellant's wife's
    appeal had already been dismissed and therefore she and the children of
    the family had no right to remain in the UK. The children had not lived
    in the UK  for  seven  years.  Neither  the  appellant's  wife  or  the
    appellant's children had any right to remain in the UK. Accordingly any
    right by the appellant to remain on the basis of family had been  dealt
    with and it was conceded that the appellant could not succeed on family
    life.

13. Having looked at those aspects of the appeal  consideration  was  given
    paragraph 276 ADE(1). It was also conceded by Ms Popal that  no  issues
    of protection nor protection claim would be referred to. On considering
    rule 276ADE it was accepted that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    eligibility requirements of  the  rule.  Ms  Popal  accepted  that  the
    paragraph 276ADE (1) argument had to be conceded.

14. Judge Meah indicated in the light of the  evidence  and  facts  it  was
    difficult to see how the appellant could succeed under the  Immigration
    Rules.  Ms Popal appears to have conceded that the  appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

15. The judges indicated that a short judgment setting  that  position  out
    could be written disposing of this appeal.

16. Ms Popal indicated that she would take instructions from the appellant.
    Having taken instructions she indicated that the appellant accepted the
    inevitability of the position reached.

17.   In light of that the issues raised as grounds of  appeal,  appear  to
    have been fully considered during the hearing  and  the  appellant  had
    been made aware of the fact that he could  not  succeed  on  the  basis
    advanced at the hearing and an amendment to  consider  other  basis  of
    appeal were not agreed to by the respondent.

18.  I note that in granting permission Judge Keith had raised the case  of
    Anwar (Rule 17 (1) :  withdrawal  of  appeal)  2019  UKUT  00125  (IAC)
    drawing a distinction between  a  withdrawal  of  only  one  aspect  of
    Article 8 rights either family or private life whilst  still  requiring
    the First-tier Tribunal to consider the other. Here it is clear that  a
    careful examination had been made of both aspects of Article 8.

19. The position of the appellant's wife and family had been considered and
    subsequently the private life had  been  considered.  Both  family  and
    private life within and outside the rules had been considered and valid
    reasons given for finding that the appellant could  not  succeed  under
    either aspect. The  proceedings  had  identified  specific  aspects  of
    Article 8 and why the appellant could not succeed. In the circumstances
    all aspects of Article 8 had been considered.

20. In the circumstances the Judges were entitled to deal with  the  appeal
    in the manner that they did. In light of the concessions the judges had
    fully considered Article 8 and were  fully  justified  in  issuing  the
    decision that they did on the evidence. In the circumstances  there  is
    no material error of law.

    Notice of Decision

21. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.






Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 19th July 2019



