
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13878/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|remotely by Skype for Business       |                                     |
|On 11 February 2021                  |On 1 March 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             ALI TAIZHDIN OSMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Hooper


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born on 13  January  1995  and  is  a  male
    citizen of Iraq. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Sethi)
    against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  11  June  2018
    refusing his claim to remain on  human  rights  grounds  following  the
    making of a deportation order. The First-tier Tribunal, in  a  decision
    promulgated on 22 July 2019, allowed the appeal. The Secretary of State
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant was sentenced at Canterbury Crown Court on 14 March  2018
    to 10 months' imprisonment upon conviction of dangerous driving/driving
    with excess alcohol. That conviction led to the making of a deportation
    order under a section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.  The  appellant
    lives in the United  Kingdom  with  his  Treaty  Rights-exercising  EEA
    (Polish) partner and their child (aged 5 years). The  child  is  not  a
    Qualifying Child for the purposes of the 2002 Act and paragraph 399  of
    HC 395 (as amended). In a careful and thorough  decision,  Judge  Sethi
    concluded that the appellant is not a foreign criminal for the purposes
    of Section 117D (2) of the 2002 Act. The  appellant's  prison  sentence
    was for less than 12 months, he is not a persistent  offender  and  the
    judge found that he had not been convicted  of  'an  offence  that  has
    caused serious harm' (Section 117D (2) (c) (ii)). It is on this  latter
    finding that this appeal turns. The Secretary  of  State  submits  that
    dangerous driving under the influence of alcohol constitutes a 'serious
    harm to the community in general' although the judge noted that it  did
    not feature with drugs and sex offences and offenses of violence in the
    Secretary of State's policy statement of May 2019. The respondent  also
    submits also that the fact the appellant  received  a  sentence  of  10
    months indicated the seriousness of the crime and should be  given  the
    'significant weight' which the judge had failed to give it.

 3. At the Upper Tribunal initial hearing, Ms Hooper, who appeared for  the
    appellant, submitted that the judge had not erred in law. His  decision
    had been consistent with the guidance which the  Court  of  Appeal  had
    provided in Mahmood [2020] EWCA Civ  717,  a  judgment  postdating  the
    judge's decision. At [42] the Court of Appeal held:

         The adjective 'serious' qualifies  the  extent  of  the  harm;  but
         provides no precise criteria. It is  implicit  that  an  evaluative
         judgment has to be made in the light of the facts and circumstances
         of the offending. There can be no general and all-embracing test of
         seriousness. In some cases, it will be a straightforward evaluation
         and will not need specific evidence of the extent of the harm;  but
         in every case, it will be for the tribunal to evaluate  the  extent
         of the harm on the basis of the  evidence  that  is  available  and
         drawing common sense conclusions.

    Further, it is now clear that the question whether particular offending
    constitutes serious harm is a matter the First-tier Tribunal:

         ... the views of the Secretary of State are a  starting  point  and
         the  reasoning  of  a  decision  letter  may  be  compelling;   but
         ultimately the issues that arise under s.117D(2)(c)(ii) will  be  a
         matter for the FtT. Provided the tribunal has  taken  into  account
         all relevant factors, has not taken into account immaterial factors
         and has reached a conclusion which is not perverse, its  conclusion
         will not give rise to an actionable error of law.[56]

 4. I agree with Ms Hooper's  submission  that  the  judge  has  reached  a
    decision which was not  perverse  (Mr  McVeety,  who  appeared  at  the
    initial hearing for the Secretary of State  acknowledged  that  it  was
    possible on the same facts for a Tribunal to find  that  the  offending
    did not constitute serious harm), that the judge has taken  account  of
    all relevant factors and has not had regard to immaterial factors.  Not
    every judge would have reached the same conclusion  on  the  facts  but
    that is not the  point.  I  disagree  with  the  Secretary  of  State's
    assertion that drink driving per se must  constitute  serious  harm  as
    defined in the statute. Had Parliament wished  to  state  that  certain
    specific offences  always  and  irrespective  of  the  factual  context
    constitute serious harm then it would no doubt have listed these in the
    Act.

 5. Mr McVeety sought to expand upon the grounds  of  appeal  in  his  oral
    submissions. He submitted that the judge had erred in  law  by  finding
    (i) that there was no clear evidence of serious harm arising  from  the
    appellant's offending and that; (ii) the sentencing  judge's  reference
    to 'significant damage'  concerned  not  the  two  women  (one  heavily
    pregnant) who were in the car into which the appellant had crashed  but
    the car itself (described in the sentencing remarks as a 'write  off').
    At [7], Judge Sethi quotes a large section of  the  sentencing  judge's
    remarks. The sentencing judge states that, '[the two women], from  what
    I have heard, both  significantly  affected  by  the  collision'  which
    'caused significant damage and injury...'  [my  emphasis].  Mr  McVeety
    submitted that the judge had made an error of fact by failing  to  have
    regard to this 'significant injury'. He also submitted that Judge Sethi
    had ignored the sentencing judge's remark that the appellant  had  tied
    to blame others for his offending.

 6. Mr McVeety's submissions lie beyond  what  is  argued  in  the  written
    grounds but Ms Hooper did not object to the argument being advanced.  I
    find that, whilst the judge may have made an assumption that the  women
    involved in the accident were not injured 'significantly'  so  to  that
    extent misread the sentencing  judge's  comments,  I  cannot  see  that
    proceeding on the basis that serious injury  had  occurred  would  have
    made any difference to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.  As  Mr  McVeety
    acknowledged there is  virtually  no  evidence  at  all  in  this  case
    regarding any injuries which the victims may have suffered. Even if the
    judge had had focused upon the comment  that  'significant  damage  and
    injury' had occurred, that comment constitutes the  sum  total  of  the
    evidence of injury. I do not accept that the judge's entire careful and
    thorough analysis of all the relevant circumstances has  been  vitiated
    by his failure to emphasise that single  phrase.  At  [40],  the  judge
    found that 'it can reasonably be expected  that  [the  pregnant  woman]
    would have been  taken  to  hospital...'  That  finding  itself  was  a
    speculation on the part of  the  judge  given  the  paucity  of  actual
    evidence of any injury; we do not in fact know whether the  women  were
    taken to hospital at all. The  judge  was  certainly  not  required  to
    speculate even further as to what 'significant injury'  either  of  the
    women might have sustained. The  judge  has  considered  all  'relevant
    factors' as Mahmood states he should have done.  He  has  done  all  he
    could with the evidence meagre available  and  has  delivered  a  sound
    decision supported by cogent reasoning.

 7. Ms Hooper submitted that, even if the judge had erred as the  Secretary
    of State argues, any error is immaterial. She submitted  that,  as  the
    appellant does not have a relationship with a  Qualifying  Child,  this
    appeal was always destined to be determined on Article 8  ECHR  grounds
    outside the Rules. She submitted that such  an  assessment  is  exactly
    what the judge has carried out, reaching clear findings on family  life
    and the best interests of the child with which the Secretary  of  State
    does not appear to disagree. The judge would  have  followed  the  same
    route and reached the same outcome even if he had  concluded  that  the
    appellant, having been convicted of an offence which had caused serious
    harm, was a 'foreign criminal'. Mr McVeety  submitted  that  a  finding
    that the appellant was a foreign offender could have changed the result
    as the judge would have been obliged to consider  the  appellant  under
    the provisions of section 117C of the 2002 Act.

 8. I agree with Ms Hopper's submission. Had the appellant been  considered
    as a foreign criminal, then, as he had not been sentenced to more  than
    4 years' imprisonment, the question as to whether it  would  be  unduly
    harsh for the appellant's child to accompany him to Iraq or to be  left
    in the United Kingdom without  the  appellant  would  have  had  to  be
    addressed. The judge correctly reminds himself several times at [57-59]
    that the child is not a Qualifying Child. His Article 8 ECHR assessment
    is, in my view, legally sound and, I am satisfied that, had  the  judge
    approached that assessment on the basis that the appellant is a foreign
    criminal, the conclusion would have been the same.

 9. For the reasons I have  given,  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is
    dismissed.




    Notice of Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 12 February 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

