
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13131/2016
                                                HU/13135/2016, HU/13140/2016
                                                HU/13144/2016, HU/13148/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd March 2018                            |On 26th April 2018            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                        GLECIA [O] (FIRST appellant)
                          [G O] (SECOND appellant)
                           [P F] (THIRD appellant)
                          [N F] (FOURTH appellant)
                           [H F] (FIFTH appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr C Yacoobali of Waltham Forest Immigration Bureau
Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr A Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. The Appellants comprise the  first  Appellant,  Glecia  [O],  a  female
    citizen of Brazil born on 13th August 1984, and her four  children  who
    are  either  of  Brazilian  citizenship  or  are  dual  Portuguese  and
    Brazilian  citizens  born  respectively  on  4th  November  2002,  22nd
    September 2009, 28th November 2010, and 31st August  2012.   The  first
    Appellant attempted to enter the United Kingdom on  30th  January  2012
    along with her then partner, a Portuguese citizen named Manuel [F]  and
    the third and fourth Appellants.  They were given  temporary  admission
    of one week's  duration.   On  16th  April  2012  the  first  Appellant
    separated from Manuel [F], but on 31st August 2012 she  gave  birth  in
    the United Kingdom  to  the  fifth  Appellant,  Manual  [F]  being  the
    biological father.  On 14th December 2012 the second Appellant  arrived
    in the United Kingdom with her grandmother and was  given  six  months'
    leave to enter as a visitor.  After various  unsuccessful  applications
    for leave to remain, on 31st March 2016 all the Appellants applied  for
    leave to remain on  human  rights  grounds.   Those  applications  were
    refused for the reasons given in a Letter of  Refusal  dated  10th  May
    2016.  The Appellants all appealed, and their  appeals  were  heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Onoufriou  (the  Judge)  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on 1st August 2017.  He decided to allow  the  appeals  on
    Article  8  ECHR  grounds  for  the  reasons  given  in  his   Decision
    promulgated on 18th August 2017.  The Respondent sought leave to appeal
    that decision, and on 25th January 2018 such permission was granted.

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge allowed the appeal on the grounds that the  decision  of  the
    Respondent amounted to a disproportionate  breach  of  the  Appellants'
    Article 8  ECHR  rights  on  the  basis  that,  as  regards  the  fifth
    Appellant, the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of HC 395  applied
    as there were very significant obstacles to  her  returning  to  Brazil
    with her family.  Further, as regards the third and fourth  Appellants,
    it was contrary to their best interests that they be removed  from  the
    United Kingdom.  Finally, the Judge considered it disproportionate  for
    the family to be split up and therefore allowed all the appeals on  the
    basis of their Article 8 ECHR rights.

 4. At the hearing before me, Mr Kotas submitted that the Judge  had  erred
    in law by failing to attach sufficient weight to  the  public  interest
    when carrying out the balancing exercise necessary for  any  assessment
    of proportionality.  The first Appellant had a poor immigration history
    and the Judge had failed to take this  factor  into  account.   He  had
    given undue weight to the best interests of the children.   The  second
    Appellant had been brought to the United  Kingdom  with  a  visit  visa
    although it had always been the wish for this child to  settle  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The family had always been supported by public  funds.
    The best  interests  of  the  children  were  not  a  "trump  card"  as
    established in EV v SSHD (Philippines) [2014] EWCA  Civ  874.   It  was
    decided in Patel and Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 that  Article  8  was
    not a "general dispensing power".

 5. In response, Mr Yacoobali argued that there had been no such  error  of
    law and that the arguments of the Respondent amounted to no more than a
    repeat of the submissions made to the Judge at the First-tier Tribunal.
     This was a complex case involving the first  Appellant  who  had  been
    resident in the United Kingdom for ten years, and four minor  children,
    three of whom had been born in the United Kingdom.  One  of  the  minor
    Appellants was severely autistic.  The Judge had referred to the report
    relating to this Appellant and had been  right  to  attach  significant
    weight to it.  It was true that the  Judge  had  not  referred  to  any
    detail of the public interest, but he had referred to it throughout the
    Decision and it could not be said that the Judge had ignored the public
    interest in the balancing exercise.

 6. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which I do not  set
    aside.  The Judge had the task of balancing the public interest against
    the  circumstances  of  all  the  Appellants  when  carrying  out   his
    proportionality assessment.  It has been argued that in  that  exercise
    he failed to attach due weight to the public interest,  but  I  do  not
    find that to be the case.  As Mr Yacoobali argued, the  Judge  referred
    to and took into account the public interest throughout  the  Decision.
    At paragraph 30, he referred to the fact that all the Appellants were a
    "burden on the social assistance system of the United Kingdom", and  at
    paragraph 33 he also referred to the fact that it was  clear  that  the
    first Appellant had arranged for the second Appellant to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom in breach of the Immigration Rules.  The Judge was aware
    of the immigration history of  the  first  Appellant  as  described  in
    paragraphs 3 to 5 inclusive of the Decision, and  when  discussing  the
    best interests of the children the Judge set them  against  the  public
    interest as stated at paragraphs 34 and 36 of the Decision.  The  Judge
    was entitled to find that the best interests of the children outweighed
    that public interest, particularly in view  of  the  fifth  Appellant's
    autism.  The Judge was also right to conclude that  the  family  should
    not be split up and  that  that  consideration  outweighed  the  public
    interest.  For these reasons I find no error of law in the judgment  of
    the Judge.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so and indeed find no reason to do so.

Signed                              Date 24th April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
