
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     Appeal Number: HU/13491/2019
     Hu/13492/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On the 15th June 2021                        |On the 5th July 2021           |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                     And

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHEPHERD

                                   Between

                           AMIE SANKAREH SAWO (1)
                             fATOUMATTA SAWO (2)
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And


               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Sawo, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are nationals of Gambia.  The first appellant is the
      partner of Mr Mankamang Sawo ("the sponsor").  The second appellant is
      the daughter of the first appellant and sponsor.  In April 2019, the
      appellants applied for entry clearance to join the sponsor in the UK.
      Their applications were refused by the respondent for reasons set out
      in two decisions dated 7th April 2019.  The appellants' appeals were
      dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Sharma for reasons set out in a
      decision promulgated on 6th February 2020.


   2. The appellants were granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Swaney on 24th April 2020.  The appeal
      was heard by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 30th July 2020.  It was
      conceded on behalf of the respondent that there had been procedural
      unfairness in the way in which the First-tier Tribunal Judge had
      proceeded.  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce noted that, although it was
      open to the First-tier Tribunal to satisfy itself that all of the
      requirements of the rules were met, it should not have reopened
      settled matters in the manner that it did.  She set aside the decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and having done so, Upper Tribunal
      Judge Bruce adjourned the hearing for a resumed face-to-face hearing
      for the decision to be remade in the Upper Tribunal.  At paragraph
      [10] of her decision, she noted that it did not appear to be in issue
      that the appellants failed to demonstrate that they met the
      requirements set out in Appendix FM of the immigration rules at the
      date of their applications. The first appellant had failed to
      establish that the eligibility financial requirements were met because
      the applications were not supported by all of the specified evidence
      required by Appendix FM-SE relating to Mr Sawo's self-employment.


   3. Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce noted that it remained open to the
      appellants to argue that the refusal to grant entry clearance was a
      disproportionate interference with their right to a family life with
      the sponsor.  She noted that if the appellants could successfully
      demonstrate that they now met all of the requirements of the rules, it
      would be for the respondent to explain why it would be in the public
      interest to maintain the refusal.  At paragraph [12] of her decision
      she said:


         "12. The matter in issue before me, in respect of the rules, is a
         narrow one. In accordance with routine practice, the Entry
         Clearance Officer has not included in his bundle all of the
         documents provided by the Appellants upon application. He has
         instead provided an explanatory statement from the Entry Clearance
         Manager, dated 25th September 2019, identifying what 'specified
         evidence' remained outstanding. I will therefore proceed on the
         basis that absent those documents, all of the 'specified evidence'
         was supplied.  As I set out above, the missing documents are:


               i) The membership status of the accountant who had prepared
                  Mr Sawo's unaudited accounts (paragraph 9(iv) of appendix
                  FM-SE);


              ii) Evidence that the company's tax return had been filed with
                  HMRC (9(b)(i); and


             iii) Corporate bank statements covering the same period as the
                  company tax return (9(v))"


   4. Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce noted, at paragraph [13] of her decision,
      that in accordance with paragraph 1(1) of Appendix FM-SE, all of this
      evidence must cover the period ending no earlier than 28 days before
      the application, the application in this case having been made on 7th
      April 2019.


   5. It is against that background that the appeal was listed for a resumed
      hearing before us to remake the decision.  As the appellants were
      unrepresented and the sponsor appeared before us in person, at the
      outset of the hearing we drew the sponsor's attention to the decision
      of Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce.  In particular, we referred the sponsor
      to the requirements of Appendix FM-SE that Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
      had identified as being in issue, to identify whether the specified
      evidence was now available so as to establish that the requirements of
      the immigration rules were now met, albeit they were not met at the
      date of the applications for entry clearance.


Remaking the decision


   6. The appellants have appealed the respondent's decisions to refuse
      their applications for entry clearance, under s82 of the Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on the ground that the decisions are
      unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  The appellants must
      satisfy us on the balance of probabilities that Article 8 ECHR is
      engaged. If it is, the burden shifts to the respondent to establish
      that the decision is proportionate.


   7. The appellants' relationship with the sponsor is not in issue.  We
      find the appellants enjoy a family life with each other and the
      sponsor and Article 8 is plainly engaged.  We find that the decision
      to refuse the appellants leave to enter has consequences of such
      gravity as to engage the operation of Article 8.  We accept that the
      interference is in accordance with the law, and that the interference
      is necessary to protect the legitimate aim of immigration control and
      the economic well-being of the country.  The issue in this appeal is
      whether the decisions to refuse entry clearance are proportionate to
      the legitimate aim.


The requirements of the Immigration Rules


   8. Although the appellants' ability to satisfy the immigration rules is
      not the question to be determined, it is capable of being a weighty
      factor when deciding whether the refusal is proportionate to the
      legitimate aim of enforcing immigration control.  As set out by the
      Court of Appeal in TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109, compliance with
      the immigration rules would usually mean that there is nothing on the
      respondent's side of the scales to show that the refusal of the claim
      could be justified. At paragraphs [32] to [34], the Senior President
      of Tribunals confirmed that where a person meets the rules, the human
      rights appeal must succeed because 'considerable weight' must be given
      to the respondent's policy as set out in the rules.  Conversely, if
      the rules are not met, although not determinative, that is a factor
      which strengthens the weight to be attached to the public interest in
      maintaining immigration control.


   9. At the outset of the hearing Mr Sawo provided us and Mr Bates with the
      Santander Business Bank Account statements for Sawo Ltd for the period
      1st March 2018 to 30th April 2019.


  10. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Bates accepted that the only required
      specified evidence that had not been provided by the appellants to the
      respondent, were the three pieces of specified evidence identified by
      the Entry Clearance Manager and by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce in
      paragraph [12] of her decision, which we have set out at paragraph [3]
      above.  Mr Bates confirmed that having reviewed the file, it is now
      apparent that at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the
      sponsor had provided evidence that the Company Tax Return CT600 for
      the financial year ending 31st  March 2019 had been filed with HMRC.
      The sponsor had provided evidence that the CT600 was received by HMRC
      at 22:47hrs on 31st December 2019.


  11. The only evidence outstanding is the requirement set out in paragraph
      9(b)(iv) of Appendix FM-SE.  That is:


         "(iv) If the company is not required to produce annual audited
         accounts, unaudited accounts for the last full financial year and
         an accountant's certificate of confirmation, from an accountant who
         is a member of a UK Recognized Supervisory Body (as defined in the
         Companies Act 2006) or who is a member of the Institute of
         Financial Accountants, The Association of Authorised Public
         Accountants, The Chartered Institute of Public Finance and
         Accountancy, The Chartered Institute of Management Accountants, the
         Association of International Accountants and The Association of
         Accounting Technicians."


  12. The relevant provision was worded differently when the appellants made
      their applications.  It is now well established that the relevant date
      for consideration of an application under the immigration rules is the
      date of decision, not of application.  The changes made to the
      relevant provision make no difference here because the ACCA is a UK
      Recognised Supervisory Body for the purposes of the Companies Act 2006
      under the authority of the Professional Oversight Board.


  13.  When the appellants appealed the respondent's decisions of 9th July
      2019, they provided further documents in support of the appeal.  The
      appellants provided a copy of the Report of the Director and Unaudited
      Financial Statements for Sawo Limited for the period 1st April 2017 to
      31st March 2018.


  14. We note that the applications made by the appellants were made on 7th
      April 2019.  The appellants were therefore required to provide
      unaudited accounts for the last full financial year, which in this
      case was for the period 1st April 2018 to 31st March 2019, together
      with an accountant's certificate of confirmation, from an accountant
      who is a member of a UK Recognized Supervisory Body.  The respondent
      did not  previously take issue with the period for which the unaudited
      accounts have been provided, and neither did Mr Bates suggest at the
      hearing before us that the unaudited accounts provided were not for
      the correct period.  For the avoidance of doubt we proceed upon the
      premise that the appellants have provided the unaudited accounts for
      the last full financial year as required. There is evidence before us
      that the CT600 for the financial year ending 31st March 2019 was filed
      and we accept the evidence of the sponsor that the CT600 could not
      have been filed unless the accounts had been prepared.  Mr Bates
      confirmed that the sponsor had previously provided confirmation that
      the CT600 had been received by HMRC on 31st December 2019.


  15.  The issue remains, as identified by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce,
      whether the appellant has provided the required certificate of
      confirmation from an accountant who is a member of a UK Recognised
      Supervisory Body.


  16. Mr Sawo was unable to provide us with a copy of any certificate of
      confirmation from an accountant as required.  Insofar as he relies
      upon the Report of the Director and Unaudited Financial Statements for
      Sawo Limited for the period 1st April 2017 to 31st March 2018, we
      pointed out to Mr Sawo that the 'Accountants' Report' that is at page
      6 of 12, is unsigned, and appears to have been prepared by 'Abbey
      Lincon UK Ltd'.  Mr Sawo was unable to explain why the Accountant's
      Report is unsigned.  His evidence was that that appears to have been
      an oversight on the part of the Accountants.  He relies upon a copy of
      a certificate issued by the ACCA to Mr Rafiu Abiodun Adebambo
      confirming that Mr Adebambo was admitted as a member of the
      Association on 31st March 2013, that is at page 43 of the appellants'
      bundle.  He submits that this is evidence that the Accountant is a
      member of a UK Recognised Supervisory Body as required by paragraph
      9(b)(iv) of Appendix FM-SE.


  17. Having considered the evidence relied upon, we find, on balance, that
      the appellants have failed to provide the specified evidence required
      in paragraph 9(b)(iv) of the Immigration Rules.  Even giving the
      appellants the benefit of the doubt and accepting the respondent was
      prepared to accept the Report of the Director and Unaudited Financial
      Statements for Sawo Limited for the period 1st April 2017 to 31st
      March 2018 as being the required unaudited accounts for the last full
      financial year, the Accountant's report is unsigned.  Mr Sawo was
      unable to provide us with a signed copy and although it may well have
      been an innocent omission by the Accountant, the relevant provision of
      Appendix FM-SE requires a certificate of confirmation from an
      accountant who is a member of a UK recognised supervisory body.
      Although Mr Rafiu Abiodun Adebambo was admitted as a member of the
      ACCA on 31st March 2013, there is nothing in the evidence before us to
      establish that he was a member in 2018/19.  More importantly however,
      there is nothing in the evidence before us that establishes that Mr
      Adebambo has any association with Abbey Lincon UK Ltd or was the
      particular Accountant responsible for completing the Accountant's
      Report.


  18. It follows that we find that the appellants have failed to provide the
      specified evidence required to establish that the financial
      requirements are met.


  19. In SS (Congo) -v- SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 387, the Court of Appeal
      considered the proper approach to applications for leave to enter the
      UK outside the Immigration Rules on the basis of ECHR Article 8
      following the Court of Appeal's decision in MM (Lebanon) -v- SSHD
      [2014] EWCA Civ 1985.  In each of the six conjoined cases, the
      applicants had applied for leave to enter as the family member of a
      British national or recognised refugee living in the UK. Each had been
      refused leave because the sponsor's income did not meet the minimum
      requirements in the Immigration Rules Appendix FM and Appendix FM-SE.
      The Entry Clearance Officer rejected SS's application for leave to
      enter, on the grounds that her sponsor husband's income was below the
      �18,600 required, and that documents submitted in support of her
      application did not meet the requirements set out in Appendix FM-SE.
      At paragraphs [50] to [53] of his judgment, Lord Justice Richards
      considered the evidential requirements set out in Appendix FM-SE which
      stipulate the form of evidence required to substantiate claims that
      the substantive financial requirements under Appendix FM, have been
      met.  He stated:


         "51. In our judgment, the approach to Article 8 in the light of the
         Rules in Appendix FM-SE should be the same as in respect of the
         substantive LTE and LTR Rules in Appendix FM. In other words, the
         same general position applies, that compelling circumstances would
         have to apply to justify a grant of LTE or LTR where the evidence
         Rules are not complied with.


         52.  This is for two principal reasons. First, the evidence rules
         have the same general objective as the substantive rules, namely to
         limit the risk that someone is admitted into the United Kingdom and
         then becomes a burden on public resources, and the Secretary of
         State has the same primary function in relation to them, to assess
         the risk and put in place measures which are judged suitable to
         contain it within acceptable bounds. Similar weight should be given
         to her assessment of what the public interest requires in both
         contexts.


         53.  Secondly, enforcement of the evidence rules ensures that
         everyone applying for LTE or LTR is treated equally and fairly in
         relation to the evidential requirements they must satisfy. As well
         as keeping the costs of administration within reasonable bounds,
         application of standard rules is an important means of minimising
         the risk of arbitrary differences in treatment of cases arising
         across the wide range of officials, tribunals and courts which
         administer the system of immigration controls. In this regard, the
         evidence Rules (like the substantive Rules) serve as a safeguard in
         relation to rights of applicants and family members under Article
         14 to equal treatment within the scope of Article 8 : compare AJ
         (Angola) , above, at [40], and Huang , above, at [16] ("There will,
         in almost any case, be certain general considerations to bear in
         mind: the general administrative desirability of applying known
         rules if a system of immigration control is to be workable,
         predictable, consistent and fair as between one applicant and
         another; the damage to good administration and effective control if
         a system is perceived by applicants internationally to be unduly
         porous, unpredictable or perfunctory; ... the need to discourage
         fraud, deception and deliberate breaches of the law; and so on
         ..."). Good reason would need to be shown why a particular
         applicant was entitled to more preferential treatment with respect
         to evidence than other applicants would expect to receive under the
         Rules. Moreover, in relation to the proper administration of
         immigration controls, weight should also be given to the Secretary
         of State's assessment of the evidential requirements needed to
         ensure prompt and fair application of the substantive Rules:
         compare Stec v United Kingdom , cited at para. [15] above. Again,
         if an applicant says that they should be given more preferential
         treatment with respect to evidence than the Rules allow for, and
         more individualised consideration of their case, good reason should
         be put forward to justify that."


  20. The specified evidence required in support of an application is there
      to establish an audit trail to ensure that the income requirement is
      met.  As Lord Justice Richards noted in SS (Congo), and the Supreme
      Court noted in MM (Lebanon), the evidence rules have the same general
      objective as the substantive rules, namely, to limit the risk that
      someone is admitted into the United Kingdom and then becomes a burden
      on public resources.  There is no doubt that avoiding a financial
      burden on the state is relevant to the fair balance required by
      Article 8.


The best interests of the second appellant


  21. In reaching our decision we have also had regard to the best interests
      of the second appellant.  The s55 duty to have regard to the best
      interests of a child applies when considering the proportionally
      assessment, and we acknowledge that there is a need to safeguard and
      promote the welfare of the child.


  22. We have had regard to the best interests of the second appellant as a
      primary consideration.  She was born on 8th July 2015 and is a
      national of Gambia.  She is currently cared for in Gambia by the first
      appellant.  In his oral evidence before us, Mr Sawo stated that his
      mother continues to live in Gambia and that he has a number of uncles
      and aunts that also continue to live in Gambia.  The second
      appellant's application for entry clearance was made upon the basis
      that she intended to join the first appellant and sponsor in the UK.
      In his oral evidence before us, Mr Sawo said that the appeal has taken
      some time to resolve and that he and the first appellant now have
      another daughter who was born on 7th June 2020.  The passage of time
      has caused him to be concerned that his daughters may be subjected to
      FGM, a practice that he says is prevalent in Gambia.  When cross-
      examined he told us that he fears his daughters will be subjected to
      FGM by members of the extended family or members of the community.  Mr
      Sawo himself opposes the practice and he has made it clear to his
      family that he does not want his daughters to undergo FGM.  Some of
      his extended family are supportive of his view and others oppose it.
      His mother (i.e. the second appellant's paternal grandmother) is well
      aware that Mr Sawo opposes FGM, and he believes she will try and
      respect his wishes although she cannot guarantee that his two
      daughters will not be subject to the procedure because it is a strong
      cultural practice.  Mr Sawo said that he had not raised any concerns
      about his daughters being subjected to FGM previously, because at the
      time of the previous hearings, he had only one daughter, the second
      appellant.  He said there is no particular age at which FGM is
      performed and it can be undertaken at any age.


  23. Although FGM may be prevalent in Gambia, we were not presented with
      any objective country background evidence on the point and are not
      satisfied that the second appellant is at risk of being subjected to
      the practice.  It is clear that Mr Sawo opposes FGM and that his
      extended family are aware that he does not wish his daughters to be
      subjected to FGM.  The first appellant and the second appellant's
      paternal grandmother are aware of the views of Mr Sawo and have
      clearly been able to protect the second appellant from being subjected
      to FGM to date.  There is no evidence before us that the second
      appellant has any unmet needs.


  24. We readily accept that the best interests of a child are usually best
      served by being with both or at least one of their parents. The second
      appellant has lived with her mother, the first appellant, throughout.
      The family dynamics changed when Mr Sawo came to the UK, but he has
      been able to continue at least some contact with his daughter.  The
      second appellant has lived in Gambia all her life and we are
      satisfied that she will be familiar with the culture and traditions in
      Gambia.  A move to the United Kingdom would enable her to reunite with
      her father, but unless the first appellant can also join them in the
      UK, it would simultaneously result in separation from her mother and
      now also a younger sibling.  It would also mean a change in the place
      of residence where she has grown up.  There is no evidence before us
      of any adverse impact upon the second appellant from her current
      separation from Mr Sawo.  It is generally in the interests of children
      to have both stability and continuity of social and educational
      provision and the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of the
      society to which they belong. The assessment of what is in the best
      interests of a child is inherently fact sensitive and we must carry
      out the assessment on the evidence before us. In the end, it is in our
      judgement in the best interests of the second appellant to remain with
      her mother and younger sister in Gambia.


Whether refusal of entry clearance is nevertheless proportionate


  25. We have carefully considered whether the decision to refuse the
      appellants entry clearance is nevertheless disproportionate.  The
      ultimate issue is whether a fair balance has been struck between the
      individual and public interest.  In our final analysis and in carrying
      out  the balancing exercise, we note the appellants are unable to
      satisfy the requirements of the immigration rules for the reasons we
      have set out.  We have also had regard to the public interest
      considerations set out in s117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
      Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  We acknowledge that the maintenance
      of immigration control is in the public interest.  For reasons we have
      set out above we cannot be satisfied that the minimum income
      requirement is met.


  26. We have had regard to the factors that weigh in favour of the
      applicants such as their wish to live together as a family in the UK,
      and the sponsor's lawful presence in the UK.  We also acknowledge the
      sponsor's concerns regarding his daughters.  Against that, there is no
      evidence before us regarding the ongoing impact of separation upon the
      family and there is no evidence before us that the appellants have any
      unmet needs.  Having considered all the evidence before us in the
      round, and although we have accepted the refusal of entry clearance
      will interfere with the appellants' family life and the family life of
      their sponsor, in our judgement, the interference for the purposes of
      the maintenance of effective immigration control, is proportionate,
      and it follows, lawful.


  27. It follows that we dismiss the appeal.


  28. We simply add that we have some sympathy with the appellants'
      position.  These applications failed because upon the evidence before
      us, the appellants failed to provide the specified evidence required
      to support their applications.  Our decision will not prevent them
      from making fresh applications.  The specified evidence is quite
      particular, and if fresh applications are made, we would urge the
      appellants to ensure that all the required specified evidence is
      provided to ensure the respondent can be satisfied the income
      requirements are met.


Notice of Decision


  29. The appeals are dismissed

  30. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   V. Mandalia                               Date        15th June
2021

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





