
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13635/2016
     HU/22899/2016
     HU/22900/2016
     HU/22901/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Reasons Promulgated            |
|On 21 December 2018                  |On 18 January 2019                      |
|                                     |                                        |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 Mansoor [A]
                                 fakhra [B]
                                    [R A]
                                    [D A]
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr W Rees of Counsel instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal on 2 October 2017 dismissing their  appeals  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse them leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellants have permission to appeal against the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing their appeals against  the  respondent's
    decision on 2 November 2016 to refuse them leave to  remain  on  family
    and private life  grounds  under  the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as
    amended) or Article 8 ECHR outside those Rules.

 3. The appellants are four Pakistani citizens,  a  husband  and  wife  and
    their two minor children, the elder of whom is now  a  British  a  dual
    national Pakistani/British citizen.  The first  and  second  appellants
    are the parents: at the date of decision, the  third  appellant  was  a
    qualifying child  but  not  yet  a  British  citizen,  and  the  fourth
    appellant, his younger sister, was a baby.  She is now nearly  4  years
    old and has Pakistani citizenship only.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal considered the  guidance  given  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed & Ors (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
    appeals) Iran [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC), by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  EV
    (Philippines) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874, and by the Supreme Court in  Zoumbas v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74.  The Judge had  regard  to  the
    best interests of the children, in particular the oldest child who is a
    British citizen now.

 5. The First-tier Judge found that, contrary to the evidence given, it was
    most unlikely that the children spoke no Urdu because the parents speak
    Urdu to each other in the home even now and the  older  child's  school
    report said he was developing  a  good  understanding  of  the  English
    language and that his spoken English was progressing.  The judge  found
    as a fact that the first language of the child was Urdu.

 6. The First-tier Judge also found that, despite  a  claimed  family  rift
    about the marriage, the second appellant had returned  to  Pakistan  in
    2008 or 2009 (before her leave to remain expired) to visit her  family,
    and had taken the third appellant with her.  The  first  appellant  had
    been unable to accompany them, because by that time he was not lawfully
    in the United Kingdom.  The first appellant is  not  currently  working
    but he is a butcher and  that  is  a  transferrable  skill.  The  first
    appellant has a number of uncles and aunts in Pakistan and  the  second
    appellant has a brother and sister there who are the uncle and aunt  of
    the third and fourth appellants.  At paragraph 40 the  judge  concluded
    that the transition to life in Pakistan however great  an  upheaval  at
    first would be manageable both practically and financially.

Permission to appeal

 7. The grounds of appeal are almost incomprehensible: to the  extent  that
    anything can be derived from them it is  summarised  in  the  grant  of
    permission at [3]:

         "2.  The appellants are citizens of Pakistan the first  and  second
             appellants are husband and wife and the  remaining  appellants
             are their children.  As noted in the determination the child R
             was born in the UK and was a qualifying child who had been  in
             the UK for over  seven  years  and  the  issue  under  Section
             117B(6) was the issue of reasonableness.

         3.   ... However the point that can be gleaned from the grounds  is
             that the judge failed  properly  to  apply  the  correct  test
             relating to reasonableness of return set out in MA (Pakistan),
             where the Court of Appeal recognised that when a child  was  a
             qualifying child because he or she had  been  in  the  UK  for
             seven years or more that was a  matter  which  must  be  given
             significant weight (at  [49]).   Furthermore  whilst  at  [45]
             Elias LJ made reference to the  court  having  regard  to  the
             conduct of the applicant and any other matters relevant to the
             public   interest,   when   considering   the   question    of
             reasonableness under Section 117B(6) he pointed  out  that  in
             order to outweigh a  child's  best  interests  in  determining
             whether it would be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the UK if the child's best interests were such that there must
             be a 'powerful' or 'strong' reasons [sic] why leave should not
             be granted for the reasons set out by  him  at  [46].   It  is
             arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to  apply  that   in   the
             circumstances of the appellants.  Also see MT and ET  (child's
             best  interests:  extempore  pilot)  Nigeria  [2018]  UKUT  88
             (IAC)."

 8. That is a relatively generous grant of permission.  The  basis  of  the
    appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  limited  to  the  reasonableness  of
    removing these children with their parents, given that they are  young,
    that they speak Urdu, that they have family members  in  Pakistan,  and
    that  their  parents  are  removable,  but  for  the  children's   best
    interests.

KO (Nigeria)

 9. The First-tier Judge did not have the benefit of the guidance given  by
    the Supreme Court in  October  2018  on  the  proper  approach  to  the
    reasonableness test: see KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department (respondent) [2018] UKSC 53,  in  particular  at  paragraphs
    [17]-[19] in the judgment of Lord Carnwath JSC  (with  whom  Lord  Kerr
    JSC, Lord Wilson JSC, Lord Reed JSC and Lord Briggs JSC concurred):

         "17.      As  has  been  seen,  section  117B(6)  incorporated  the
             substance of the rule without material change, but  this  time
             in the context of the right of the parent to remain.  I  would
             infer that it was  intended  to  have  the  same  effect.  The
             question again is what is 'reasonable' for the child. As Elias
             LJ said in  MA  (Pakistan)  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and
             Asylum Chamber) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, [2016] 1 WLR  5093,  para
             36, there is nothing in the subsection to import  a  reference
             to the conduct of the parent. Section 117B sets out  a  number
             of factors relating to those seeking leave to enter or remain,
             but criminality is not one of them. ...

         18.  On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it  seems
             to me inevitably relevant in both contexts to  consider  where
             the parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected
             to be, since it will normally be reasonable for the  child  to
             be with them. To that extent the record  of  the  parents  may
             become indirectly material, if it leads to  their  ceasing  to
             have a right to remain here, and having to leave. It  is  only
             if, even on that hypothesis, it would not  be  reasonable  for
             the child to leave that the provision may give the  parents  a
             right to remain. The point was well-expressed by Lord Boyd  in
             SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
             2017 SLT 1245:

                  "22.     In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment
                      of whether it is reasonable to expect  the  child  to
                      leave the UK one has to address  the  question,  'Why
                      would the child  be  expected  to  leave  the  United
                      Kingdom?' In a case such as this there  can  only  be
                      one answer: 'because the parents  have  no  right  to
                      remain in the UK'. To approach the  question  in  any
                      other way  strips  away  the  context  in  which  the
                      assessment of reasonableness is being made ..."

         19.  He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had made a similar point in
             considering the 'best interests' of children in the context of
             section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009 in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874, para 58:

                  "58.     In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of  the
                      best interests of the children must be  made  on  the
                      basis that the facts are as  they  are  in  the  real
                      world. If one parent has no right to remain, but  the
                      other parent does, that  is  the  background  against
                      which the assessment is conducted. If neither  parent
                      has the right to remain, then that is the  background
                      against which the assessment is conducted.  Thus  the
                      ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to expect
                      the child to follow  the  parent  with  no  right  to
                      remain to the country of origin?"

             To the extent that Elias LJ may have suggested otherwise in MA
             (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully  disagree.  There  is
             nothing in the section to suggest that "reasonableness" is  to
             be considered otherwise than in the real world  in  which  the
             children find themselves."

10. The 'real world'  in  this  case  is  that  the  first  appellant,  the
    children's father, has not had  leave  to  remain  since  2007  at  the
    latest, that the second appellant, their mother, has not had  leave  to
    remain since 2010 and that absent the question of the  children's  best
    interests, they are both in the United Kingdom without  leave  and  are
    removable.

11. There is no evidence of  any  particular  difficulty  for  any  of  the
    children, nor any indication that on the facts found, it would  not  be
    reasonable for these children to travel to Pakistan and live there with
    their parents.

Decision

12. Professor Rees accepted  at  the  hearing  that  in  the  light  of  KO
    (Nigeria), the First-tier  Judge's  approach  was  unarguably  correct.
    There is no material error of law in his decision.

13. Accordingly, the appellants' appeal is dismissed and  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal upheld.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:  10 January 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
