
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/13273/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 October 2019                        |On 1 November 2019                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH

                                   Between

                                    'GAD'
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Ogunnowo, Solicitor, Allison Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family.     Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are the approved record of the decision and written reasons which
    were given orally at the end of the hearing on 22 October 2019.

 2. This is the remaking of the decision in the appellant's appeal on human
    rights grounds against the respondent's refusal  on  5  April  2018  of
    entry  clearance,  to  join  her  father,  a  British  national,   (the
    'sponsor'), in the United Kingdom ('UK').

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge M Davies (the  'FtT')  dismissed  her  appeal
    against the respondent's refusal in a decision promulgated on 21  March
    2019.  The FtT found that the appellant and the sponsor were related as
    claimed, but that the sponsor did not have sole parental responsibility
    for the appellant, noting that the appellant had been brought up by her
    mother, then aunt; and now the sponsor's best friend.

 4. The appellant appealed on 12 April  2019,  arguing  that  the  FtT  had
    failed to make any finding on whether the appellant's mother had  died,
    so  that  the  appellant  would  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    297(i)(d) of the Immigration Rules; failed to explain why, if he  found
    the sponsor to be credible, the FtT had concluded that the sponsor  did
    not have sole parental responsibility for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
    297(i)(e); and misdirected himself  on  the  fact  of  the  appellant's
    cohabitation with  people  other  than  the  sponsor;  and  there  were
    insufficient reasons for concluding that the appellant's exclusion from
    the UK was not undesirable, for the purposes of paragraph 297(i)(f).

 5. This Tribunal dismissed the appeals and preserved the FtT's findings in
    relation to the grounds of appeal under paragraphs 297(i)(d)  and  (f),
    in the error of law decision, which was promulgated on  25  July  2019,
    and which is annexed to this remaking decision.

The issue in this appeal

 6. The decision of the FtT in relation to Paragraph 297(i)(e), namely  the
    question of sole parental responsibility, did contain an error of  law,
    such that the findings on that issue were set aside and  needed  to  be
    remade.  It was this single issue which is the subject of this remaking
    decision.  While the appeal is on human rights grounds, I must consider
    it through the lens of the Immigration Rules first,  i.e.  whether  the
    sponsor has sole parental responsibility for the appellant.

The gist of the respondent's refusal


 7. The core points taken against the appellant  were  that  correspondence
    from the appellant's school did not refer to the  sponsor  having  sole
    parental responsibility, particularly when the appellant's  claim  that
    her mother is no longer alive,  is  found  to  be  not  reliable;  that
    financial support for the appellant was not sufficient  to  demonstrate
    sole parental responsibility;  and  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    sponsor  took  the  important  decisions  regarding   the   appellant's
    upbringing. In  previous  interviews  in  2006,  the  sponsor  had  not
    suggested that he was in contact with his two  children,  who  included
    the appellant.



The Law

 8. On the issue of sole or shared responsibility, the case  of  TD  ("Sole
    Responsibility) Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049 sets out, at paragraph 52, the
    approach for considering sole responsibility:


    "i. Who has "responsibility" for a child's upbringing and whether  that
    responsibility is "sole" is a factual matter to be decided upon all the
    evidence.
    ii. The term "responsibility" in the immigration rules should not to be
    understood as a  theoretical  or  legal  obligation  but  rather  as  a
    practical one which, in each case, looks to who in fact  is  exercising
    responsibility for the child. That responsibility may have been  for  a
    short duration in that the present arrangements may  have  begun  quite
    recently.
    iii. "Responsibility" for a child's upbringing  may  be  undertaken  by
    individuals other than a child's parents  and  may  be  shared  between
    different individuals: which may particularly  arise  where  the  child
    remains in its own country whilst the only parent involved in its  life
    travels to and lives in the UK.
    iv. Wherever the parents are, if  both  parents  are  involved  in  the
    upbringing of the child, it will be exceptional that one of  them  will
    have sole responsibility.
    v. If it is said that both are not involved in the child's  upbringing,
    one of the indicators for that will be that the other has abandoned  or
    abdicated his responsibility. In such cases, it may well  be  justified
    to find that that parent no longer has responsibility for the child.
    vi. However, the issue of sole responsibility  is  not  just  a  matter
    between the parents. So even if there is only one  parent  involved  in
    the child's upbringing, that parent may not have sole responsibility.
    vii. In the circumstances likely to  arise,  day-to-day  responsibility
    (or decision-making) for the child's welfare may necessarily be  shared
    with others (such as relatives or friends) because of the  geographical
    separation between the parent and child.
    viii.  That,  however,  does  not  prevent  the  parent   having   sole
    responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.
    ix. The test is, not whether anyone else has day-to-day responsibility,
    but whether the parent has continuing  control  and  direction  of  the
    child's upbringing including making all the important decisions in  the
    child's life. If not, responsibility is shared and so not "sole".


 9. In considering article 8 of the  ECHR,  I  also  needed  to  take  into
    account section 117A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002. Section 117A required me to  consider,  in  cases  where  I  must
    determine whether the respondent's decision  breached  the  appellant's
    rights to a family life under article 8, the considerations  listed  in
    section 117B of that Act.  The burden of showing facts to the  ordinary
    civil standard rests with the appellant to  show  that  her  article  8
    rights had been interfered with.


Findings of fact

10. I considered all of the evidence presented to me, whether I refer to it
    specifically in these findings or not.

11. The sponsor provided a brief written witness statement, the brevity  of
    which I do not criticise; and was also cross-examined by Mr Melvin. The
    gist of the witness statement  was  that  the  sponsor  reiterated  his
    assertion  that  the  appellant's  mother  was  no  longer  alive.   He
    described  the  fact  of  his  marriage  to  the  appellant's   mother.
    Following his relocation  to  the  UK  in  August  2007,  he  left  the
    appellant in the care of R  M,  the  appellant's  paternal  great-aunt.
    While R M was looking after the appellant on a day-to-day basis in line
    with the authority of TD, all of  the  day-to-day  decisions  including
    financial support, high school education as  well  as  general  welfare
    were made solely by the sponsor.

12. On R M becoming married and joining her spouse  in  September  2017  in
    Accra whilst the appellant was in a boarding school, the appellant then
    had to come under the day-to-day care, as arranged by the  sponsor,  of
    his friend F K, on a temporary basis.  That arrangement  could  not  be
    sustained as Mr F K had then emigrated from Ghana to the United  States
    in April 2019, which then necessitated the sponsor to make an unplanned
    trip to Ghana to arrange yet further care outside the school terms with
    a friend, E B, from April 2009 onwards.  There was  evidence  that  the
    sponsor had travelled to Ghana, when he provided his  plane  ticket  to
    this Tribunal for the purposes of an adjournment application.  While  I
    accept the fact of the sponsor travelling to Ghana, it did  not  follow
    that the sponsor necessarily had sole parental responsibility  for  the
    appellant.  I had previously granted the adjournment application on the
    basis that the sponsor was a key witness in the case and  therefore  it
    was in accordance with  the  overriding  objective  that  the  case  be
    adjourned.

13. In terms of the other evidence, before I come on to the  findings,  the
    bundle included documentation about the sponsor's flight, the  fact  of
    the sponsor's mother's death to which I had already given consideration
    and which I did not regard as accurate, and  also  correspondence  from
    the high school apparently attended by the appellant dated 5 June 2018,
    at page [20] in which it stated that the appellant was a student at the
    school and that the sponsor had  been  calling  to  enquire  about  her
    progress and educational needs.  The letter continued that:-

         "He communicates  with  the  house  mistress  on  her  conduct  and
         welfare.

         During his visit to Ghana early this year, he personally  paid  the
         school a visit to interact with authorities on his ward's welfare.

         The school is satisfied with his monitoring, follow ups and concern
         of his daughter's education.

         I  therefore  recommend  that,  kindly  render  him  the  necessary
         assistance and support he may require from your high office without
         difficulties".

14. It also  included  reports  which  indicated  satisfactory  educational
    performance as well as fee payments made by the sponsor which had never
    been disputed.

15. There was also evidence in the remainder of the bundle to social  media
    contacts which clearly support a genuine parental relationship  between
    the appellant and the sponsor.  Also of note, although not included  in
    the bundle before me but which had been included by Judge  Mark  Davies
    was a reference  at  paragraph  [25]  of  Judge  Davies's  decision  as
    follows:-

         "I am satisfied  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  that  has  been
         submitted that the sponsor makes  financial  contributions  towards
         the appellant's upkeep and that he has made arrangements for her to
         live with his best friend who has confirmed those arrangements in a
         letter dated 20th August 2018."

16. Nevertheless,  as  already  previously  considered,  Judge  Davies  had
    considered that sole parental responsibility had not been shown, albeit
    I had concluded that reason was not adequate.

17. In terms of my findings, I am not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
    shown on the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the  sponsor  has  sole
    parental responsibility for her.   I accepted Mr Ogunnowo's  submission
    that even if the appellant's mother has not died, if  it  is  the  case
    that she no longer has an active involvement in the  appellant's  life,
    the sponsor may nevertheless still have sole  parental  responsibility.
    In other words, the presumption that  there  would  be  joint  parental
    responsibility might not apply even where  the  appellant's  mother  is
    alive.

18. I also took into account that Judge Davies had not sought previously to
    criticise the sponsor's general credibility.  There is evidence of, and
    I accept, the sponsor's visits to Ghana in 2016 and  more  recently  in
    2019, as well as evidence of financial support; and the  correspondence
    from the school is supportive of a caring and  loving  father  who  was
    obviously interested in the welfare of his daughter.

19. Nevertheless, I accepted the power of Mr Melvin's submissions that this
    was a case where there was crucially missing evidence that  would  have
    been obviously available, notwithstanding any limited  financial  means
    and which was not produced, and that the  evidence  that  was  produced
    included important admissions.  For example, in  the  letter  addressed
    'to whom it may concern' from the appellant's school, already  referred
    to at [20], whilst it confirmed  the  sponsor's  involvement  with  the
    appellant,  it  did  not  confirm  that  no  one  else,  including  the
    appellant's mother had involvement whatsoever  with  the  appellant  or
    involvement in her welfare.  Had this been the case, and in  particular
    where the letter was obviously obtained to assist the appellant, (as to
    which I make no criticism), it would have been an obvious statement  of
    support for that school to have made, bearing  in  mind  the  sponsor's
    claim that he had sole parental responsibility for the appellant.  This
    absence was striking when the appellant's legal  representatives  would
    be aware that the question of sole parental relationship was one of the
    three central issues in the First-tier Tribunal  and  indeed  the  sole
    issue before this Tribunal.

20. In terms of the important missing  evidence,  there  was  no  statement
    either from R M or E B or a more detailed witness statement from  F  K.
    Whilst I was  conscious  that  there  was  a  letter  of  support  that
    confirmed the living arrangements  as  of  April  2018  that  had  been
    referred to at [25] by Judge Davies in the decision, first of all I was
    not provided with a copy of that letter, and second, Judge  Davies  did
    not suggest, in the description of the  letter,  that  it  corroborated
    sole parental responsibility, for example the appellant's mother had no
    contact, merely a suggestion that in that case F K had day-to-day  care
    for the appellant.

21. The more detailed factual analysis of  whether  the  sponsor  took  all
    necessary decisions in the appellant's life was  therefore  unsupported
    by any evidence from those three key actors.   While  it  is  suggested
    that  the  sponsor  was  not  able  to  obtain  a  statement  from  the
    appellant's aunt because of a lack of financial means, paying testament
    to the consistent way in which the sponsor has sought  to  support  the
    appellant in pursuing this litigation, I do not regard it  as  credible
    that even with limited means he would not have sought to have  obtained
    some sort of notarised document, for R M, whom he  described  as  being
    illiterate.  While there is no evidential requirement of corroboration,
    where, as here, there is an absence of readily available evidence  from
    the three witnesses other than the sponsor, I drew significant  adverse
    credibility inferences from the failure to provide this evidence.

22. I also considered the consistency with which the sponsor  pursued  this
    litigation, and what otherwise would have been his motivation for doing
    so, if he did not have sole parental responsibility.  That question  is
    answered by the finding that the sponsor obviously deeply cares for his
    daughter, but that of course may exist regardless  of  whether  he  has
    sole parental responsibility or shares it with others.  The  fact  that
    he has been willing to pursue that in terms of his  litigation  is  not
    one to be criticised or taken lightly, but is not nevertheless one that
    adequately explains the absence of evidence, even on  the  standard  of
    proof  only  being  the  balance  of  probabilities.  Given  the   real
    limitations  in  the  evidence  and  my  previous  concerns  about  the
    reliability  of  the  sponsor's  assertions  about  the  death  of  the
    appellant's mother, I find that the sponsor does not have sole parental
    responsibility for  the  appellant  and  so  does  not  meet  paragraph
    297(i)(e).

23. That is not an  end  of  the  matter,  as  I  needed  to  consider  the
    appellant's appeal through the wider lens of article  8.  I  find  that
    there is undoubtedly a family life between the sponsor  and  his  minor
    daughter, the appellant;  and  that  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance
    undoubtedly interferes with the appellant's  rights  under  article  8,
    noting that she remains a minor and  also  noting  her  best  interests
    under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009.



24. I  have  to  consider  the  question  of  the  proportionality  of  the
    respondent's decision.  On the one hand, as I have indicated there is a
    genuine loving family  relationship  in  this  case.   There  has  been
    consistent involvement between the appellant and  the  sponsor  over  a
    number of years.  On the other hand, the fact remains that the  refusal
    was in accordance with the Immigration Rules.  There is also  the  fact
    that the sponsor has been able to retain regular  contact  and  develop
    the family relationship that he has done over the years.  However,  one
    of the weightiest factors  in  the  consideration  is  the  fact  that,
    setting aside the issue of not complying  with  the  Immigration  Rules
    where, as here,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  there  is  sole  parental
    responsibility, it follows that there is someone in Ghana, either  R  M
    or the appellant's mother (most likely) who continues to share parental
    responsibility  for  the  appellant  with  the  sponsor,  and  in   the
    circumstances it cannot be said that it is in the best interests of the
    appellant to be separated from the person or people in Ghana with  whom
    parental responsibility has been shared for the majority,  if  not  all
    of, her life in Ghana. When considering the weighty best  interests  of
    the appellant, I do not start with the presumption that it  is  in  her
    best interests to travel to the UK  to  be  with  her  father,  however
    loving and genuine that relationship is.  Instead, this is a case where
    the facts are more complex and in fact the  status  quo  would  have  a
    significant weighty factor  against  the  appellant's  appeal.  In  the
    balance sheet analysis and taking into account those circumstances  and
    the considerations under section 117B of the 2002 Act, even  if  it  is
    the case that the appellant would not be a significant burden on the UK
    taxpayer  and  even  if  her  English  is  of  sufficient  proficiency,
    nevertheless  I  concluded  that  the  respondent's  decision   was   a
    proportionate decision, noting that the status quo was a  very  weighty
    consideration; and that the decision did  not  breach  the  appellant's
    rights under article 8.


Conclusions

25. On the facts established in this  appeal,  there  are  no  grounds  for
    believing that the refusal of entry clearance would result in a  breach
    of the appellant's rights under article 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

26. I remake the decision by dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.

Signed:  J Keith


         Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

Dated:   30 October 2019




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


The appeal has failed and so there can be no fee award.


Signed:  J Keith


         Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


Dated:   30 October 2019


ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13273/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 July 2019 (given orally)                |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'GAD'
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Ogunnowo, representative
For the Respondent:    Mr A Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

On the basis that the appellant is a minor unless and until  a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member
of her family.  This direction applies both to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


27. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M Davies (the 'FtT') promulgated on 21  March  2019,  by
    which he dismissed her appeal based on her human  rights,  against  the
    respondent's refusal on 5 April 2018 of entry clearance,  to  join  her
    father, a British national, (the 'sponsor'),  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    ('UK').

28. In essence, the appellant's claims involved the following  issues:  her
    biological relationship to the sponsor; whether the appellant's  mother
    was dead, so that the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    297(i)(d) of the  Immigration  Rules;  or  alternatively,  whether  the
    sponsor has sole parental responsibility for the purposes of  paragraph
    297(i)(e), or whether there were considerations  for  the  purposes  of
    paragraph 297(i)(f)  making  the  appellant's  exclusion  from  the  UK
    undesirable and that  suitable  arrangements  had  been  made  for  the
    appellant's care.

The FtT's decision

29. The FtT found that the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  were  related  as
    claimed, but not that the sponsor had sole parental responsibility  for
    the appellant, noting that the appellant had been  brought  up  by  her
    mother, then aunt; and now the sponsor's best friend.  The FtT was  not
    impressed that the evidence was sufficient to  show  that  the  sponsor
    took day-to-day  decisions  regarding  the  appellant's  schooling  and
    future plans, albeit accepting that the sponsor was a credible witness.

The Grounds of Appeal and Grant of Permission

30. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal which are that the FtT failed to
    make any finding on whether the appellant's mother had  died,  so  that
    the appellant would meet the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(d) of the
    Immigration Rules; failed to explain why, if he found the sponsor to be
    credible, the FtT had concluded that the  sponsor  did  not  have  sole
    parental responsibility and misdirected himself  on  the  fact  of  the
    appellant's cohabitation with people other than the sponsor; and  there
    were insufficient reasons for concluding that the appellant's exclusion
    from the UK was not undesirable.

31. First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach granted  permission  on  5  June  2019.
    Permission was not limited in its scope.

The hearing before me

32. The appellant applied on 17 June  2019  to  this  Tribunal,  albeit  Mr
    Melvin, the  Presenting  Officer,  had  not  received  a  copy  of  the
    application pursuant to Rule 15(2)(a) of the 2008  Rules,  to  admit  a
    photocopy of the death certificate  of  the  appellant's  mother.   The
    explanation for previous non-disclosure was said to be a  family  feud,
    as a result of which the appellant's representatives had not managed to
    previously obtain it.  Mr Melvin did not object to the admission of the
    evidence, although he  challenged  the  reliability  of  the  document,
    noting that  it  was  not  a  certified  copy.   In  response  to  that
    challenge, Mr Ogunnowo then  presented  the  original,  or  a  document
    purporting to be the original, on the day of the hearing.   When  asked
    why  a  certified  copy  had  not  previously  been  provided  to   the
    respondent, Mr Ogunnowo explained that he and the appellant were  based
    some distance away from one another and so Mr Ogunnowo had been  unable
    to certify a copy.  While I admitted the original document, once again,
    its authenticity was not accepted.

The law

33. Paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules states:

    "Requirements for indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom  as  the
    child of a parent, parents or a relative present and settled  or  being
    admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom

    297. The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite leave to
    enter the United Kingdom as  the  child  of  a  parent,  parents  or  a
    relative present and settled or being admitted for  settlement  in  the
    United Kingdom are that he:

    (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a parent, parents or
    a relative in one of the following circumstances:

            (a) both parents are present and settled in the United Kingdom;
    or

            (b) both parents are being admitted on the  same  occasion  for
    settlement; or

         (c) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom and the
         other is being admitted on the same occasion for settlement; or

        (d) one parent is present and settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  or
        being admitted on the same occasion for settlement  and  the  other
        parent is dead; or

        (e) one parent is present and settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  or
        being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and has had sole
        responsibility for the child's upbringing; or

        (f) one parent or a relative is present and settled in  the  United
        Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for  settlement  and
        there are serious and compelling  family  or  other  considerations
        which  make  exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable  and   suitable
        arrangements have been made for the child's care; and

            (ii) is under the age of 18; and

         (iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and is not a
         civil partner,       and has not formed an independent family unit;
         and

        (iv) can, and will,  be  accommodated  adequately  by  the  parent,
        parents or relative the child is seeking to join  without  recourse
        to public funds in  accommodation  which  the  parent,  parents  or
        relative the child is seeking to join, own or occupy exclusively

        (v) can, and will, be maintained adequately by the parent, parents,
        or relative the child is  seeking  to  join,  without  recourse  to
        public funds; and

            (vi) holds a valid United Kingdom entry clearance for entry  in
    this capacity; and

            (vii) does not fall for refusal under the general  grounds  for
    refusal."

Decision of Error of Law in relation to Paragraph 297(i)(d)

34. In the first ground, I conclude that there was an error of law  in  the
    FtT's decision, but not one such  that  it  should  be  set  aside.  My
    reasons for the conclusion are as follows.

35. As accepted by Mr Melvin, the issue of whether the  appellant's  mother
    had passed away was a live issue before the FtT, on which it  had  made
    no finding.  However, that needed to be considered in  the  context  of
    the evidence before the FtT.  The respondent's response under  Rule  24
    of the  2008  Rules  identified  the  significant  concerns  about  the
    evidence before the FtT.  A police report dated 7 January 2015  singled
    out the appellant's mother by name, whose date of birth was said to  be
    9 September 1975 and four other unnamed people having died, when it was
    unclear why the appellant's mother was singled out in  the  report  and
    the four other victims of the accident were not named.

36. It was also notable that the date of birth of  the  appellant's  mother
    was inconsistent when comparing the police report, with the application
    for entry clearance, which stated it as 9 September 1976.  There was  a
    further concern when referring to  an  earlier  application  for  entry
    clearance of 31 January  2007,  which  in  turn  had  referred  to  the
    appellant's mother by a different name.  In essence, on  the  basis  of
    just three documents alone, there are inconsistencies as  to  both  the
    dates of birth and also the name  of  the  appellant's  mother.   I  am
    therefore not  satisfied  as  to  the  reliability  of  the  documents,
    including the document said to be the original death  certificate,  but
    which the appellant had not produced  prior  to  this  hearing  and  in
    circumstances where I am not satisfied as to the  explanation  for  its
    late production. Notwithstanding the FtT's failure to make a finding on
    whether the appellant's mother has passed  away,  I  am  not  satisfied
    that, on the basis of the lack of reliability of  the  evidence  before
    it, and me, it is appropriate to set aside  the  FtT's  decision,  when
    there was never sufficiently reliable evidence before it such  that  an
    appeal was ever likely to  succeed.  The  appellant's  appeal  on  this
    ground is therefore dismissed.

Decision of Error of Law in relation to Paragraph 297(i)(f)

37. The FtT considered, at paragraph [27] of his  decision,  the  issue  of
    whether the appellant's  exclusion  was  undesirable,  concluding  that
    while she no longer lived with a family member (she lives with a friend
    of the sponsor) there was no  evidence  that  there  were  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which  made  the  appellant's
    exclusion from the UK undesirable.

38. Mr Ogunnowo accepted that there was  no  assertion  of  destitution  or
    danger to the appellant and I considered specifically the authority  of
    Mundeba (Section 55 and paragraph  297(i)(f))  Democratic  Republic  of
    Congo [2013] UKUT 88  (IAC).   The  respondent  had,  in  reaching  its
    decision, noted that consideration of the issue of  exclusion  involved
    an assessment of  what  the  appellant's  welfare  and  best  interests
    require.  Family considerations,  in  turn,  require  an  evaluation  a
    child's welfare, including emotional needs.  Other considerations  come
    into play where there are other aspects of  a  child's  life  that  are
    serious and compelling, for example where an applicant is living in  an
    unacceptable social and economic  environment.   The  respondent  noted
    that the focus needs to be on the circumstances of a child in light  of
    his or her age, social background and developmental  history  and  will
    involve enquiries as to whether there is evidence of neglect or  abuse;
    there are needs that should  be  catered  for;  and  there  are  stable
    arrangements for the child's physical care.   The  assessment  involves
    consideration as  to  whether  the  combination  of  circumstances  are
    sufficiently serious and compelling to require  admission.   Mr  Melvin
    asserts that, in the context of no assertion of destitution  or  danger
    to the appellant, who is currently enrolled during the school  year  on
    an IT course, and who stays during the holidays with a close friend  of
    the sponsor's, that her exclusion is not undesirable; and the  FtT  was
    entitled to find as such.

39. The appellant was born on 10 February 2003 and is consequently now aged
    16.  She was 16 at the date  of  the  FtT's  decision.   There  are  no
    reasons put  for  her  exclusion  being  undesirable,  except  for  the
    understandable assertion that she is no  longer  living  with  a  blood
    relative, but being looked after on a day-to-day basis, outside  school
    terms, with a close friend of the sponsor; and the sponsor would prefer
    to look after her.  Whilst  I  make  no  criticism  whatsoever  of  the
    entirely understandable desire that they  should  live  together,  that
    does not in my view meet the test set out in Mundeba,  namely  evidence
    of neglect or abuse, unmet needs or around such  equivalent  situations
    such as unstable arrangements.  The arrangements themselves  appear  to
    be stable and in reality what is  presented  is  a  desire  for  family
    reunion after a period of ten years.  Nevertheless, that does not  make
    the appellant's exclusion undesirable in the  circumstances  and  there
    was no error of law in the FtT's decision, which is dismissed.

Decision of Error of Law in relation to Paragraph 297(i)(e)

40. I turn, however, to the question of sole  parental  responsibility  for
    the purposes of paragraph 297(i)(e).  The challenge in relation to this
    was the sufficiency of reasoning.  The FtT had concluded, at  paragraph
    [26] of his decision, that while the sponsor may  well  make  financial
    contributions towards the appellant's upkeep,  this  did  not  indicate
    sole responsibility.  Mr Melvin urged me to find  that  this  reasoning
    was sufficient, whereas  the  grounds  assert  that  having  found  the
    sponsor to be credible, it was unclear why the FtT concluded  that  the
    sponsor did not exercise sole parental responsibility, as  he  claimed.



41. I conclude that on this ground only, the FtT's decision does contain an
    error of law, which requires that part of the decision  to  be  remade,
    but any remaking should be in the context of it not  being  found  that
    the appellant's mother has died.  The reasons for my conclusions are as
    follows.  On the one hand, at paragraph [78] of the FtT's decision,  he
    accepts the sponsor was a credible witness,  but  on  the  other,  then
    concludes that the sponsor does not have sole  parental  responsibility
    for the appellant.  The FtT's reasons are that the sponsor did not have
    sole parental responsibility for the appellant when she was living with
    her grandmother or aunt; and taking into account that she is now living
    with the sponsor's friend, the extent of responsibility will  not  have
    changed. Whilst the FtT accepted that the sponsor may return  to  Ghana
    on an annual basis to see the appellant,  that,  along  with  financial
    support, does not indicate that he has sole  responsibility.   The  FtT
    further found that 'day-to-day' decisions on the appellant's upbringing
    are taken by the sponsor's friend, with no evidence  to  indicate  that
    the  sponsor  makes  day-to-day  decisions  regarding  the  appellant's
    schooling and future plans.

42. However, the above rationale of how the FtT could  conclude  that  sole
    parental responsibility has not been shown, i.e. in  referring  to  the
    sponsor's visits and financial support, but with 'day-to-day' decisions
    being taken by the sponsor's friend, does not  take  into  account  the
    authority of  TD (Paragraph  297(i)(e):  "sole  responsibility")  Yemen
    [2006] UKAIT 00409. I am not satisfied that the FtT in  this  case  has
    adequately  considered  that  the  sponsor  could  have  sole  parental
    responsibility while his friend looks after the appellant on a  day-to-
    day  basis.   That  element  of  the  FtT's  decision  is  inadequately
    reasoned, and so contains an error in law, which is material.

Notice of Decision

43. The  FtT's  decision  in  relation  to  the  grounds  of  appeal  under
    paragraphs 297(i)(d) and (f) does not contain an error of law such that
    the decision should be set aside and the FtT's findings  are  preserved
    in respect of those grounds.  The decision of the FtT  in  relation  to
    Paragraph   297(i)(e),   namely   the   question   of   sole   parental
    responsibility, does contain an error of law, such that I set aside its
    findings on that issue, which need to be remade.

44. The remaking of the decision on paragraph  297(i)(e)  can  be  properly
    remade by the Upper Tribunal, in light of the narrowness of  the  issue
    and  a  hearing  in  order  to  remake  the  decision  will  be  listed
    accordingly.

Signed                                  Date     23 July 2019

J Keith
Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
