
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/13120/2018
                                                               HU/13126/2018
                                                               HU/13130/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 October 2019                   |On 18 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                            M a (first appellant)
                          M A A (second appellant)
                            I a (third appellant)
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication  thereof  shall  directly  or   indirectly   identify   the
    Appellants or members of  their  family.  This  direction  applies  to,
    amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction
    could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Sowerby, Counsel, instructed by Pioneer
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellants are all nationals of Pakistan. The  first  appellant  is
    the mother of the other two. None of them have leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom. The second appellant was born in this country in  March
    2012 and the third in December 2015.

 2. The first appellant's husband (the father of the two children) is  also
    in this  country  without  leave.  It  appears  as  though  he  has  an
    application outstanding before the respondent.

 3. This is the  remaking  of  the  decision  in  the  appellants'  appeals
    following the decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge King, promulgated
    on 5 September 2019, in which he concluded that the First-tier Tribunal
    had materially erred in law when dismissing their appeals  against  the
    respondent's refusals of their respective human  rights  claims.  Judge
    King's error of law decision is annexed to this remaking  decision.  In
    summary, it was said that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  recognise
    the significance of the second appellant being a "qualifying child"  by
    having accrued seven years residence in  the  United  Kingdom.  It  was
    common ground that the first appellant had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with her two children.

 4. Judge King was of the view that little new evidence was anticipated  in
    respect of the resumed hearing  because  the  "details  of  the  family
    situation as a whole and that of [the second appellant]  in  particular
    have been set out in the [First-tier  Tribunal's]  determination."  The
    production of further evidence was not, however, ruled out.

 5. In the event, a supplementary bundle of evidence was filed  and  served
    by the appellants. This consisted of an application form  submitted  to
    the respondent by the  first  appellant's  husband  (second  and  third
    appellant's father) on 1 October 2019, and a report from an Independent
    Social Worker, Ms Sally-Anne Deacon, dated 29 September 2019. This  new
    evidence was admitted without opposition from Mr Clarke.

 6. Notwithstanding the new evidence, there is no sound reason  to  disturb
    the First-tier Tribunal's findings of primary fact in  respect  of  the
    appellants. I note that these findings were not the  subject  challenge
    in the grounds of appeal. Judge King said nothing in his error  of  law
    decision which would indicate that resumed hearing would  be  conducted
    on a clean factual slate, as it were. At  the  hearing  before  me,  Mr
    Sowerby, quite rightly in my view, did not seek  to  argue  that  these
    findings were now irrelevant.

The issues in these appeals

 7. As recognised by both parties, the core issue in these appeals  is  the
    circumstances  of  the  second  appellant  and  whether  it  would   be
    reasonable for him to leave the United Kingdom.  The  second  appellant
    was not a qualifying child as at the date of the human rights claims in
    March 2017, but clearly is now. Thus, it  is  accepted  that  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the Immigration Rules cannot be met, and it is section
    117B(6) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  as
    amended, which represents the applicable legal test here.

 8. It has not been suggested  that,  absent  a  favourable  conclusion  on
    section 117B(6), the other two appellants would be able to  succeed  on
    Article 8 grounds.

Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act

 9. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act reads as follows:

         "(6)     In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

The authorities and my approach to the reasonableness test

10. The question of reasonableness is  to  be  assessed  in  light  of  the
    authorities, including KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC  53  and  AB  (Jamaica)
    [2019] EWCA Civ 661. By way of self-directions, I state the following:

      1) I assess the reasonableness question on the hypothetical basis that
         the second appellant would in fact leave the United Kingdom;

      2) the assessment must be made in  a  "real  world"  scenario,  taking
         account of the current status of all relevant family members;

      3)  a  best  interests  assessment  forms  part  and  parcel  of   the
         reasonableness test and is a primary consideration;

      4) the parents' historical immigration record (in other words, matters
         going beyond the simple fact of an absence of status as of now)  is
         irrelevant to the reasonableness test;

      5) reasonableness assessments are, by their nature,  inherently  fact-
         specific;

      6) if it would be unreasonable for the second appellant to  leave  the
         United Kingdom, the first appellant will succeed in her  Article  8
         claim.

11. The six points set out above are not, as I understand  it,  in  dispute
    between the parties. However, there is an argument as to whether or not
    "powerful reasons" need to be shown for a conclusion that it  would  be
    reasonable for a qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom.

12. Mr Sowerby submits that the need to show "powerful reasons", elucidated
    by Elias LJ in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705, survives KO (Nigeria)
    and should be applied  in  respect  of  the  second  appellant.  It  is
    submitted that what was said by Elias LJ in paragraphs 46 and 49 of  MA
    (Pakistan) was not overturned by the Supreme Court, either expressly or
    by implication.  With  reference  to  paragraph  84  of  JG  (s117B(6):
    "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC) and  paragraph
    33 of MT and ET (child's best  interests;  ex  tempore  pilot)  Nigeria
    [2018] UKUT 88(IAC), Mr Sowerby submitted that the  "powerful  reasons"
    factor had been correctly applied  by  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  the
    former decision post-dating KO (Nigeria).

13. Mr Clarke submitted that there was no scope for  a  "powerful  reasons"
    requirement  within  the  reasonableness  assessment.  It   is   clear,
    submitted Mr Clarke, that KO (Nigeria) had  effectively  overturned  MA
    (Pakistan) in its  entirety.  The  question  of  reasonableness  was  a
    straightforward one, and there was no room for a balancing exercise. In
    other words, it either was, or was not,  reasonable  for  a  qualifying
    child to leave the United Kingdom.

14. For the reasons set out below, I conclude that there is still a need to
    show "powerful reasons"  as  to  why  it  would  be  reasonable  for  a
    qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom.

15. First, nothing suggests to us that in principle the seven-year  gateway
    criterion contained within section 117B(6) and in the Rules  holds  any
    less  significance  in  the  post-KO  (Nigeria)  landscape  as  it  did
    previously.

16. Second, there is nothing in the Supreme Court's judgment that casts any
    doubt, whether explicitly or otherwise, on the appropriateness of  what
    Elias LJ said in paragraphs 46 and 49 of  MA  (Pakistan),  although  we
    recognise that  the  particular  issue  with  which  we  are  presently
    concerned did not appear to have been canvassed before the Court.

17. Third, a previous version of the respondent's guidance on  Appendix  FM
    and the reasonableness issue stated  that  "strong"  reasons  would  be
    required in order for leave to remain to be refused in the  case  of  a
    qualifying child (see paragraph 46 of MA (Pakistan)). The reference  to
    "strong" reasons does not appear in the latest  guidance,  referred  to
    earlier in our decision, nor did it appear  in  the  previous  relevant
    guidance on the 10-year route under Appendix FM, dated 11  April  2019.
    Whether or not this is a deliberate alteration is  not  a  matter  upon
    which we can comment. However, at pages 50-51 of the current  document,
    we find the following passages:

         "The starting  point  is  that  we  would  not  normally  expect  a
         qualifying child to leave the UK. It is normally in a child's  best
         interest for the whole family to remain together,  which  means  if
         the child is not expected to leave, then the parent or  parents  or
         primary carer of the child will also not be expected to  leave  the
         UK.

         ...

         There  may  be  some  specific  circumstances  where  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect the qualifying child to leave the UK with  the
         parent(s). In deciding  such  cases  you  must  consider  the  best
         interests of the child and the facts relating to the  family  as  a
         whole. You should also consider any specific issues raised  by  the
         family or by, or on behalf of the child (or other children  in  the
         family)."

18. Taking into account the need to assess cases by reference to the  "real
    world" scenario in which the qualifying  child  finds  themselves,  the
    approach set out in the passages cited above is in no way  inconsistent
    with the need to show "strong" or "powerful" reasons that the departure
    of the child in question from the United Kingdom would  be  reasonable.
    The guidance is not of course binding,  or  even  persuasive.  It  does
    however indicate that the respondent's current  approach  continues  to
    recognise  the  importance  of   the   qualifying   criteria   (British
    nationality or seven-year residence in the United Kingdom) and the need
    to provide specific evidence-based reasons for justifying a  conclusion
    that a departure will be reasonable. The guidance also appears  to  sit
    somewhat uncomfortably with Mr Clarke's submission.

19. Fourth, our conclusion that the need to show "powerful" reasons remains
    valid does not inexorably lead  to  the  respondent  being  effectively
    disabled from ever being able to identify such  reasons  in  any  given
    case. Following KO (Nigeria), the conduct of the parent(s),  which  had
    previously been available as a potential "powerful" reason for  why  it
    would be reasonable for the child to leave the United Kingdom, must now
    be left out of the equation. It remains the case that a combination  of
    factors relevant to an assessment of  reasonableness  (including  those
    set out in the Respondent's current guidance)  may,  depending  on  the
    facts of the case,  be  employed  to  show  that  a  departure  by  the
    qualifying child will be reasonable. In saying this, we note that in KO
    (Nigeria), Lord Carnwath expressly approved the  relevance  of  factors
    contained in a previous  version  of  the  respondent's  guidance  (see
    paragraphs 10 and 17).

20. Fifth, I disagree with Mr Clarke's submission that  the  need  to  show
    "powerful reasons" somehow imports a balancing exercise/proportionality
    assessment into the reasonableness test. In fact, all it does  is  form
    part of the need to justify a conclusion on what Mr Clarke described as
    a straightforward question.

The evidence

21. In remaking the decision is in these appeals, I have considered the new
    bundle from the appellants, referred to earlier, together with a bundle
    which appears to have been before the First-tier Tribunal (indexed  and
    paginated A1-I2), a number of letters and  documents  relating  to  the
    second appellant's education,  and  the  respondent's  original  appeal
    bundle.

22. Mr Sowerby was concerned that the first appellant had never given  oral
    evidence (this is because she had chosen to have the appeals before the
    First-tier Tribunal determined without a hearing). However, in view  of
    the preserved primary findings of fact from  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    the Independent  Social  Worker's  report,  and  the  applicable  legal
    framework, he  did  not  call  the  first  appellant  and  the  hearing
    proceeded by way of submissions only.

23. I shall deal with the Independent Social Worker's report in appropriate
    detail, below.

The parties' submissions

24. Mr Sowerby relied on his skeleton argument.  He  submitted  that  first
    appellant had a good immigration history. It was in the best  interests
    of the second appellant to remain in the United Kingdom,  as  confirmed
    by the First-tier Tribunal. I was specifically referred to pages  14-16
    of the Independent Social Worker's report. It was submitted that  there
    were no "powerful reasons" as to why it would  be  reasonable  for  the
    second appellant to leave the United Kingdom at this time.

25. Mr Clarke placed significant emphasis on the findings of the First-tier
    Tribunal at paragraphs 15-21. The  judge  had  found  that  the  second
    appellant's health was improved, that he had made  friends  at  school,
    had visited Pakistan on at least two occasions, and was able  to  speak
    Urdu. The judge had found that  the  first  appellant  had  exaggerated
    aspects of her evidence in  respect  of  the  claimed  difficulties  of
    relocating to Pakistan. It was clear that children's parents  would  be
    able to find work. The First-tier Tribunal had concluded  that  it  was
    only "just" in the second appellant's best interests to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom. This child was not at a crucial stage of his education.
    It was also significant that he was not yet in an older age bracket. In
    respect of the "real world" scenario, none of the appellants had  leave
    to remain in this country.

Findings of fact

26. With  reference  to  paragraphs  15-21  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision, I  apply  the  following  primary  findings  of  fact  to  my
    reasonableness assessment:

      1)  Whilst  the  second  appellant  has  suffered  from  some   health
         conditions, they have improved and  cannot  currently  be  properly
         described as significant;

      2) he has been to Pakistan on  two  occasions:  the  first  between  1
         December 2012 and 20 February 2013; the second between  22  January
         2014 and 7 April 2014;

      3) there were no particular medical complications during either of the
         two visits;

      4) the second appellant speaks at least some Urdu;

      5) the first appellant and her  husband  are  both  well-educated.  In
         particular, the husband has obtained impressive qualifications  and
         has employment record both in the United Kingdom and when  he  last
         resided in Pakistan;

      6) both parents would be able to secure  employment  in  Pakistan  and
         care for the two children;

      7) the first appellant's parents and sisters reside in Pakistan;

      8) a number of cousins reside in the United Kingdom.

27. On the issue of the second appellant's ability to speak  Urdu,  I  note
    that at page 35 of the  FLR(FP)  application  form  (page  116  of  the
    respondent's appeal bundle) it is said that  the  second  appellant  is
    "familiar" with both English and Urdu. The Independent Social  Worker's
    report states that the second appellant only has  "limited  ability  to
    speak or comprehend" what is described as "the basic language of Urdu."
    It is unclear where the author obtained information on this  particular
    issue.

28. On balance, and  having  regard  to  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and what the first appellant herself said in  the  application
    form, I find that second appellant  can  speak  Urdu  to  a  reasonable
    standard. It is more likely than not that his ability to read and write
    that language is very limited, if he has any at all.

29. The  Independent  Social  Worker  comments  that  there  are  relatives
    residing in Pakistan from the paternal side of the family. There is  no
    reason to doubt this, and I find that such relatives exist. There is no
    further detail about their circumstances, and there is no  evidence  to
    show that they, or any  other  relatives,  would  simply  be  unwilling
    and/or unable to provide whatever assistance they could.

30. I turn to consider the  Independent  Social  Worker's  report  in  more
    detail. I am satisfied that the author is suitably qualified to provide
    expert evidence on  the  subject  of  the  second  appellant's  current
    familial, social, and educational circumstances in the United  Kingdom,
    together with the possible impact upon him  of  having  to  leave  this
    country.

31. I do, however, have concerns about certain aspects of the  report.  For
    example, at pages 10 and 11, the author refers to  country  information
    (in the form of a BBC article) relating to the parents'  home  area  in
    Pakistan. At page 14 there is reference to  aspects  of  the  Pakistani
    educational system. Ms Deacon does not  profess  to  be  an  expert  on
    either the cultural and/or security  and/or  educational  circumstances
    pertaining to Pakistan. With all due respect, I place little weight  on
    this particular part of her evidence.

32. Ms Deacon also  makes  reference  to  possible  psychological  problems
    experienced by the second appellant in the United Kingdom and  possibly
    arising where he to go to Pakistan. In fairness to the author, at  page
    15 she does, quite rightly, state that such matters are not within  her
    area of expertise. Nonetheless, she has commented upon these issues  in
    support of her overall conclusions as to  the  adverse  impact  of  the
    second appellant leaving this country. Again, with respect, I am unable
    to place any material weight on this particular aspect of her evidence.

33. As a matter of fact,  there  is  no  medical  evidence  to  indicate  a
    diagnosis of, or even the suggestion of, an anxiety disorder.

34. On balance, I do not accept that the second appellant does suffer  from
    an anxiety disorder.

35. The two issues discussed above do detract from  the  overall  weight  I
    attach to Ms Deacon's evidence, although  the  weight  attributable  to
    other aspects of it remains considerable.

36. I accept that it is likely that the second  appellant  would  not  have
    meaningful memories of his visits to Pakistan in 2012 and  2014,  given
    his very young age at the time. It is likely  that  infrequent  contact
    with family members in Pakistan through, for example, Skype,  will  not
    have  resulted  in  particularly  meaningful  connections  with   those
    individuals. I accept that the  second  appellant  is  integrated  into
    British life. Indeed, it may be somewhat surprising if he were not. The
    information  contained  in  the  report  as  provided  by  the   second
    appellant's father, corroborated to an extent by the family  GP,  shows
    that the second appellant is a sensitive  and  reserved  child.  It  is
    clear that he is well-settled in school  and  finds  stability  of  the
    educational setting important. I find that  the  second  appellant  has
    established friendships, and I also accept that he has a best friend.

37. Within the report there is reference to "discussions" with  the  second
    appellant's  former  Year  2  teacher  (at  page  12).  It  is  perhaps
    unfortunate that there is no direct evidence from this source.  In  any
    event, there is no reason to indicate that the  views  of  the  teacher
    have  been  anything  other  than  accurately  reflected.  The  teacher
    commends the second appellant's attitude towards school, confirms  that
    he  gets  anxious  if  he  does  not  understand  something,  but   had
    nonetheless worked hard and reached good attainment levels (presumably,
    this must refer to Year 2. The child is now in Year 3). The involvement
    of the parents in school life is said to be excellent. In the teacher's
    opinion, it would be "catastrophic" for the second appellant  to  leave
    the school and the United Kingdom. He believes that  given  the  second
    appellant's low levels of resilience, the adaptation required by such a
    move would be "above and beyond" his capabilities. I  accept  that  the
    views expressed by the teacher were genuinely  held.  As  a  matter  of
    primary fact, what he says supports other sources of evidence  relating
    to the second appellant's reserve and sensitivity. I will consider  the
    issue of the potential impact of a departure on  the  second  appellant
    when setting out my conclusions, below.

38. Turning to the third appellant, there is no detailed information  about
    her circumstances. Given her very young age, she will not have  started
    formal education. It is highly unlikely that she would have formed  any
    meaningful relationships beyond her immediate family unit. There is  no
    evidence of any health problems, and I find that there are none.

39. As to the first appellant and her  husband,  I  have  already  set  out
    certain relevant findings of fact  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    which are preserved. There is no suggestion that either  are  estranged
    from their respective family members in Pakistan. Whilst there  was  an
    indication that the first appellant  had  suffered  from  some  medical
    problems in the past, I  find  this  does  not  currently  represent  a
    material issue.

Conclusions

40. The focus here, as  with  the  findings  of  fact,  is  on  the  second
    appellant.

41. I conclude that it is in the best interests of the second appellant not
    only to be with his parents and siblings, but also  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom. He was born here and has resided in  this  country  for
    the whole of his life. He is integrated  into  British  life,  both  in
    terms of his social and educational spheres. I take full account of the
    fact that the second appellant is a  sensitive  and  reserved  boy  who
    benefits from a stable environment. It is also  the  case  that,  other
    than the fact of his parental heritage, he does not have  what  may  be
    described as meaningful ties  with  Pakistan.  A  departure  from  this
    country would represent a significant disruption in his life.

42. It would in fact be bordering on the perverse to conclude that his best
    interests did not lie, at least in part, in him continuing to  live  in
    the United Kingdom.

43. Having said that, I, like the First-tier Tribunal, conclude that  those
    best interests are not very strongly in favour of him remaining in this
    country. Whilst the second appellant has met the gateway  criterion  of
    seven years residence, it is only by a  matter  of  some  four  months.
    There is merit to Mr Clarke's submission that the second appellant  has
    not lived here significantly in excess of  the  so-called  younger  age
    bracket referred to in cases such as Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC). This is  not
    a case in  which  there  are,  for  example,  relevant  medical  and/or
    developmental difficulties. Nor is it a case in which the  family  unit
    is in any way dysfunctional or unsupportive. Further, Pakistan is not a
    country  which  raises,  in  general  terms,  particularly  significant
    concerns as to the safety/well-being of children.

44. It will be recalled that the Year 2 teacher has said that, in his view,
    leaving the school and this country would  be  "catastrophic"  for  the
    second appellant. With respect, I do not agree that this would  be  the
    likely outcome, when  all  surrounding  circumstances  are  taken  into
    account. Those  circumstances  include  the  matters  set  out  in  the
    preceding  paragraph,  together  with   those   discussed   below.   In
    particular, the nature and support of his parents,  combined  with  his
    obvious intelligence and aptitude and his reasonable linguistic ability
    in Urdu, would materially mitigate the disruption caused by leaving his
    school and this country. In addition, the teacher was  basing  part  of
    his view on the second appellant leaving the particular school that  he
    currently attends. It is the case that many children will move  schools
    at or around the second appellant's age, albeit within the same country
    (for example, a family may have to relocate due to work). Such  a  move
    will cause upheaval and distress to the child  concerned.  However,  it
    would, in the normal course of events, be very unlikely that this event
    would  represent  a   significant   factor   accounting   against   the
    reasonableness of a move to  a  different  school.  Finally,  and  with
    respect to the teacher, he was not in a position to be able to  comment
    on the educational possibilities in Pakistan.

45. The next step in the  process  is  whether,  notwithstanding  the  best
    interests assessment and the  crossing  of  the  seven-year  threshold,
    there are "powerful reasons" as to why it would be reasonable  for  the
    second appellant to leave the United Kingdom.

46. On the facts  of  this  particular  case,  and  having  viewed  matters
    cumulatively, I conclude that such reasons do exist. My  conclusion  is
    based on the following.

47. My best interests assessment, whilst a primary consideration, does  not
    overwhelmingly favour second appellant remaining in the United Kingdom.
    The reasons I have given for this  conclusion  bear  relevance  to  the
    existence of "powerful reasons" in support of the reasonableness  of  a
    departure.

48. The second appellant, like his parents and siblings, is a  national  of
    Pakistan and would be able to enjoy all the rights  of  citizenship  in
    that country.

49. The "real world" scenario in this case  is  that  none  of  the  family
    members have right to remain in the United Kingdom and  all  would,  in
    the hypothetical situation I am obliged to consider, leave this country
    together  (the  father's  application   to   the   respondent   remains
    outstanding and there has been no suggestion that I should  proceed  on
    the extremely speculative basis that he will be granted  some  form  of
    leave).

50. The  second  appellant's  parents  clearly  have  significant  ties  to
    Pakistan. The father has worked there in the past. One  both  would  be
    able to obtain employment there upon return. The parents, in particular
    the father, well-educated. Both parents have  close  relatives  in  the
    country, and it has not been shown by way of reliable evidence that  at
    least some form of support would not be available.

51. The parents are clearly extremely supportive and capable in respect  of
    the educational  and  overall  well-being  of  their  two  children.  I
    conclude that this would represent a significant mitigating  factor  in
    respect of the appeal caused by a departure from the United Kingdom.

52. This is not a case in which it has been shown that there  would  be  no
    realistic prospect of access to the  educational  system  in  Pakistan,
    whether that was on a publicly or privately funded basis. I  appreciate
    that in respect of the former, the standard may well not be  equivalent
    to that United Kingdom. However, that cannot be a factor  of  any  real
    significance. In respect of the latter, there is no  reliable  evidence
    to  indicate  that  the  costs  would  be,  in  all  circumstances,  be
    prohibitive. In saying this, I bear in mind the finding that the father
    at least would be in a position to find reasonable employment. Further,
    there is a distinct possibility that at least some  form  of  financial
    support would be forthcoming from other relatives, although  I  do  not
    place a great emphasis on this particular possibility.

53. Part of the upheaval will relate to language. I  have  found  that  the
    second appellant speaks Urdu at a reasonable level. It is highly likely
    that with the support of his parents and through educational provision,
    his ability would increase.  The  reading  and  writing  aspects  would
    clearly require greater intervention, but this  does  not  represent  a
    factor materially undermining the cumulative effect of those to which I
    have already referred to in paragraphs 48-52, above.

54. In summary, I conclude that the second appellant's case falls far short
    of showing that it would be "unduly harsh" for him to go  to  Pakistan,
    contrary to the view of Ms Deacon at the end of her report. I  conclude
    that it would, on the particular facts, be reasonable  for  the  second
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom.

55. It follows that section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act is not  satisfied.  The
    first appellant cannot succeed on this basis.

56. As discussed previously, no alternative basis for the  success  of  the
    appellants' appeals has been put forward. For the sake of completeness,
    I conclude that the third appellant's best  interests  clearly  lie  in
    remaining with her parents and siblings wherever they may be. Absent  a
    conclusion that the second appellant cannot reasonably be  expected  to
    leave this country, the third appellant's best interests do not lie  in
    her remaining in the  United  Kingdom.  There  are  no  exceptional  or
    compelling circumstances in her case.

57. Nor are there any exceptional or compelling circumstances in the second
    appellant's case.

58. The first appellant cannot satisfy  any  of  the  relevant  Article  8-
    related Immigration Rules: on any legitimate  view  of  the  facts,  it
    cannot be said that there would be "very significant obstacles" to  her
    integration into Pakistani society. On the evidence before  me,  it  is
    also clear that there are no exceptional or compelling circumstances in
    her case such as to permit success outside the context of the Rules.

59. All three appeals must be dismissed.

Anonymity

60. In view of the fact that these appeals concern  to  minor  children,  I
    maintain the order made by the Upper Tribunal previously.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside.

I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeals of all three appellants.

Signed      [pic]            Date:  16 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/13120/2018
                                                               HU/13126/2018
                                                               HU/13130/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th August 2019                  |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |.........                            |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                mrs m a (A1)
                              master m a a (A2)
                                miss i a (A3)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Uma Price of Counsel, instructed by way of
Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellants are mother and son and daughter.  The second  appellant
    being born on 5th March 2012 and the third on 11th December 2015.

2.    The first appellant's husband came to the United Kingdom in  2007  and
    she joined him on a Tier 1 dependant visa.  In June 2016 her  husband's
    application was varied because he had completed  ten  years  residence.
    Her husband's application was refused in December 2017 and he was noted
    as being appeal rights exhausted in November 2018.

3.    The appellants made an application in March 2017,  which  was  refused
    on 3rd June 2018.  It was considered that none of the  appellants  fell
    within the Immigration Rules.  Paragraph  276ADE  was  considered.   No
    exceptional circumstances were found such as to invoke  the  protection
    of Article 8 of the ECHR.

4.    The appellants sought to appeal against that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson  for  hearing  on  18th
    April 2019.  In a decision of 2nd May 2019 the appeal was dismissed  in
    respect of all of the appellants.

5.    The appellants sought to appeal against that decision and leave to  do
    so to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Judge Storey on 3rd July  2019,
    on the basis that it was arguable that the judge failed to carry out  a
    balanced best interests of the child assessment  and  failed  to  apply
    correct case law principles and establish whether, pursuant to  Section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act it was reasonable to expect child A2,  who  had
    resided in the United Kingdom for over seven years ,to leave the United
    Kingdom, bearing in mind that strong or powerful  reasons  need  to  be
    shown for requiring such a child to leave the United Kingdom.

6.    A2 was not a qualified child at the time  of  the  decision,  but  had
    been in the United Kingdom for seven  years  as  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing. The judge properly recognised that A2 fell to be considered as
    a qualified child for the purposes of the assessment.

7.    In paragraph 3 of the determination the judge set out the following:-

         "However, the guidance in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2019] UKSC  53  must
         also be borne in mind and this provides that it  will  normally  be
         reasonable for the child to be where the parents are expected to be
         and:  'To  that  extent  the  record  of  the  parents  may  become
         indirectly material, if it leads to their ceasing to have  a  right
         to remain here, and having to leave.  It is only if, even  on  that
         hypothesis, it would not be reasonable for the child to leave  that
         the provision may give the parents a right  to  remain'  (paragraph
         18)."

8.    In paragraph 19 of KO the comments of Lewison LJ in EV  Philippines  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  were
    quoted, particularly as to paragraph 58 which provides:-

         "In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of
         the children must be made on the basis that the facts are  as  they
         are in the real world.  If one parent has no right to  remain,  but
         the other parent does, that is the  background  against  which  the
         assessment is conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain,
         then that  is  the  background  against  which  the  assessment  is
         conducted. Thus the ultimate question will be: is it reasonable  to
         expect the child to follow the parent with no right  to  remain  to
         the country of origin?"

9.    The relevant findings of the judge in relation to KO could be seen  in
    paragraph 24 of the determination in these terms:-

         "As provided in KO, I find that it is reasonable to  expect  A2  to
         leave the UK because he and all the other members of his family are
         nationals of Pakistan.  Although his parents'  immigration  history
         is not poor (they did not  go  to  ground  and  have  a  number  of
         previous successful applications for leave to remain  in  the  UK),
         they currently do not have leave to remain; and  normally  in  such
         cases, it would be reasonable to expect the child to  be  with  his
         parents (KO)."

10.   It is contended  by  Mrs  Price  that  such  an  assessment  fails  to
    acknowledge with sufficient clarity or give sufficient  weight  to  the
    protection which being a qualified child gives  to  A2.   Although  the
    case of KO overturns paragraph 40 of the decision in MA Pakistan [2016]
    EWCA Civ 705 by requiring the question of reasonableness to be assessed
    in the "real world", paragraph 49 of MA remains which provides:-

         "... the fact that the child has been in the  UK  for  seven  years
         would need to be given significant weight  in  the  proportionality
         exercise for two related reasons: first, because of  its  relevance
         to  determining  the  nature  and  strength  of  the  child's  best
         interests; and second, because it establishes as a  starting  point
         that leave should be granted unless there are powerful  reasons  to
         the contrary."

11.   In the present case the judge had  found  it  was  just  in  the  best
    interests of A2 to remain in the UK.  It is submitted that, given  such
    findings, it was  incumbent  upon  the  Immigration  Judge  to  clearly
    recognise that effect and to give cogent  reasons  why  A2  should  not
    benefit from the protection as provided.  Mrs Price submitted that this
    was not a case where the public interest was clearly met so far as  the
    removal  of  the  parents  were  concerned.   There  was   no   adverse
    immigration history.  They were  not  overstayers  nor  had  they  used
    deception to maintain their family in the United  Kingdom,  but  rather
    had made all due applications.

12.   She submits that it would render non-sensical the comments in  MA.  if
    interests of A2 could simply be swept aside because of a lack of status
    of parents in the United Kingdom.

13.   The Upper Tribunal in JG (s 117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK)  Turkey
    [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC)  expressly  stated  at  paragraph  41  of  that
    decision  that  paragraph  44  of  MA  survives  the  decision  in  KO.
    Paragraph 44 of MA provides:-

         "I do not find this a surprising conclusion.  It seems to  me  that
         there are powerful reasons why, having regard in particular to  the
         need to treat  the  best  interests  of  the  child  as  a  primary
         consideration, it may be thought that once they have been in the UK
         for seven years, or are otherwise citizens of the UK,  they  should
         be allowed to stay and have their position legitimised if it  would
         not be reasonable to expect them to leave, even though  the  effect
         is that their possibly undeserving families can remain with them. I
         do not accept that this amounts to  a  reintroduction  of  the  old
         DP5/96 policy.  As the Court of Appeal observed  in  NF  (Ghana)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 906, the
         starting point under that policy was that a child with seven years'
         residence could be refused leave  to  remain  only  in  exceptional
         circumstances.  The  current  provision  falls  short  of  such   a
         presumption, and  of  course  the  position  with  respect  to  the
         children of foreign criminals is even tougher."

14.   In the self-directions at paragraph  9  of  the  determination  it  is
    said:-

         "In assessing proportionality, it is necessary  to  establish  that
         there are compelling circumstances for the  grant  of  leave  under
         Article 8 ECHR (SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387).".

    It is contended that in the case of A2, as  a  qualifying  child,  that
    burden is somewhat shifted and for it to be demonstrated that there are
    strong or powerful reasons for requiring that child to leave the UK.

15.   Mrs Price submits that the mere fact of having no leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom is not a proper basis to exclude the parents in  the
    absence of any criminality or misdemeanour.  I am by no means persuaded
    that that is an accurate indication of the current  state  of  decision
    making.  It is to be noted that so far as the father  is  concerned  he
    had his appeals exhausted in November 2018, thus would seem  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom unlawfully.  In fairness to the  first  appellant
    however, the particular circumstances of the husband have not been  set
    out in any particular detail.

16.   Mr Kandola submits that all  the  necessary  ingredients  are  in  the
    determination and that there was no error of law in the  approach  that
    has been taken by the judge.

17.   It seems to me however that the analysis is unsafe.  There  is  little
    recognition by the judge, if any, as to the significance of having  the
    status of  qualified  person.  Secondly,  there  is  a  lack  of  clear
    reasoning as to why the protection afforded to A2 should not  apply  in
    the final analysis.  Although the  matter  may  be  a  fine  matter  of
    balance and proportionality, it seems to me to be an important one.  If
    the illegal status of the family members always trumps the benefits  of
    being  a  qualified  person,  then  that  status  would  seem  to  lack
    relevance, contrary to Statute and Judicial decisions.

18.   In terms of the husband he is not a party  to  these  proceedings.   I
    understand from Mr Kandola that he issued his application for leave  to
    remain at  the  same  time  as  the  appellants.   His  case  came  for
    consideration upon refusal before the First-tier Tribunal Judge on 11th
    June 2018.  A copy of the determination has been presented  to  explain
    why it was that his appeal came to be refused.

19.   Although Mrs Price contends that  the  circumstances  of  the  husband
    should be irrelevant for the purposes of this appeal, I do  not  agree.
    Clearly the context of family life as a whole needs to be considered.

20.   In all the circumstances and given the concern  that  I  have  that  a
    proper  assessment  was  not  carried  out  particularly  as   to   the
    reasonableness of A2 to leave the United Kingdom.

21.   The decision shall therefore  be  set  aside  to  be  remade  focusing
    particularly upon the  jurisprudence  surrounding  A2  and  the  proper
    considerations to be applied.

22.   It seems to me, as I have indicated, that it would distort the  proper
    context if the immigration history of the husband was to be ignored and
    leave is granted for the respondent  and/or  appellant  to  adduce  any
    further evidence in relation to him.

23.   It is clear that the details of the family situation as  a  whole  and
    that of A2 in particular have been set out  in  the  determination.   I
    anticipate, therefore, that there would be little new evidence,  but  I
    do not exclude its production upon proper notice to the parties.  If it
    is intended to give any further oral evidence then  that  should  be  a
    factor notified to listing as soon as possible.

24.   Given that the issues would seem to be narrow, the matter is  retained
    in the Upper Tribunal.  This matter is to be reheard   not  before  six
    weeks from today's date.

25.   I do not reserve this decision to myself in the circumstances.

26.   Thus for  clarification  the  appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    allowed to the extent that it falls for reconsideration  at  a  resumed
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      [pic]      Date 29 August 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
