
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13349/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 March 2019                     |On 02 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                  LORD UIST
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                    SSTZ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  L
    Murray promulgated on 26  September  2017.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by the Vice President of the  Upper  Tribunal  on  15  February
    2019.



Anonymity

 2. An anonymity direction  is  made  owing  to  the  sensitive  nature  of
    concerns raised by the appellant.

Background

 3. On 24 September 2010, the appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    Tier 4 dependant. That leave was extended until 20 November  2015.  The
    appellant made an in-time application for further leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds, which was refused on 12 May 2016. In  short,  the
    reasons for  refusal  were  that  the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE (1), her parents and siblings had been
    refused further leave to remain and she could not have had a  realistic
    expectation that she would be able to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    permanently.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 4. At the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  appellant  gave
    evidence, as did her father and two of  her  friends.  Her  appeal  was
    based on the private life she had developed in the United Kingdom since
    arriving here aged 13 and the difficulty she would have in adjusting to
    life in Pakistan after the comparative freedom of life here. The  judge
    found that this  did  not  amount  to  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration when considered with the privileged lifestyle the appellant
    would enjoy in Pakistan as a result of her father's wealth.  The  judge
    attached little weight  to  the  appellant's  private  life  which  was
    established during precarious leave, concluded that  the  family  could
    return  to  Pakistan  as  a  unit  and  there  were  no  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances.

The grounds of appeal

 5. The grounds of appeal  contended  that  the  judge  erred  in  reaching
    conclusions on whether there were  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  the
    appellant re-establishing herself in Pakistan,  in  that  her  findings
    were based on assumptions and a failure to consider all the evidence.

 6. The appellant sought judicial review of the Upper Tribunal's refusal to
    grant permission to appeal. In  her  grounds  the  appellant  expressed
    concern that her family were seeking a husband for her in Pakistan. She
    enclosed evidence of a document which she described as  a  profile  her
    parents had composed for a marriage website.  The  appellant  explained
    that she had not raised this issue before because her  solicitors  were
    instructed by her parents.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on 12 December 2018 by HHJ  Jarman  QC
    on the basis that there were arguably good  reasons  why  the  evidence
    relating to the appellant's concerns was  not  previously  adduced  and
    there was a compelling reason why the claim should proceed.

 8. On 24 January 2019  the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  refuse
    permission to appeal was quashed without a substantive hearing.

 9. On 25 February 2019 the Principal  Resident  Judge  directed  that  the
    respondent must file a Rule 24 response no later than 14 days prior  to
    the hearing and the appellant a skeleton argument, Rule  15(2A)  notice
    and trial bundles no later than 7 days prior to the hearing

10. The respondent failed to comply with  the  above-mentioned  directions.
    The  appellant  complied  with  directions  and  provided  a   skeleton
    argument, Rule 15(2A) notice and a bundle  which  was  received  on  19
    March 2019. In her  skeleton  argument  the  appellant  reiterated  the
    grounds which were before the Administrative Court.  In  addition,  she
    provided evidence that her parents and younger  siblings  were  granted
    further leave to remain in the United Kingdom until 24 April 2021.

The hearing

11. The appellant was unrepresented and told our  clerk  that  she  was  no
    longer represented by Orchid Solicitors. Mr Walker  had  not  seen  the
    material sent by the appellant to the Upper Tribunal.  We  informed  Mr
    Walker that the appellant's parents and younger  siblings  appeared  to
    have been granted further leave to remain, that there was a  new  issue
    she wanted to raise. The appellant confirmed that she continued to live
    with her parents at the address on the IAC case  file.  We  allowed  Mr
    Walker time to consider given the appellant's bundle as well as to take
    instructions as to  whether  the  respondent  intended  to  oppose  the
    appeal.

12. When the hearing resumed, Mr Walker informed us that the  Secretary  of
    State's position was that there was an error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision owing to subsequent events, those being the grant of leave  to
    the appellant's family and the circumstances set out in the appellant's
    skeleton argument. Mr Walker clarified  that  the  respondent  was  not
    resisting the appeal. He invited the panel to set aside the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal and to allow the appeal, which would enable the
    appellant to be granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom  in  line
    with her family.

13. We announced that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  a
    material error of law, that the decision  was  set  aside  and  remade,
    allowing the appeal.

Decision on error of law

14. In view of Mr Walker's concessions, we can  be  brief.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal made  an  unwitting  error  of  law  in  concluding  that  the
    appellant's parents and siblings had no basis of  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom [15] and at [23] that she would be returning to  Pakistan  with
    her family.  Neither  of  those  propositions  are  correct  given  the
    respondent's  decision  to  grant  further  leave  to  remain  to   the
    appellant's family until April 2021.



Remaking

15. As indicated above, Mr Walker invited us to allow the appeal.

16. In refusing the appellant's human rights claim  on  12  May  2016,  the
    Secretary of State commented that none of her family members had  leave
    to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  because  her  father  and  all  his
    dependants were refused leave to remain on 17  February  2016.  At  the
    date of decision the appellant was aged 18 and had been dependent  upon
    her father's claim since she arrived in the United Kingdom in 2010. The
    appellant continues to  reside  with  her  parents  and  siblings.  The
    appellant's siblings, a brother aged 18 and  a  sister  aged  14,  were
    granted further leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  12  November
    2018. There is no good  reason  why  the  appellant  should  be  facing
    removal to Pakistan as a lone female when her parents and siblings  are
    permitted to remain in the United Kingdom.

17. We have been guided by the decision of  PD  and  Others  (Article  8  -
    conjoined family  claims)  Sri  Lanka  [2016]  UKUT  00108  (IAC),  the
    headnote of which states as follows;

         "In considering the conjoined Article 8  ECHR  claims  of  multiple
         family members decision-makers should first apply  the  Immigration
         Rules to  each  individual  applicant  and,  if  appropriate,  then
         consider Article 8 outside the Rules. This exercise will  typically
         entail the consideration and determination of all  claims  jointly,
         so as to ensure that all  material  facts  and  considerations  are
         taken into account in each case. "

18. The Secretary of State's decision refusing the appellant further  leave
    to  remain  does  not  take  into  consideration  the  current   family
    circumstances.  Furthermore, the appellant has  since  raised  concerns
    that she is to be married off if  removed  to  Pakistan.  These  issues
    amount to exceptional circumstances which were not  considered  by  the
    respondent.

19. In conclusion, the appellant has established that she enjoys a  private
    and family life in the United Kingdom and that the decision  to  remove
    her will amount to a  substantial  interference  with  that  life.  The
    Secretary of State's failure to grant the appellant leave to remain  in
    line with her family in circumstances where her adult brother has  been
    granted leave to remain, and to remove  her  from  the  United  Kingdom
    amounts to a disproportionate outcome.

Conclusions


The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside to be re-made.

A decision is substituted allowing the appeal, on human rights  grounds,  on
the basis that the Secretary of State's decision is disproportionate.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 28 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As we have allowed the appeal  and  because  a  fee  has  been  paid  or  is
payable, we have considered making a fee award and have decided to  make  no
fee award for the following reason. The appeal has been allowed owing  to  a
change of circumstances since the original decision was made.


Signed                                  Date: 28 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

