

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number:  HU/13590/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 January 2018                         |  On 14 March 2018             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                           OYETUTU SARAH OGUNLEYE
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Waithe
For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmad


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria  born  in  1980.   She  appeals
    against a decision of the respondent made on 3 December 2015 to  refuse
    her further leave to remain following an application made on 2 December
    2015.


    Background

 2. The immigration history is that she claimed to have first  entered  the
    UK as a visitor in 2002 and to have overstayed.


 3. Subsequent applications for leave outwith the Immigration Rules made on
    23 March and 18 August 2008 were respectively rejected on 11 April  and
    27 August 2008.
 4. A grant for leave outside the Rules was made on 29 September  2008  and
    was  granted  until  25  September  2010.   Two  further   periods   of
    discretionary leave outside the Rules were  granted,  the  most  recent
    period extending until 29 November 2016.


 5. The refusal letter noted that the appellant had initially been  granted
    leave to remain in September 2008 on the ground  that  her  child  B  O
    (known as V) who was  born  on  16  April  2006  suffered  from  severe
    disability.  V died on  22  March  2014.   The  appellant's  leave  was
    curtailed on 7 February 2016.


 6. The respondent did not find that the appellant  had  provided  evidence
    which would meet the requirements of Appendix FM with respect to family
    life.  Also, in respect of private life rights in  terms  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1) (vi).


 7. She appealed.


    First tier hearing


 8. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 29  March  2017,  Judge  of  the
    First-Tier Buckwell dismissed the appeal.


 9. The judge's findings are at paragraph 27ff.  Analysing the  length  and
    status of the appellant's stay in the UK, he  found  that  she  had  no
    leave between 2002 and  September  2008.   Further,  that  having  been
    granted discretionary leave on the basis that she was looking  after  V
    and because of his medical condition, the purpose for which such  leave
    was granted ended on 22 March 2014 when V died.


10. Following the approach set  out  in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL27  the  judge
    accepted that there was private and family life.  It was noted that her
    son B, aged 17 years is in the UK on a student visa.


11. Having found that removal would interfere with the right to respect for
    private and family life the judge  advanced  to  the  consideration  of
    proportionality.


12. In that regard, he found that as a result of V's  death  the  appellant
    had not accrued a six year period of leave such as to  be  entitled  to
    ILR. Turning to consider section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum  Act  2002  he  gave  little  weight  to  any  private  life
    established between 2003 and 2008 when she was unlawfully  in  the  UK.
    Also, to  the  period  after  2008  when  the  immigration  status  was
    precarious, namely, the periods for which she was granted discretionary
    leave because she had no entitlement to expect any further extension of
    leave.


13. Turning next to section 55 he noted that  the  appellant's  son  is  17
    years old and studying here.  He is 'very  nearly  an  adult'  and  has
    student accommodation independent from his  mother.   The  judge  found
    that his best interests were to stay on his course of studies until  he
    finished them and within his visa term.


14.  The  judge  concluded  by  expressing  sympathy  for  the  'very   sad
    circumstances'  involved  but,  making  particular  reference  to   the
    original basis for granting discretionary leave  no  longer  subsisting
    due to the death of V,  found that the respondent's decision to  remove
    the appellant was not disproportionate.


    Error of law hearing


15. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  on  29
    November 2017.


16. The crux of the grounds, repeated before me,  was  that  the  judge  in
    looking  at  proportionality  gave  inadequate  consideration  to   the
    appellant's history, in  particular  fleeing  an  abusive  marriage  in
    Nigeria, and her claim that she would have no home or family to  return
    to as they disapproved of her having a child, V, by another man.


17. Further, inadequate weight had been given to the  emotional  impact  of
    requiring her to leave, particularly as she  visits  V's  grave  often.
    Also, she is afraid of leaving her 17 year old son here.


18. In addition, inadequate consideration had been given to the appellant's
    private life in the UK  including  her  work  and  involvement  in  the
    church.


19. The judge had not referred to statements from the  appellant,  her  son
    and others in support, nor to paragraph 276ADE.


20. Ms Ahmad's position was that while the decision was succinct the  judge
    had dealt with the material aspects adequately and reached a conclusion
    on proportionality which was open to him.


    Consideration


21. In considering this matter I find difficulties with the  decision.   As
    the judge correctly noted this is an appeal on  human  rights  grounds.
    As indicated the judge  found  that  family  life  existed.   Such  was
    clearly correct.  The appellant's surviving  child  is  still  a  minor
    albeit approaching adulthood.  He is also  in  the  UK  studying.   The
    judge correctly considered that her removal would engage Article 8.  In
    my view the judge's assessment under  proportionality  of  the  child's
    best interests, namely that he should stay on his course of studies and
    remain here for that purpose until these conclude within his visa  term
    was one that was open to him.  It was noted that he  lives  in  student
    accommodation independent from his mother.


22.  The  problem,  in  my  view,  is  the  judge's  consideration  of  the
    appellant's private life.


23. It appears that he accepted that  she  has  a  private  life  and  that
    removal would be an interference with the  right  to  respect  for  her
    private life and to have consequences of such gravity as potentially to
    engage  Article  8.   However,  the  decision  in  the  proportionality
    assessment, in my view, lacks analysis.  In essence, in the  assessment
    it is restricted to findings that although granted discretionary  leave
    from 2008 until 2016 when it was curtailed  because  V  died  in  March
    2014, such did not entitle her under the relevant Home Office  guidance
    to indefinite leave to remain, that whilst 'highly sympathetic' to  the
    sad circumstances with V's death the original basis for granting  leave
    no longer subsisted.  The judge also noted that under section  117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 little  weight  should
    be given to private life accrued whilst the appellant  was  in  the  UK
    unlawfully as she was between 2003 and 2008  and  when  her  leave  was
    precarious, as it was thereafter.


24. The problem is that the judge has failed to give any  consideration  to
    the bundle of eighty three pages lodged for the hearing.  Such included
    statements by the appellant and her elder son.  In her statement, inter
    alia she gave an account of  why  she  left  Nigeria  in  2002  due  to
    domestic abuse by her in-laws, how having become  pregnant  by  another
    man and giving birth to V she was deserted by  him,  how  having  given
    birth to another man's child she would be ostracised by her in-laws and
    that she would have no family, and no home to return to  and  would  be
    destitute.


25. In the statement from her son and from others there is evidence of  the
    appellant's involvement in the community, in the church  and  that  she
    has worked and paid income tax.


26. None of this material which goes to consideration of private  life  was
    considered by the judge.  Nor did he give  consideration  to  paragraph
    276ADE.


27. In her statement the appellant emphasises her desire  to  be  near  V's
    grave which she states she attends every weekend and  cleans  and  lays
    wreaths on it.  If removed she fears his grave will suffer neglect.  It
    is further indicated that due to V's death she has a phobia of  leaving
    her older son here in the UK.


28. As the judge noted the appellant's status, initially unlawful has since
    2008 been precarious because her leave was temporary.


29. In Kaur (children's best interests/public  interest  interface)  [2017]
    UKUT14 it was held that the 'little weight' provisions in  Part  5A  of
    the 2002 Act do not contain an absolute, rigid measurement or  concept;
    'little weight' involves a  spectrum  which,  within  itself  contained
    boundaries, will result in the measurement of  the  quantum  of  weight
    considered appropriate in the fact sensitive context of every case.



30. In this case I consider that grief and  bereavement,  which  of  course
    have no time limits,  are  a  part  of  the  appellant's  private  life
    associated with the aspect of moral integrity. As the former  President
    stated in Abbasi and another (visits-bereavement-Article 8) [2015] UKUT
    463  '...matters relating to death,  burial,  mourning  and  associated
    rites have been held to fall within the ambit of Article 8'  (at  [6]).
    Also, at [15] 'The visitation and maintenance of the graves  of  family
    members and the act of grieving with  others,  whether  ritualistic  or
    otherwise, is an intrinsic feature of civilised society throughout  the
    world.'


31. I conclude that in failing to give consideration to  material  evidence
    that  was  before  him  the  judge   erred   in   his   assessment   of
    proportionality such that the decision must be set aside.


32. I was asked by Mr Waithe were I minded to set  aside  the  decision  to
    remake it by allowing it.  I do not consider that to be the appropriate
    course.  Findings need to  be  made  on  the  various  strands  of  the
    appellant's human rights claim.


    Notice of Decision


33. The decision of the First tier Tribunal is set aside.   The  nature  of
    the case is such that it is appropriate in terms of section 12(2)(b)(i)
    of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007 Act and of  Practice
    Statement 7.2 to remit the case  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  for  an
    entirely fresh hearing before a judge other than  Judge  Buckwell.   No
    findings stand.


34. No anonymity order made.











Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

