

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13545/2015
     HU/14262/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12th December 2017                         |On 14th December 2017        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                BATOOL NAEEM

                                     And

                                BEENISH NAEEM
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Thathall of UK Immigration Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The two appellants are the daughters of Naseem Akhtar, who arrived  in
      the UK in 2010 as the spouse of  a  British  Citizen.  Both  daughters
      sought entry clearance as the minor dependants of the  sponsor,  their
      applications being refused on 2nd November 2015.  The  ECM  maintained
      the decision.


   2. Their appeals were heard  on  5th  September  2017  before  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge S C Clarke and dismissed by her for the reasons set out
      in the determination promulgated on 15 September 2017.  Permission  to
      appeal was granted on the grounds it was arguable:

   a) The First-tier Tribunal  judge  had  incorrectly  cited  the  relevant
      immigration rules;
   b) That describing the sponsor as "an open witness' was  a  finding  that
      her evidence was credible and thus the findings that the  sponsor  did
      not have sole responsibility and there were no serious and  compelling
      circumstances were not reliable;
   c) The judge failed  to  have  regard  to  all  available  evidence  when
      determining adequacy of maintenance;
   d) The judge failed to give adequate reasons for the finding of  lack  of
      sole responsibility/proportionality of the decision.


   3. Mr Thathall submitted that the only interpretation of the use  of  the
      phrase 'open witness' was that the sponsor's evidence was credible; it
      followed that the First-tier Tribunal judge's findings adverse to  the
      appellants were unsustainable and it seemed the judge was applying too
      high a standard of proof in requiring "persuasive" evidence. Mr  Bates
      submitted that, as a specialist tribunal and judge, if the  judge  had
      meant "credible" she would have said so. Her use of  the  word  'open'
      was a description of the sponsor's manner of giving  evidence  and  no
      more. This submission was supported, he submitted,  in  that  findings
      made by the judge were not made in isolation but in the context of the
      whole of the evidence that was before her. As an example, he  referred
      to the finding by the First-tier Tribunal judge that the  sponsor  was
      the mother of the two appellants, such a  finding  being  made  having
      considered not  only  the  sponsor's  evidence  but  the  evidence  of
      financial support, birth certificates, passports  and  a  Guardianship
      Order from the Pakistan family court.


   4. The judge did not find the sponsor credible; nor did she find her  not
      credible. The judge acknowledged that the sponsor gave her evidence in
      an open way and that she was genuine in  her  wish  to  have  her  two
      daughters join her. As submitted by Mr Bates, that is not enough;  the
      appellants must meet the Immigration Rules or, if they do not meet the
      requirements of the Rules,  there  must  be  some  other  issue  which
      results in a finding that the decision to refuse  entry  clearance  is
      disproportionate. The judge considered the evidence before him in  the
      round, including the sponsor's evidence in reaching her decision.

   5. The First-tier Tribunal judge sets out the evidence  before  her.  She
      refers to evidence of financial support between 2014 and 2017,  to  an
      earlier  refused  application  for  entry  clearance  (which  was  not
      appealed), to the evidence (in the sponsor's witness  statement)  that
      her mother i.e. the appellants' maternal grandmother, had removed  the
      children from school without consulting her, that the sponsor had gone
      to Pakistan after the children had been removed from school but  there
      was no evidence of what she had done about the removal of the children
      from school, the lack of medical or  other  evidence  to  support  the
      submission that the sponsor's mother is mentally unwell, that  at  the
      date of decision the appellants did not meet  the  financial  criteria
      and the lack of evidence to support the contention that the appellants
      could not continue to live with their maternal grandmother.

   6. Although Mr Thathall submitted that the use of the  word  'persuasive'
      indicated the judge had applied a higher standard of  proof  than  the
      civil standard, this is not  so.  The  evidence  relied  upon  has  to
      persuade the judge that the appellants meet the Rules;  a  failure  to
      produce such evidence can only result in a finding that  the  relevant
      requirements of the Rules is not met.

   7. Considerable submissions were made before me about the removal of  the
      children from school. The judge found 'scant evidence' about who chose
      the school,  why  they  left  the  school  or  that  the  sponsor  was
      responsible for decisions relating to the appellants' education  prior
      to them attending the school. In her witness  statement  the  decision
      was taken by the maternal grandmother.  In  submission  before  me  Mr
      Thathall said that the sponsor was unhappy with the decision to remove
      them from the school but had to reluctantly accept the decision. Those
      are not the actions of a person with sole responsibility. There was no
      significant evidence before the judge that in  relation  to  schooling
      she retained sole responsibility - the evidence points the other  way.
      This does not in any way diminish the finding of the  judge  that  the
      sponsor has a genuine desire to bring her children to  the  UK  to  be
      with her. But they do not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
      Rules.

   8. Mr  Thathall  submitted  that  the  reference  by  the  judge  to  the
      appellants not meeting the requirements of "paragraphs  297(i)(e)  and
      (f)" in paragraph 30 was an error of law in that the judge had  elided
      the two subsections rather  than  considering  them  as  two  separate
      requirements. That paragraph of the decision is a summing  up  of  the
      earlier findings and the conclusion. It is plain when the decision  is
      read as a whole that the judge has considered whether  the  appellants
      met the requirements of the Rules in connection  with  their  mother's
      claimed sole responsibility and, given that they  did  not  meet  that
      requirement, the judge considered whether there were other  compelling
      reasons for their entry to the UK.

   9. The Judge  considered  Article  8.  Mr  Thathall  submitted  that  the
      consideration was scant and inadequate. Whilst it is correct that  the
      judge's consideration and conclusion covers only two paragraphs, there
      was no  other  evidence  before  the  judge  that  did  not  fall  for
      consideration within the parameters of the Immigration Rules.  In  his
      submissions, Mr Thathall did not refer to any evidence  that  had  not
      already been considered. The judge undertook a brief, but  considered,
      Razgar analysis. She found that there  was  family  life  between  the
      appellants and the sponsor, that the decision was an interference with
      their ability to conduct that family life, that the  decision  was  in
      accordance with the law and necessary in  the  interest  of  effective
      immigration control. She then applied her findings on the evidence and
      concluded that the decision was proportionate to  the  legitimate  aim
      namely effective immigration control. As Mr Bates submitted, what else
      could the judge have considered which she had not  already  considered
      and reached findings upon. Those findings could not have  led  to  any
      other decision other than that the decision was proportionate and  not
      a breach of the right to respect for  the  Article  8  rights  of  the
      appellants.


  10. There is no error of law in the decision by the First-tier Tribunal. I
      do not set aside the decision; the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
      stands.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    The appeal is  dismissed;  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.

[pic]

    Date 12th December 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
