
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13583/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 November 2020                   |On 5 November 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                   [R A F]

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     The Legal Resource Partnership

For the respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





                            DECISION AND REASONS





         Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal to the appellant by Upper Tribunal Judge  Gill  on  20  July
         2020  against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
         Buckwell, promulgated on 5 February 2020  following  a  hearing  at
         Hendon Magistrates' Court on 6 January 2020.

      2. The appellant is a Ghanaian national born on 21  October  1991.  He
         came to the UK with limited leave under Tier 5 from 23 July 2014 to
         16 August 2014 as the personal assistant to  a  musician.  He  then
         overstayed.  On 30 October 2018, he made an application  for  leave
         to remain on family/private life grounds on the basis that  he  was
         the father of M, a British child born in  July  2017.  He  explains
         that he overstayed because he had been sacked by his  employer  and
         he was confused and felt stranded. His relationship with the mother
         of his child (whom he met in 2015) had already broken down by  that
         stage.

      3. The application was refused on 2 August 2019.  The  respondent  was
         not satisfied that the appellant had sole  responsibility  for  his
         son or that the child lived with him.  The  respondent  noted  that
         although a letter had been provided,  allegedly  from  the  child's
         mother, there was no sworn or notarised statement from her  and  no
         independent evidence of contact. Further, the respondent found that
         the appellant failed to meet the eligibility  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules because he had been here without leave  for  over
         four years and paragraph 39E did not apply. He could not  meet  the
         long residence requirements under paragraph 276ADE and it  had  not
         been shown that there would be very significant  obstacles  to  his
         reintegration on return to Ghana. The best interests of  the  child
         were considered but it was concluded that there were no exceptional
         circumstances which would warrant a grant of  discretionary  leave.



      4. The appeal came before Judge Buckwell. He heard oral evidence  from
         the appellant and his sister. The evidence was that  the  appellant
         used to have an amicable relationship with his former  partner  but
         that changed when he made his application  for  leave  in  November
         2018 and wanted to provide further documents from her to  the  Home
         Office. He had recently made an application for contact through the
         Family Court. He had not seen his son for some three months at  the
         date of the hearing. Prior to that he used to see him  about  three
         times a month. His parents and two siblings lived in Ghana. He  had
         a sister in the UK with whom  he  lived.  She  had  a  husband  and
         children. They all had a relationship with  the  appellant's  child
         but had not seen him for several months.

      5. The judge accepted that that it would not be reasonable for the two
         year old child, a British citizen and minor, to leave  the  country
         however he found that the relationship between  the  appellant  and
         his son was very fragile and that they had not been in contact  for
         some time. He noted that despite the application  lodged  with  the
         Family Court,  the  child's  mother  did  not  want  to  allow  the
         appellant access and there was no court order at the  date  of  the
         hearing which gave him any right to contact. He  found  that  there
         was no subsisting parental relationship and that  the  requirements
         of EX.1 did not apply. He considered article 8 but found that there
         was no family life between the appellant and his son  and  that  no
         evidence had been  put  forward  as  to  family  life  between  the
         appellant and anyone else. He considered that the  appellant  would
         not face very significant obstacles on return  to  Ghana  where  he
         still had close  family.  He  had  regard  to  the  fact  that  the
         appellant had spent the majority of his time in the UK  unlawfully,
         had shown an utter disregard for  the  Immigration  Rules  and  had
         commenced his relationship during a time when he had no basis to be
         here. He considered that the  appellant's  child's  best  interests
         were to remain with his mother in the UK. Accordingly, he dismissed
         the appeal.

      6. The appellant was refused permission to appeal on 15  May  2020  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro but  was  granted  permission  on
         renewal to the Upper Tribunal on limited grounds. I shall deal with
         these below.

         Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

      7. The matter would ordinarily have then been listed for a hearing but
         due to the Covid-19 pandemic and need to take  precautions  against
         its spread, this did not occur and instead directions were included
         in the grant of permission dated 20 July 2020 but which was sent to
         the parties on 14 August 2020.  They  were  asked  to  present  any
         objections to the matter being dealt with on the papers and to make
         any further submissions on the error of law  issue  within  certain
         time limits.

      8. The Tribunal has received written submissions from  the  respondent
         dated 1 September 2020 which  opposed  the  appeal  and  urged  the
         Tribunal  to  uphold  the   judge's   decision.   The   appellant's
         representatives by way of correspondence dated 28  August  continue
         to rely on the grounds for permission; specifically, to those which
         dealt with the best interests of the child.  Neither party objected
         to the proposed course of determining the appeal. Having had regard
         to the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (the  UT
         Rules), the judgment of Osborn v The Parole Board [2013]  UKSC  61,
         the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 2020: Arrangements  during  the
         Covid-19 pandemic (PGN),  the  Senior  President's  Pilot  Practice
         Direction (PPD) and the overriding objective which  is  defined  in
         rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I  am
         satisfied that is  the  appropriate  way  of  disposing  with  this
         matter.  The parties have been able to  participate  fully  in  the
         proceedings and further delay has been avoided. I am satisfied that
         I am able to fairly and justly deal with this matter in the  manner
         proposed and now proceed to do so.

         Discussion and conclusions

      9. I have considered all the evidence, the determination, the  grounds
         for permission, the grant of permission and the submissions made.

     10. The appellant sought permission to appeal on  several  grounds  but
         the grant of permission was limited in the following terms: "It  is
         arguable that Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Buckwell  may  have
         erred in law in reaching his finding that  the  appellant  did  not
         enjoy a parental relationship with his son for reasons advanced  at
         paragraphs 3 and 4 of the grounds. In addition, the judge  arguably
         failed to  take  into  account  the  decisions  of  SR  (subsisting
         parental relationship s.117B(6)) Pakistan  [2018]  UKUT  00334  and
         SSHD v AB (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 661.  to paragraphs 12  and  13
         of the grounds which related to the  reasonableness  of  the  child
         leaving the UK. This may arguably be material  either  because  (1)
         paragraph 83 of the judge's decision may amount to a finding by him
         that it would not be reasonable for the appellant's  son  to  leave
         the UK; or (2)in the alternative, the judge arguably failed to take
         into account the guidance in SR (Pakistan) on the issue. Paragraphs
         12 and 13 of the grounds, which relate to the reasonableness of the
         appellant's son leaving the UK, may therefore be argued".

     11. The arguments on which permission was granted were that  the  judge
         had erred in finding there was no parental relationship between the
         appellant and his son (at 3 and 4 of the grounds) and that  he  had
         not considered the impact of the appellant's departure on the child
         (at 12 and 13 of the grounds). It is argued that the appellant  had
         provided  a  letter  of  support  from  his  former   partner   and
         photographs of his child. It is submitted that it was only when the
         appellant requested documents in support of his  application,  that
         his former partner withdrew her support and that the judge did  not
         give weight to this fact. It was argued that the  judge  failed  to
         consider that the appellant's removal would mean leaving behind his
         son which would involve significant hardship  and  that  there  had
         been no consideration of the fact that the child  had  never  lived
         abroad and had no experience of the  outside  world.   Included  in
         these arguments was the submission that the best interests  of  the
         child were not given primary consideration.

     12. The judge was required to consider the circumstances as they  stood
         at the date of the hearing. There can be no dispute about that.  In
         reaching his conclusions, the judge properly directed  himself  (at
         79-84) and had regard to all the evidence before him (at 24-25  and
         82). He also accepted that in principle it would be  in  a  child's
         best interests to have contact with both parents (at 28).  He  took
         account of the appellant's oral and written evidence (at 35-39) and
         noted that the situation had changed  between  the  appellant,  his
         former partner and thus his son when he made  his  application  for
         leave to remain and that he had not seen the child for some  months
         prior to the hearing. The appellant's sister's evidence was that it
         was difficult for them to  bond  with  the  child  because  of  the
         child's mother's conduct and that lack of contact could  occur  for
         up to three months. She confirmed that  prior  to  the  appellant's
         last contact, he had seen  the  child  some  two  to  three  months
         earlier.

     13. In assessing the evidence, the judge found  that  the  relationship
         between the appellant and the child was very fragile  (at  85).  He
         had regard to the reality of the situation, noting  that  no  court
         order had yet been obtained for contact, that  the  child's  mother
         did not provide access and that there was, therefore, no subsisting
         parental relationship.  Although it is argued that  the  judge  did
         not have regard to the appellant's evidence that his former partner
         only became difficult and ceased to grant access when the appellant
         sought documentation to  support  his  application  for  leave,  no
         explanation is provided as to why that would be so when  the  claim
         is that she had previously supported it. Crucially, the grounds  do
         not explain how consideration of this  fact  would  have  made  any
         difference to the outcome of the appeal. The fact remains that  the
         appellant did not  have  contact  with  his  child  and  that  even
         previously,  according  to  his  sister's  evidence,  contact   was
         intermittent, sometimes with three months of no  access.  Based  on
         the situation at the date of the hearing, it was open to the  judge
         to conclude that  there  was  no  current  subsisting  relationship
         between father and son (at 85 and 86). In assessing article 8,  the
         judge had full regard to s.55 (at 92) and properly found  that  the
         child's best interests were to remain with his mother in the UK. He
         took note of the absence of any current court order and the lack of
         any evidence that suggested any likelihood that there  would  be  a
         favourable one in place in the near future.  He found that it would
         not be reasonable for the child to leave the UK (at 82). These  are
         all conclusions based on the evidence and which were  open  to  the
         judge to reach.

     14. There was no need for the judge to  consider  that  the  child  had
         never been abroad and had no experience of living  outside  the  UK
         because the judge found that it would be unreasonable to expect the
         child to leave his home here with his mother.  There is no error in
         that. On the issue of the impact of the  appellant's  departure  on
         the child, there was not a shred of oral or documentary evidence to
         support  the  contention  that  the   removal   would   cause   him
         "significant  hardship"  as  the  grounds  claim.  At   best,   the
         appellant's contact with his child has been intermittent.  The  boy
         is very young and his home is with his mother and  her  family.  In
         the absence of any evidence that he would be adversely affected  by
         the appellant's removal, it is difficult  to  see  what  the  judge
         could have taken into account had he considered the issue. All that
         he could have said was that the evidence was lacking on this point.



     15. The grant of permission refers to case law  and  it  is  maintained
         that the judge may not have taken the principles contained  therein
         into account. Neither  SR  (Pakistan)  nor  AB  and  AO  (Jamaica),
         however, were relied on by the appellant's Counsel. SR was a father
         who entered the UK as  a  student  and  subsequently  married.  His
         marriage later broke down but had resulted in the birth of a  child
         of around the same age as the child in the present  case  when  the
         matter was considered by the court. The difference is that he had a
         court order which gave him direct contact  for  three  hours  on  a
         fortnightly basis. The court found that as a result of that  direct
         contact he had been providing parental case to the child and had  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  her.  AB  was  a
         father to an older child whom he saw three times  a  week.  It  was
         accepted that he had  a  subsisting  parental  relationship  as  he
         provided care and helped  with  homework.  AO  was  permitted  only
         indirect contact with his son. In his case the court  rejected  the
         contention  that  he  had  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
         relationship with his child.

     16. The principles to be derived from these judgments  are  essentially
         that  a  parent  can  have  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
         relationship even where he/she has no active role  in  the  child's
         upbringing, that specific factors such as the child's age  and  the
         role played by the parent must be considered but that there had  to
         be an element of dependency (RK [2016] UKUT 00031 (IAC)  approved).
         What also emerges from these cases is  that  some  form  of  direct
         contact is required. In the present case, as at  the  date  of  the
         hearing, there was no direct contact, there had not been  any  such
         contact for the recent past and the appellant played no role in his
         child's life. On that basis, these  judgments  do  not  assist  the
         appellant  and  the  judge  did  not  err  in  his   findings   and
         conclusions. If, in the future, the appellant's situation  changes,
         it will be open to him to make a fresh application on the basis  of
         any new circumstances and evidence.

         Application to adduce fresh evidence

     17. On 18 June 2020 and  again  on  17  August  2020,  the  appellant's
         representatives purport to  make  a  fresh  application  to  adduce
         further evidence although there is no reference to Rule 15 (2A)  in
         either item of correspondence. The correspondence consists  of  two
         emails  and  two  recent  documents  from  the  Family   Court   at
         Southampton. The first email attaches a court order made on 18 June
         2020 allowing the appellant indirect access by video  platform  for
         no more than 30 minutes twice a week. The second is an order  dated
         21 July 2020 which gives permission to the  appellant  to  disclose
         the previous order to the Upper Tribunal.

     18. I have regard to Rule 15(2A) of the Upper Tribunal Procedure  Rules
         2018. That provides the following:

             (2A) In an asylum case or an immigration case-

             (a)  if a party wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider evidence
             that was not before the First-tier Tribunal, that  party  must
             send or deliver a notice to the Upper Tribunal and  any  other
             party-

                  (i)  indicating the nature of the evidence; and

                  (ii) explaining why it was not submitted to the First-tier
                  Tribunal; and

             (b)  when considering whether to admit evidence that  was  not
             before the First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal  must  have
             regard  to  whether  there  has  been  unreasonable  delay  in
             producing that evidence (added emphasis).

     19. No such notice has been served. Whilst it  may  be  seen  that  the
         documents were not in existence at the date  of  the  hearing,  the
         emails which were submitted by the representatives are silent as to
         the requirements of Rule 15(2A) and  do  not  confirm  that  either
         document was served on the  respondent.  Indeed,  all  they  do  is
         attach documents although one seeks an update.

     20. The Senior President's Practice Directions at 4.1 say this:

             "UT rule  15(2A)  imposes  important  procedural  requirements
             where the Upper Tribunal is asked to  consider  evidence  that
             was not before the First-tier Tribunal. UT rule 15(2A) must be
             complied with in every case  where  permission  to  appeal  is
             granted and a party wishes the Upper Tribunal to consider such
             evidence. Notice under rule 15(2A)(a), indicating  the  nature
             of the evidence and explaining why it was not submitted to the
             First-tier Tribunal, must be filed with the Upper Tribunal and
             served on the other  party  within  the  time  stated  in  any
             specific directions given by the Upper  Tribunal;  or,  if  no
             such direction has been given, as soon  as  practicable  after
             permission to appeal has been granted" (added emphasis).

         And at 4.2:

             "A party  who  wishes  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  consider  any
             evidence that was not  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  must
             indicate in the notice whether the evidence is  sought  to  be
             adduced: (a) in connection with the issue of whether the First-
             tier Tribunal made an error of law, requiring its decision  to
             be set aside; or (b) in connection with the re-making  of  the
             decision by the Upper Tribunal, in the event of the First-tier
             Tribunal being found to have made such an error".

     21. The rules and the Practice Directions have not  been  followed.  No
         proper application has been made as required  under  the  Procedure
         Rules and I have no information as to whether  the  documents  have
         been served on the respondent. This is fresh evidence which was not
         before the First-tier Tribunal Judge. I am  not  told  whether  the
         evidence is for the purpose of the error of law decision or whether
         it is to be taken into account at a later stage, if an error of law
         is found.  In  all  the  circumstances,  given  the  absence  of  a
         correctly made application, I am not willing to admit the documents
         at this stage for the purposes  of  the  consideration  of  whether
         there have been any errors of law. I note that  in  any  event  the
         grant of indirect access takes the appellant's case no further than
         AO (discussed above) and that the appellant does not need to be  in
         the UK to continue such contact. As stated, if in  the  future  his
         circumstances change and he obtained direct access, it will be open
         to him to seek leave on that basis.



Decision

     22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain errors  of
         law and it is upheld.

    Anonymity

     23. The First-tier Tribunal judge did not make an anonymity order but I
         do so  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008 to protect the  identity  of  the  appellant's
         child.

     24. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no  reports
         of these proceedings of  any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
         directly or indirectly identify the appellant or  his  child.  This
         direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  the  appellant  and  the
         respondent. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could  give
         rise to contempt of court proceedings.




         Signed


         R. Keki?
         Upper Tribunal Judge


         Date: 2 November 2020
