
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13522/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 August 2020                    |On 26 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                             Gyanu Maya Sherchan
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the respondent's decision  on
   24 July 2019 to refuse her indefinite leave to remain on the basis of  10
   years' lawful residence.  The appellant is a citizen of Nepal.

Background

2. The appellant came to the United Kingdom in June 2008.  She was 27  years
   old and had Tier 4 entry clearance as a student. The respondent  accepted
   that she had valid leave from 27 June 2008 to 5 April 2017, which is less
   than 10 years. On 5 April 2017, further leave was refused with an out  of
   country right of appeal.

3. The appellant has studied successfully in the United  Kingdom.   She  has
   completed a Master of Arts in Marketing and Innovation from Anglia Ruskin
   University.

4. The appellant's parents remain in Nepal.  One of her  brothers  lives  in
   japan and the other is here, with his family.  She has  lived  with  that
   brother, his wife and their young children since  coming  to  the  United
   Kingdom to study in 2008.  The appellant has never  made  any  claim  for
   international protection.  The  present  claim  sounds  in  human  rights
   alone.

5. The appellant has extensive body scarring, on her leg and back,  said  to
   have been caused by an attack on her by her paternal  uncle  in  December
   1995, when she was 14 years old.  The uncle was given to aggression  when
   drunk: he pushed her into a fire during dinner.  No medical evidence  was
   produced to assist the judge in assessing whether the burns  were  caused
   as claimed.  The appellant contended that she continued to fear her uncle
   in Nepal and that she was ashamed of her appearance, which would make  it
   difficult for her to reintegrate in Nepal if she were returned there.

6. The applicant made a judicial review application which does  not  attract
   a section 3C continuation of the existing leave. She  cannot,  therefore,
   meet the  long  residence  requirements  of  the  Rules.   Following  the
   judicial review claim, an in-country right of appeal was granted.

Respondent's decision

7. The respondent  rejected  the  applicant's  claim  for  leave  to  remain
   outside the Rules, because she considered  that  the  appellant  had  not
   shown exceptional or compelling circumstances for which leave  to  remain
   should be given outside the Rules and  that  her  relationship  with  her
   brother  and  his  family  could  be  continued  by   modern   means   of
   communication, from Nepal, after her return.

First-tier Tribunal decision

8. First-tier Judge Kudhail had before her a bundle of  documents  including
   some indistinct photographs of the scarring, and witness statements  from
   the appellant's brother  and  father.  The  respondent  did  not  arrange
   representation for the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

9. The First-tier Judge heard oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  her
   brother.  Her father, who remains in Nepal, gave evidence  by  a  witness
   statement.

10. The brother's witness statement says that  the  appellant  helps  a  lot
   with the care of his children and receives free accommodation in  return.
   That enables the brother and his wife to work outside the home:  he  says
   the children are 'totally dependent emotionally'  on  the  appellant  and
   that they are a family unit.

11. The appellant's uncle, a former Indian army soldier, was  said  to  have
   been jealous of her father, a successful businessman.  He was fired  from
   his army battalion for behavioural issues.  He came home  to  the  family
   and 'started ruling the house': they were all scared of him.

12. On 5 December 1995, when the  appellant  was  14  years  old,  during  a
   family meal the uncle pushed her  onto  the  fire.   She  had  to  go  to
   hospital because she was badly burned on the hip and  leg.   All  of  the
   children were sent to Kathmandu to study, away from the  uncle,  who  had
   now taken over their family home.   The appellant remained  in  Kathmandu
   for almost three years before coming to the United Kingdom to study,  and
   her brother says she has difficulty trusting family members now.

13. The appellant's father gave the same account, and said that  he  thought
   the appellant had made social friends, as well as family connections,  in
   the United Kingdom where she was safer and sounder.

14. In oral evidence, the brother said it would be  a  disaster,  given  the
   family history, if his sister went back to Nepal.  He wanted  her  to  be
   safe and happy: he thought of her more as one  of  his  children,  rather
   than a sister, and her care of the children of himself and his  wife  was
   essential to them.

15. The evidence of  the  appellant,  her  brother  and  her  father  stands
   unchallenged, since the respondent did not attend the First-tier Tribunal
   hearing, and must therefore be treated as credible.

Permission to appeal

16. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Judge Povey on the  basis
   of arguable irrationality and/or inadequacy of reasoning  in  the  First-
   tier Judge's decision.

Rule 24 Reply

17. There was no Rule 24 reply on behalf of the respondent.

Further submissions on behalf of the appellant

18. On 17 June 2020, triage directions  were  sent  to  both  parties.   The
   appellant's solicitors responded, stating that they considered  the  case
   to be so clear that no further oral  hearing  is  necessary,  and  making
   submissions for consideration in a paper remaking of the decision.

19. The submissions, which are concise, repeat the assertion that the First-
   tier Judge's decision lacks  reasoning  on  the  body  shame  and  social
   anxiety issues.

20. The respondent did not reply to that response and  I  assume  therefore,
   that she has nothing, or nothing further, to add.  I therefore proceed to
   consider this appeal on the documents before me.

21. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.



Upper Tribunal hearing

22. I consider this appeal without  a  hearing,  following  the  appellant's
   solicitors' indication that they have no objection to that approach.   It
   is right, I consider, that the First-tier Judge erred in the treatment of
   the brother's  evidence  about  the  cause  of  the  body  scars  in  the
   photographs.  There was no cross-examination and no reason to  disbelieve
   his evidence.

23. Her uncle did not follow her there, as the appellant  asserted  that  he
   would (see [22] in  the  First-tier  Judge's  decision,  where  her  oral
   evidence is set out).

24. The brother's evidence is accurately recorded at [24]-[26] of the First-
   tier Judge's decision.

Analysis

25. However, I remind myself that there  was  no  asylum  claim  before  the
   First-tier Judge and that the appellant apparently studied  in  Kathmandu
   for a number years before coming to the United Kingdom, without the uncle
   causing her further difficulty.  The incident  relied  upon  occurred  in
   December 1995, almost 25 years ago.  The appellant is an adult woman  now
   39 years old.  She did not leave Nepal until 2008,  13  years  after  the
   index event.  The First-tier Judge did not err in considering that  there
   was no real risk from the uncle now.

26. The First-tier Judge's consideration of  the  question  of  private  and
   family life is also properly reasoned and sound.

27.  The  conclusions  reached  by  the  judge  are  supported  by   proper,
   intelligible and adequate reasoning and I decline to reopen them.   These
   grounds of appeal and the later submissions, together with  the  evidence
   before the First-tier Judge, disclose no material error of law therein.

DECISION

28. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law
   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.



Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     25 August
2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



