

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeals: HU/13260/2016
                                                               HU/13273/2016
                                                               HU/13276/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|on 19 October 2018                   |on 5 November 2018                   |
|                                             |                            |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                  ALABI + 2
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr J Bryce, Advocate, instructed by Drummond Miller,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This decision is to be read with:

      i)  The  respondent's  decision  dated  11  May  2016,  refusing   the
         appellants' claims on human rights grounds.

     ii) The appellants' grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Buckwell, promulgated on 1 December 2017.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal dated 15 December 2017.

      v) The grant of permission by FtT Judge Pooler, dated 15 May 2018.

     vi) The skeleton argument prepared by Mr Bryce, dated 18 October 2018.

 2. The appellants are father, mother and son, all citizens of Nigeria.

 3. The argument presented by Mr Bryce was as follows:

      i) It was accepted there was no error of declining to assess the  best
         interests of the child separately from the position of the parents.

     ii) There was error in that the judge at [50] said that he took account
         of the mental health of  the  mother,  and  various  health  issues
         regarding the child, but failed entirely to say  what  he  made  of
         them.  The issue in  respect  of  both  parents  was  in  terms  of
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules  -  whether  there
         were very significant obstacles to  their  integration  into  their
         home country.  The  "section  55  duty"  in  effect  required  that
         question to be asked also about the child.   The  omission  of  any
         reasoning on the reports about the child's development was error on
         a matter central to the decision.

    iii) The decision should be set aside.

     iv) The decision fell to be remade in the context that  since  28  July
         2018 the child has been a qualifying child in terms  of  s.117B  of
         the 2002 Act.  A family with a qualifying child was to  be  granted
         leave in absence of strong reasons to  the  contrary.   There  were
         none.  The parents were here lawfully until 2 September 2015.  They
         had overstayed but never absconded.  Applications leading to  these
         proceedings were dated 30 September 2015.

      v) The decision should be remade in the appellants' favour.

 4. Mr Govan submitted thus:

      i) The grounds and submissions for the appellant showed  disagreement,
         not error of law.

     ii) The decision might have  been  more  clearly  structured,  but  the
         findings that the evidence showed no obstacles to integration  were
         sufficiently explained, and served also to cover all considerations
         relevant to the best interests  of  the  third  appellant,  and  to
         article 8.

    iii) The appellants had not referred to anything which might have led to
         a different outcome.

     iv) The decision should stand.

 5. Mr Bryce said in reply that the matter was well covered at paragraph  8
    of the grounds:

         "The judge failed to provide adequate reasons ... outside the rules
         (and possibly also in relation  to  rule  276ADE(1)(vi))  [re]  the
         impact on every member of the family of the removal  of  the  child
         with  his  parents  to  Nigeria  and  in  particular  whether   the
         combination of the second appellant's medical needs along with  the
         third  appellant's  developmental  needs   would   represent   very
         significant obstacles to integration or ... mean that removal would
         be disproportionate."

 6. Mr Bryce further submitted that the  onus  was  on  the  SSHD  to  show
    powerful  reasons  to  justify  removal.   However,  he   accepted   my
    observation that it remained for the appellants to provide the evidence
    on which reasoning was to proceed.

 7. I reserved my decision.

 8. The submissions  of  both  parties  were  succinct;  but  neither  drew
    attention to the underlying evidence which had been dealt  with  either
    inadequately (as the appellant said) or adequately (as  the  respondent
    said).

 9. The degree of particularity required in dealing  with  evidence  varies
    according to the circumstances of the case.  Judgements cannot  be  too
    sweeping; but they do not have to specify and analyse all the  evidence
    line by line.  (The appellants' first inventory of productions  ran  to
    103 pages.)

10. The judge said at [50] - [51] that he had considered the evidence about
    the third appellant, and that it showed no very  significant  obstacles
    to his integration into Nigeria, hence no article  8  case  within  the
    rules;  and  went  on  by  [57]  to  hold  that   no   disproportionate
    interference with article 8 rights was shown, and the  requirements  of
    section 55 had been complied with.

11. The evidence is at items 6 - 10 of the appellant's first  inventory  of
    productions in the FtT:

         'Item 6, dated 5 September 2017, is from a lead speech and language
         therapist,  Aberdeen  City.   The   third   appellant   has   "mild
         difficulties" and is not being provided with direct therapy.

         Item 7, dated 28 June 2017, is a Speech and Language Therapy report
         from NHS Grampian.  The appellant  in  various  respects  is  "just
         below expected levels for his age", and "on the whole, in  the  low
         normal range".

         Items 8 and 9 are earlier reports, in similar terms.

         Item  10  is  letter  fixing  3  appointments  in   2016,   of   no
         significance.'

12. The judge said he had taken the reports  into  account.   There  is  no
    reason to doubt him.  Nothing in the reports might conceivably have led
    to another  outcome.   Further  analysis  could  not  have  helped  the
    appellants.

13. Mr Bryce referred in his skeleton argument to the fact that a  decision
    of the Supreme court was pending.  That decision is available today, KO
    (Nigeria) & others, [2018] UKSC 53.  I see nothing in it which, applied
    to this case, might lead to the decision of the FtT being set aside for
    error on a point of law or which might contribute to another result.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]
            24 October 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
