
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13377/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th February 2018                          |On 1 March 2018               |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                muhammad [s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan of Counsel instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Moxon made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 18th May 2017.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  1st  March  1988.   He
    applied for leave to remain in the UK on 15th March 2016 on  the  basis
    of his marriage.  His wife and child,  born  on  [  ]  2015,  are  both
    British citizens born in the UK.

 3. The appellant originally entered the UK on 15th  May  2011  with  entry
    clearance as a student which was subsequently extended to 30th December
    2013.  He then applied for leave to remain as a spouse and was  granted
    leave until 11th April 2016.

 4. The present application was made on 15th March 2016.  Although  it  was
    accepted that the appellant had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with a British wife and child, the appellant was refused on the grounds
    that he failed to satisfy the suitability requirements of  Appendix  FM
    in particular paragraph S-LTR1.6 which provides:

         "The presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to  the
         public good because their conduct (including convictions  which  do
         not  fall  within  paragraphs   S/LTR.1.3   to   1.5),   character,
         associations or other reasons make it undesirable to allow them  to
         remain in the UK."

 5. It was argued by the respondent that  the  appellant  had  taken  TOEIC
    speaking tests with ETS on 17th July 2012 and 1st August 2012 which had
    been cancelled because the certificates arising from  those  tests  had
    been fraudulently obtained.

 6. The appellant denied that he had used a proxy test taker  and  asserted
    that he honestly undertook the TOEIC test.

 7. The judge found against the appellant.  He concluded that  the  generic
    evidence used to analyse the TOEIC test  recordings  was  reliable  and
    there was sufficient scrutiny to the assessment of  tests  before  they
    are determined invalid.

 8. The judge considered the appellant's individual circumstances  but  set
    out, at paragraph 64, his reasons for preferring the  evidence  of  the
    respondent and decided that she had satisfied him  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the TOEIC certificates were obtained by fraud.

 9. The judge then looked at paragraph  S-LTR1.6  and  concluded  that  the
    appellant's behaviour was undesirable and not conducive to  the  public
    good.   Accordingly  the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the  suitability
    requirements of Appendix FM to the  Immigration  Rules.  He  considered
    Article 8 in some detail andconcluded that the  interference  with  the
    appellant's private and family life was proportionate to the legitimate
    public end sought to be achieved.   On  that  basis  he  dismissed  the
    appeal.

The Grounds of Appeal

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal on a number of grounds.

11. Ground 1 challenges the judge's reliance upon Professor French's report
    that the methodology used to  analyse  the  TOIEC  test  recording  was
    reliable.  Professor French's evidence was generic in  nature  and  did
    not suggest that the conclusion of the ETS review in this specific case
    was correct.

12. Second, the judge had  erred  in  his  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    innocent explanation.  He gave the appellant credit for the  fact  that
    he had obeyed immigration laws otherwise than in the  instance  alleged
    in this case but said that the likelihood of two  invalid  test  scores
    being taken would be extremely low.  He had no evidence to suggest that
    this was the case.  Neither did he accept the  appellant's  explanation
    that there had been a raid by the Home Office when he  first  took  the
    test; but his assessment of  the  appellant's  evidence  was  based  on
    speculation.  The judge further stated that he did not accept that  the
    appellant had disclosed this information in previous interviews to  the
    Home Office without having  seen  the  transcripts.   Finally,  it  was
    illogical for the appellant to have used a proxy when  the  appellant's
    scores were relatively low. One would have thought that he  would  have
    had good scores in the first attempt rather than having to  take  three
    attempts.

13. In any event, in the alternative, the judge  had  erred  in  concluding
    that a fraudulently obtained ETS test was sufficient to fall foul of S-
    LTR1.6. He had failed to take into account the guidance set out in  the
    respondent's policy IDI Appendix FM family life as a partner or parent.
     In concluding that the  appellant  did  not  fall  within  the  policy
    because he had a very poor immigration history the judge had  erred  in
    law since in this case there was no such history.   The  appellant  had
    otherwise obeyed immigration laws and had not  been  charged  with  any
    criminal offence.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Pedro on 7th December 2017.

Submissions

15. Ms Khan relied on her grounds and submitted that the  judge  had  acted
    irrationally in finding that the appellant's behaviour fell foul of the
    suitability  requirements  when  a  criminal   conviction   would   not
    necessarily do so.   Furthermore  there  was  in  this  case  a  single
    instance of alleged bad behaviour and otherwise, the  appellant  had  a
    good immigration history.

16. The witness statements from both appellants said that  they  could  not
    live in Pakistan and the Home Office Policy document  states  in  terms
    that it was unreasonable to expect a British child to leave.  It was in
    the best interests of the child to have both  parents  with  him.   The
    appellant was in practise being put in a  more  disadvantaged  position
    than deportees. The appellant's child was entitled to live  in  the  UK
    and it was not  reasonable  for  family  life  to  be  conducted  at  a
    distance.  The decision was simply disproportionate.

17. Ms Pettersen defended the determination and submitted  that  the  judge
    was entitled to conclude both that the appellant had used deception and
    that, in these circumstances, it was proportionate to expect either the
    family to go and live in Pakistan together, or  for  the  appellant  to
    leave and to apply for entry clearance.

Findings and Conclusions

The challenge to the Judge's Conclusions in Relation to the TOIEC Test

18. The respondent  relied  on  generic  evidence  from  Peter  Millington,
    Rebecca Collings and a report from Professor Peter French.  He recorded
    that the two tests taken at Roses College in Manchester  on  17th  July
    2012 and 1st August 2012  were deemed invalid.  The appellant had taken
    an earlier test at Manchester Learning Academy  and  obtained  a  lower
    score, which in itself was questionable.

19. The  judge  accepted  that  the  generic  evidence  was  sufficient  to
    discharge the burden  on  the  respondent  in  the  first  instance  to
    establish that deception had  taken  place.   He  then  considered  the
    appellant's innocent explanation.

20. The appellant's explanation for having obtained a  significantly  lower
    mark in a speaking test only a month before the first invalid test  was
    that the test had been interrupted by Home Office  officials  demanding
    to  see  identification.   However  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant had asked for a retake and he did not make the allegation  of
    the raid prior to  the  witness  statement.   The  judge  rejected  the
    appellant's evidence that he had disclosed  the  incident  in  previous
    interviews.  He had made no reference to the raid  in  his  Grounds  of
    Appeal.

21. It was open to the judge to conclude that the  low  mark  was  not  the
    result of his exam being interrupted by the Home Office.

22. He said that there  was  no  proper  explanation  for  the  significant
    improvement in his marks between the July assessment and the assessment
    taken two weeks later.  The rapid improvement in his test  results  had
    not  been  adequately  explained   and   undermined   the   appellant's
    credibility.   There  is  nothing  illogical  in  his  decision  making
    process.

23. The judge said that the likelihood of having two invalid results  would
    be extremely low if the tests had been taken lawfully.  In the  grounds
    it was argued that this was mere speculation on the judge's part but it
    seems to me that this was an observation plainly open to him.

24. Moreover the judge was entitled to hold it against the  appellant  that
    he had failed to acknowledge that he had used the TOEIC certificate  to
    obtain his CAS when in fact he had done so.

25. The judge adopted the proper approach to the law in  assessing  whether
    there had been fraud in this case.  He was  entitled  to  rely  on  the
    generic evidence.  He considered the appellant's explanation in  detail
    and gave proper reasons for rejecting it. The   grounds  amount  to  an
    attempt to reargue the appellant's case.

The article 8 challenge

26. Paragraph S-LTR1.6 provides:

         "The presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive  to  the
         public good because their conduct (including convictions  which  do
         not  fall  within   paragraphs   S/LTR1.3   to   1.5),   character,
         associations or other reasons make it undesirable to allow them  to
         remain in the UK."

27. In the respondent's IDI it states:

         "In doing so, decision makers should look at whether their  conduct
         (including any convictions which  do  not  fall  within  paragraphs
         S/LTR1.3 to S-LTR1.4) mean the applicant's presence in  the  UK  is
         undesirable or non-conducive to  the  public  good  under  conduct,
         character, associations or other reasons.  It is  possible  for  an
         applicant to meet the suitability requirements, even where there is
         some low level criminality."

28. Ms Khan argued that it was irrational for the judge  to  conclude  that
    the appellant fell foul of the suitability requirements when committing
    a criminal offence would not necessarily mean that he would do so.  She
    submitted that the appellant did  not  have  a  very  poor  immigration
    history, such as where  the  person  has  repeatedly  and  deliberately
    breached the Immigration Rules.

29. However, at paragraph 68, Judge Moxon dealt with the criminality  point
    and said that it was clearly not the intention of the Rules or the  IDI
    that there must be criminal conduct for  the  suitability  requirements
    not to be met.  The appellant had relied upon fraudulent documents  and
    then had sought to use them in order to obtain a  CAS  which  was  then
    used in order to obtain leave to remain.  It was not irrational for the
    judge to conclude that the deception constituted behaviour  covered  by
    the suitability requirements of the Rules.

30. Finally, Ms Khan argued that the judge had erred in his  assessment  of
    the policy in relation to British children.  This states:

         "Save in cases involving criminality, the decision maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British citizen child where the effect of that decision will be  to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child.  This reflects the European Court of  Justice  judgment
         in Zambrano."

31. However the judge  deals  with  that  point  at  paragraph  94  of  the
    determination when he concluded that even if it was not reasonable  for
    the child to leave the UK the option remained with him to  reside  with
    his mother in the UK. He did consider the best interests of the  child,
    and both possible scenarios, that  of  the  appellant  leaving  the  UK
    alone, and of the family going altogether.  It was Judge  Moxon's  view
    that in fact the appellant's wife and child would join him  voluntarily
    in Pakistan and it would be reasonable for them to do so. He  is  of  a
    very young age. The family speak Urdu and have many family  members  in
    Pakistan. He was entitled to rely upon the  respondent's  policy  which
    states that it might be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
    conduct of a parent or primary carer gives rise  to  considerations  of
    such weight as to justify separation, if the child could otherwise stay
    with another parent in the UK.

32. It is wrong to suggest,  as  Ms  Khan  did,  that  it  would  never  be
    reasonable for a British child to be expected to leave.  There are some
    circumstances in which the parent's behaviour is  sufficiently  serious
    so as to justify either separation of the child from his father or  for
    the family to decide to live apart.  Deception is a serious matter. The
    fact that the appellant had an otherwise good immigration history  does
    not of itself make it irrational for the judge  to  consider  that  the
    conduct of the appellant in this instance was sufficiently  serious  to
    warrant  removal.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  consider   that   the
    appellant's reliance upon fraudulent TOIEC certificates, his subsequent
    failure to accept the allegation against him and then  his  attempt  to
    mislead during the Tribunal hearing  amounted  to  being  a  very  poor
    immigration history. It was open to him to  conclude  that  the  public
    interests outweighed those of the appellant. It is true that not  every
    Immigration Judge would have reached the same decision  but  it  cannot
    properly be said that this was not one which the judge was not entitled
    to make.

33. This is a very thorough and detailed determination.   The  grounds  and
    submissions  amount  to  a  strenuous  disagreement  with  the  judge's
    conclusions but do not  establish  any  error  of  law  either  in  his
    approach or his consideration of the evidence  or  of  the  conclusions
    which he reached.

Notice of Decision

The judge did not err in law.  His decision stands.  The appellant's  appeal
is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed[pic]                             Date 28 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
