
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13060/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th November 2019                |On 04th December 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     G R
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Plowright, of Counsel, instructed by Perera &
Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The claimant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in June 1975. He  arrived
       in the UK in 2004 and had leave to remain as a  foreign  student.  He
       was granted indefinite leave to remain on 5th February  2015.  He  is
       married with two children (B born in September 2004  and  S  born  in
       February 2007), and his wife and children are all  British  citizens.
       On 7th September 2016 the claimant was convicted  of  theft.  He  was
       sentenced  to  18  months  imprisonment.  On  6th  October  2016  the
       Secretary of State notified him that he would be deported  unless  he
       could show that he fell within the  exceptions  at  s.33  of  the  UK
       Borders Act 2007. The Secretary of State  refused  his  human  rights
       claim on 8th June 2018. His appeal against the decision  was  allowed
       by First-tier Tribunal Judge S Miah in a determination promulgated on
       the 15th July 2019.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brian
       on 7th August 2019 on the basis that it was arguable that the  First-
       tier judge had erred in law in the consideration  as  to  whether  it
       would be unduly harsh for the appellant's partner and children if  he
       were deported and in failing to consider the public interest  as  set
       out a s.117C of the 2002 Act.

    3. The matter  came  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. In the grounds of appeal, skeleton argument and oral  submission  the
       Secretary of State argues as follows.

    5. Firstly it is said that the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider or
       give reasons for how the claimant met the unduly harsh  test  as  set
       out in KO ( Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53,  given that this must  go
       beyond the normal effects of deportation on a family and  bearing  in
       mind that unduly harsh is an elevated threshold and  means  something
       severe or bleak, when concluding that it was  unduly  harsh  for  the
       claimant's family to go with him to Sri Lanka. Further, there  was  a
       total failure to consider whether it would be unduly harsh  for  them
       to remain in the UK without  the  claimant.  The  findings  that  the
       support for the  family  and  education  of  his  daughter  would  be
       disrupted are not properly reasoned  given  that  these  matters  had
       continued whilst the claimant was in prison.

    6. Secondly, it is argued that there was a failure in the  consideration
       of the claimant's very compelling circumstances for the same reasons.

    7. The claimant argues in a Rule 24 notice that the First-tier  Tribunal
       accepted that the claimant has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
       with his partner and two children in the UK, see paragraph 5  of  the
       decision. The First-tier Tribunal  clearly  knew  that  they  had  to
       decide both whether it was unduly harsh for the claimant's family  to
       go with him to Sri Lanka or for them to remain in the UK without him,
       see paragraphs 5 and 6 of the decision. The reasoning at paragraph 27
       onwards relates to why these two options are unduly harsh to his wife
       and children. Consideration was given to the fact  the  oldest  child
       would be taking her GCSEs next year  and  the  youngest  has  special
       needs. Reasoned findings were given  for  the  conclusion  that  this
       would be unduly harsh at paragraphs 27 to 30 of the  decision.  There
       was therefore no material error of law.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    8. At paragraph 26 of the decision the claimant is found not to be  able
       to satisfy the requirement to  have  very  significant  obstacles  to
       integration on return to Sri Lanka, and thus  it  is  found  that  he
       could not meet  the  private  life  exception  to  deportation.  This
       finding is not challenged  by  either  party.  The  appeal  therefore
       depended on whether the claimant can show that he  meets  the  family
       life exception.

    9. The Secretary of State concedes that the claimant has a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship with his partner and children, as is recorded
       at paragraph 5 of the decision.

   10. The First-tier Tribunal does set out that the deportation of  foreign
       criminals is in the public interest and the more serious the  offence
       the  greater  the  public  interest  in   deportation,   the   s.117C
       considerations, at paragraph 16 of the decision. We do not  find  any
       error in this respect.

   11. The claimant correctly submits that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       records in paragraphs 5 and 6 of the decision that the  Secretary  of
       State contests his contention that it would be unduly harsh  for  the
       family to return to Sri Lanka together or for the claimant to  return
       and for the family to remain in the UK. There is therefore a  correct
       self-direction by the First-tier Tribunal of the  need  to  determine
       both scenarios. It is clear that the findings made at  paragraphs  27
       to 35 address both options  particularly  as  in  the  conclusion  at
       paragraph 35 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge returns to
       both scenarios, looking at whether it would be unduly harsh  for  the
       family to go back to Sri Lanka  or  remain  in  the  UK  without  the
       claimant.

   12. The most important findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  relating  to
       the issue of whether  the  claimant's  deportation  is  unduly  harsh
       relate to his youngest child. At paragraph 28  of  the  decision  the
       claimant's younger child, who has special needs,  is  found  to  have
       "suffered immensely when the appellant was incarcerated to the extent
       that he self-harmed by  attempting  to  strangle  himself.  This  was
       detected  by  both  his  mother  and  his  school";  and  further  at
       paragraphs 30 and 32 of the decision it is found that this  child  is
       particularly vulnerable given  the  evidence  of  Dr  Obeng  and  the
       material in the educational and health plans he could not  reasonably
       be removed from his network of support and care in the UK which could
       not be substituted by anyone else in Sri Lanka. Additional supporting
       findings with respect to whether it would be unduly harsh  to  deport
       the claimant are as follows: his older child is  found  to  be  at  a
       critical stage of her education with her GCSE's looming next year, so
       it is found that it would not be reasonable to expect  her  to  leave
       the UK;  the claimant's wife is found to have no support  network  in
       Sri Lanka, and  to  be  suffering  from  stress  and  depression,  at
       paragraph 34; and  at paragraph 29 of the decision relying  upon  the
       evidence of both parents and social work reports it was found  to  be
       in the best interests of both children that the  claimant  should  be
       permitted to remain with them in the UK, noting they are both British
       citizens and the younger child has never been to Sri  Lanka  and  the
       older one had not been there since she was a year  old.  There  is  a
       proper direction that the  best  interests  of  the  children  are  a
       primary consideration at paragraph 31 of the decision.

   13. Whilst there is no direction as to the meaning  of  unduly  harsh  we
       find that there is no material error in this decision as we find that
       the findings of the First-tier Tribunal that the  claimant's  younger
       child, a twelve year old with special needs, attempted  to  self-harm
       by strangling himself when he was without his father because  he  was
       in prison is sufficiently severe and bleak evidence  which  shows  on
       the balance of probabilities that  it  was  open  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to rationally conclude that it  was  unduly  harsh  for  the
       claimant to be deported and his family to remain in the  UK.  We  are
       also satisfied that there were rational findings  showing  it  to  be
       severe and bleak for the that child to have to go to Sri Lanka as  in
       that country he would be without his network  of  essential  medical,
       education and social care and support which could not  be  replicated
       in that country.

   14. It follows that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the
       appeal on Article 8 ECHR family life grounds was entirely lawful  and
       proper.



Decision:

   15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
       the making of an error on a point of law.

   16. We uphold the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
       deportation appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.



Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) we make an anonymity order. Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings. We do so in order to avoid a likelihood of harm arising to  the
appellant's younger child who is very vulnerable with special needs.


Signed:      Fiona  Lindsley                          Date:   26th  November
2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley


