
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/13852/2016
                                                               HU/13867/2016
                                                               HU/13857/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd April 2018                    |On 5th April 2018                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                               CHERYL [M] (1)
                              CLIFFORD [M] (2)
                                  [CM] (3)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Turnbull, of Counsel, instructed by Aston Bond
Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




    Introduction


    1. The appellants are citizen of India. They are a family consisting  of
       a mother, father and child who was born in the UK on the  [  ]  2012.
       The first appellant came to the UK on 17th September 2007 as a Tier 4
       student migrant, and her leave was extended until 30th July  2016  on
       this basis, but then curtailed to expire on  8th  January  2016.  Her
       husband, the second appellant, entered the UK on 31st March 2009  and
       had leave in line as her dependent. The third appellant was  born  in
       the UK on [ ] 2012, and  also  had  leave  in  line  with  the  first
       appellant as a dependent.


    2. On 2nd December 2015 the family applied to extend their leave on  the
       same basis (as a Tier 4 student and dependents) but this was  refused
       and an application for administrative review failed. On 11th February
       2016 they applied to remain in the UK on the basis of  their  private
       life ties with the UK. This application was refused on dated 20th May
       2016. The appeal against this human rights decision was dismissed  on
       human rights grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge  R  Sullivan  in  a
       determination promulgated on the 30th May 2017.


    3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier judge had erred in law in failing to adjourn  the
       hearing on 22nd May 2017 in light of  the  first  appellant's  health
       problems, which rendered the hearing procedurally unfair.


    4. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.


Submissions - Error of Law


    5. It is contended for the appellants that the hearing before the First-
       tier Tribunal should have been adjourned because of evidence  of  the
       first  appellant  being  hospitalised  with  severe   diarrhoea   and
       vomiting. She was taken into hospital on  17th  May  2017  with  this
       condition and an application to adjourn on the papers was refused  on
       the basis that she should have recovered by 22nd May 2017,  and  also
       because it was said that the facts were not in dispute, so  the  case
       could be dealt with by submissions only.


    6. At the hearing before me the position was described as follows:  that
       the first appellant had been released from hospital over the  weekend
       but her condition had continued and she had returned to  hospital  by
       ambulance early on the day of the hearing. The  first  appellant  was
       seen by a triage nurse who found that she should  continue  with  the
       treatment  previously  prescribed  and  sent  her  home.   The  first
       appellant  had  not  been  able  to  provide  instructions   to   her
       representatives due to being unwell over this period of time, and the
       second appellant had had to care for both the first appellant and the
       third appellant who has a tentative diagnosis of autism so  had  also
       not been able to assist. As a result, there were no agreed statements
       or bundle before the First-tier Tribunal as neither  adult  appellant
       had been able to assist their solicitors. The first appellant was the
       primary carer for the third appellant, and her health was the central
       issue in the appeal and the facts were not agreed.


    7. It was argued that the hearing should therefore have been  adjourned,
       and to refuse to do so was  procedurally  unfair  as  the  appellants
       could not present their case that it was  not  lawful  to  force  the
       third appellant to return to India given  her  medical/  neurological
       condition. This failure was made all the more unfair due to the  fact
       that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  admitted  new  evidence  about   the
       availability of treatment for autism in India which was ordered to be
       served on the appellants' solicitors two days  later  but  was  never
       received by them, and which they had not been able to consider.


    8. Ms Everett submitted that there was no procedural  error  of  law  in
       refusing to adjourn as this was not unfair in all the  circumstances.
       The notice of hearing had been sent to the appellants' solicitors  in
       November 2017 and the bundle ought to have been prepared prior to the
       first appellant becoming unwell in December 2016. The appellants were
       all clearly happy with the third appellant's treatment in the UK  but
       had produced no evidence that she would be without adequate treatment
       in India which was vital to any prospect of success before the First-
       tier Tribunal.


 Conclusions - Error of Law


    9. I accept that the first appellant has shown that she was unwell  with
       diarrhoea and vomiting on 16th and 17th May 2017 and was admitted  to
       hospital: this is supported by documentary evidence.  I  accept  that
       this condition continued and the first  appellant  went  back  for  a
       short consultation at A&E on the early day of the hearing,  the  22nd
       May 2017, and was advised to remain at  home,  and  that  the  second
       appellant could not attend the hearing in her place as he was  caring
       for the third appellant who clearly suffers from autism as set out in
       the medical papers. I find that the  first  appellant  was  therefore
       unable to attend the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and  give
       evidence as to why it would be unlawful to return the third appellant
       to India which she had otherwise intended to do. The directions  with
       the notice of hearing only referred to the appellants having to  send
       documents before 28th  December  2016  and  not  to  the  appellants'
       testimony having to be contained in a witness statement by that date.




   10. The refusal letter contains no  specific  information  about  medical
       provision in India for autistic children. If the first appellant  had
       been able to attend and provide oral evidence  about  this  issue  it
       might have been that the conclusion of the First-tier  Tribunal  that
       the interference with the third appellant's private  life  which  her
       removal would constitute was disproportionate under Article  8  ECHR.
       Oral evidence from a lay person might not normally suffice on such an
       issue but in the absence of any other evidence from the respondent it
       cannot be said that the outcome of the appeal would  have  inevitably
       been the same. I therefore find it was  procedurally  unfair  not  to
       have adjourned the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  in  these
       circumstances.


   11. This procedural error  was  compounded  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       admitting further evidence from the respondent on this key  issue  at
       the hearing and not providing the appellants with an  opportunity  to
       comment on it before making a decision. There was  a  direction  that
       the appellants' solicitors were  to  be  served  with  the  documents
       within 2 working days by the respondent but  no  direction  was  made
       giving the  appellant an opportunity  to  make  representations  with
       regard to these documents prior to a decision being made by the First-
       tier Tribunal even though these were seen as central to deciding  the
       appeal as they were seen as showing that appropriate  services  would
       be available to the third appellant on her return to India  and  thus
       that there would be no disproportionate interference with  her  right
       to respect for her private life..


   12. In these circumstances I find that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal was unfairly reached on procedural grounds,  and  should  be
       set aside with no findings preserved.




  Decision:

      1. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the
         making of an error on a point of law.

      2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the
         appeal.

      3. The re-making  of  the  decision  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal with no findings preserved.



Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  3rd April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley









