
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13977/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15 September 2020 by Skype for Business |On 17 November 2020             |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                              MOHAMMED ALAUDDIN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, Counsel (Direct Access)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                   DECISION ON APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh born in 1974,  has  applied  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy) who,  following
    a hearing at Taylor House on 25 January 2019, dismissed the appellant's
    human rights appeal against the decision of the respondent on  20  June
    2018 to refuse the appellant's  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the basis of ten  years'  lawful  residence.   It  is  common
    ground that the refusal of that application constituted the refusal  by
    the respondent of a human rights claim made by the  appellant,  thereby
    generating a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  under  section
    82(1)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in March 2007 with leave as
    a student.   Further  leave  was  granted  by  the  respondent  to  the
    appellant in that capacity; but on  6  January  2015,  the  appellant's
    application  for  such  further  leave  was  refused.   The   appellant
    exercised his right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal but he  became
    appeal rights exhausted on 19 September 2016.

 3. On 13 October 2016, the appellant applied for leave to  remain  on  the
    basis of  his  family/private  life,  varying  that  application  on  2
    December 2016 to  one  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  On 8 March 2017, the  appellant  again  varied  the
    application; this time, to make it one for indefinite leave  to  remain
    on the basis of ten  years'  residence  under  paragraph  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. On 20 June 2018, the respondent refused the appellant's application  on
    the basis that, when he became appeal  rights  exhausted  in  September
    2016, the appellant was more than 28 days away from accruing ten years'
    continuous residence.  As we have said, this decision is the subject of
    the present appeal.

 5. At the hearing on 25 January 2019, there was  discussion  before  Judge
    Herlihy as to the effect of paragraph 276B(v) of the Immigration Rules.
     Paragraph 276B provides as follows:-

         "276B.   The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite
                leave to remain on the ground of long residence in the
                United Kingdom are that:

                (i) (a)     he has had at least 10 years continuous lawful
                     residence in the United Kingdom.

                (ii)   having regard to the public interest there are no
                     reasons why it would be undesirable for him to be
                     given indefinite leave to remain on the ground of long
                     residence, taking into account his:

                     (a)   age; and

                     (b)   strength of connections in the United Kingdom;
                         and

                     (c)   personal history, including character, conduct,
                         associations and employment record; and

                     (d)   domestic circumstances; and

                     (e)   compassionate circumstances; and

                     (f)   any representations received on the person's
                         behalf; and

                (iii)  the applicant does not fall for refusal under the
                    general grounds for refusal.

                (iv)   the applicant has demonstrated sufficient knowledge
                    of the English language and sufficient knowledge about
                    life in the United Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix
                    KoLL.

                (v)    the applicant must not be in the UK in breach of
                    immigration laws, except that, where paragraph 39E of
                    these Rules applies, any current period of overstaying
                    will be disregarded. Any previous period of overstaying
                    between periods of leave will also be disregarded where
                    -

                    (a)    the previous application was made before 24
                        November 2016 and within 28 days of the expiry of
                        leave; or

                    (b)    the further application was made on or after 24
                        November 2016 and paragraph 39E of these Rules
                        applied."

 6. Judge Herlihy noted the appellant's representative as submitting  that,
    because the appellant made an application for leave in  September  2016
    which was, in fact, within 24 days after his statutorily extended leave
    (under section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971) had expired, the  effect
    of paragraph 276B(v) was to treat the appellant's new application as if
    it had been made while the appellant had leave to remain.   This  meant
    that the appellant had achieved ten years' continuous lawful residence,
    as required by paragraph 276B(i)(a).

 7. Judge Herlihy found on this issue as follows:-

         "18. Having  carefully  considered  the  submissions  made  by  the
             Appellant's representative I find that  he  has  conflated  3C
             leave with provisions allowing for  the  disregarding  of  any
             period of overstaying of up to 28 days which was a position at
             the time the Appellant submitted his current application  that
             he subsequently varied.   The  Appellant's  period  of  lawful
             leave (which had been extended by section 3C of the 1971  Act)
             ended on 19 September  2016  when  his  appeal  rights  became
             exhausted.  As the Appellant's  lawful  leave  expired  on  19
             September 2016 when his appeal rights were exhausted,  I  find
             that that [sic] his leave could not be extended by  virtue  of
             section 3C when submitting a fresh application and there was a
             break in his lawful residence.  The Appellant needs to rely on
             the statutory extension of leave allowed by section 3C as  had
             not accrued 10 years lawful continuous residence when he  made
             his application on 19 September 2016.

         19.  The effect of paragraph 276B(v) was  that  the  Appellant  was
             able to make a further application which would be regarded  as
             an in-time application but this did not extend his  3C  leave.
             He was not covered by the provisions  of  section  3C  of  The
             Immigration Act 1971  when  he  made  his  application  on  13
             October  2016  and  therefore  that   the   Appellant   cannot
             demonstrate 10 years continuous lawful residence in the United
             Kingdom since at the date of  the  application,  he  had  only
             accrued continuous lawful residence totalling 7  years  and  9
             months.

         20.  Section 3C applies, by subsection (1),  where  an  application
             for variation of an existing leave is made before  that  leave
             expires (and provided that there has been no decision on  that
             application before the leave expires).  However, in this  case
             there had been a decision on the Appellant's application on 19
             September 2016 so that by the  time  he  made  his  subsequent
             application on 13 October  2016  there  was  a  break  in  his
             continuous lawful residence as at that date he had  no  extant
             leave.  Section 3C does not extend leave where the application
             is made after the applicant's current leave has expired.  If a
             person does not already have section 3C leave  the  fact  that
             they are entitled to an in-country right of appeal  against  a
             decision does not give them section 3C leave."

 8.  At  paragraph  21,  Judge  Herlihy  considered  the  submission  that,
    regardless of paragraph 276B, the appellant had now been in the  United
    Kingdom for over eleven years and most  of  that  time  had  been  with
    lawful leave.  Discretion should, therefore, have been exercised in the
    appellant's favour.  Judge Herlihy was unpersuaded by that  submission.
    Turning to Article 8, outside the Rules, Judge Herlihy found  that  the
    appellant had spent his formative life in Bangladesh, having studied to
    postgraduate  level  in  that   country.    He   had   obtain   further
    qualifications in the United Kingdom.  The appellant had  an  uncle  in
    the United Kingdom but no evidence to attest to  the  strength  of  his
    relationship with that relative, other than the general claim  that  he
    and his uncle were close.

 9. Judge Herlihy found that the appellant's family ties subsisted entirely
    in Bangladesh.  There was no satisfactory evidence that he  would  face
    any significant obstacles in Bangladesh, where he had  family  members.
    He had spent the first 33 years of  his  life  there.   There  were  no
    disclosed health conditions.  The judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant had lost cultural, family and social ties  to  Bangladesh  or
    that he had disclosed the existence of an unjustifiably  harsh  set  of
    exceptional circumstances; or that there were insurmountable  obstacles
    or arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside the Rules
    (paragraphs 22 and 23).

10. The appellant had submitted "almost no evidence of his private life  in
    the United Kingdom or the extent of his ties  and  connections  to  the
    country" (paragraph 24).  There was no evidence as to how he  supported
    himself financially.  There were no letters of  support  from  friends,
    employers or organisations to whom he had links (paragraph 24).

11. At paragraph 25, Judge Herlihy noted that the appellant  had  developed
    such private life as he had in the United Kingdom at  a  time  when  he
    knew that the same was dependent upon meeting the requirements  of  the
    Immigration  Rules.   His  immigration  status  throughout   had   been
    precarious.

12. At paragraph 27, balancing everything for and  against  the  appellant,
    Judge  Herlihy   concluded   that   the   respondent's   decision   was
    proportionate and would not cause the United Kingdom to be in breach of
    its obligations under the ECHR.  She accordingly dismissed the  appeal.



13. The appellant applied to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Robertson
    refused the application  on  25  February  2019.   The  appellant  then
    applied to the Upper Tribunal for permission  The first ground asserted
    that Judge Herlihy erred  in  law  in  conducting  the  proportionality
    exercise under Article 8.  Candidly, the  grounds  submitted  that  the
    appellant "did not place significant evidence before the FTJ  but  this
    it is submitted down to the representatives" [sic].  The appellant  had
    subsequently changed representatives and if  permission  were  granted,
    could, "subject to Rule 15(2) [sic] provide  further  evidence  of  his
    life in the UK to substantiate his claim".  The grounds then  contended
    that the consideration of proportionality was flawed,  given  that  the
    appellant "is 44 years old, has been in the UK for almost 12 years  and
    the basis of the  Respondent's  refusal  is  incorrect  and  failed  to
    consider their own  discretion  under  the  Rules".   Finally,  it  was
    submitted that the appellant had been waiting between 2016 and 2018 for
    a decision which he believed would be successful.  If  the  application
    had been  refused  sooner,  then  the  appellant  "could  have  made  a
    different application, for discretionary leave or 30 months  leave  for
    example, instead which would likely have been successful".

14. Ground 2 related to the Immigration Rules.  The ground  contended  that
    the appellant had applied within  28  days  of  his  section  3C  leave
    expiring.  Having regard to paragraph 276B(v) and paragraph 39E of  the
    Immigration Rules, the thrust of the ground was that the appellant had,
    in fact, met the requirements of paragraph 276B in order to be  granted
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom, because of 10  years'
    lawful residence in the United Kingdom.

15. On 15 April 2019, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Keki?  refused  permission  to
    appeal.  She concluded that the  grounds  were  not  made  out.   Judge
    Herlihy had "properly considered all the available evidence and reached
    wholly sustainable conclusions".  Judge Keki? regarded the challenge as
    no more than a disagreement with the outcome of the appeal.

16. The appellant challenged Judge Keki?'s refusal of permission to  appeal
    by means of a judicial review under CPR 54.7A.   That  judicial  review
    was ultimately successful, resulting in the quashing of the refusal  of
    permission.  Regrettably, the Upper Tribunal has not been provided with
    the grounds of challenge or the decision to grant permission.  What  we
    do have, is a copy of the summary grounds of resistance  filed  by  the
    Secretary of State,  as  an  interested  party.   These  grounds  were,
    apparently, ordered to be filed by Sir Ross Cranston, sitting as a High
    Court Judge.

17. The following passage is of significance:-

         "Grounds of challenge: UTJ Kekic has failed to properly engage with
         the grounds of appeal before the UT and those previously before the
         FTT and no consideration has been given to  the  FTT's  failure  to
         consider Paragraph 39E of the Immigration Rules

         21.  The Claimant asserts that UTJ Kekic has failed to give reasons
             for refusing the application for PTA.  The  Defendant  submits
             that this is entirely unarguable.  However, the  substance  of
             the Claimant's first ground of challenge appears to be that no
             consideration has been given to  the  grounds  of  appeal,  as
             before either the UT or the FTT, as no consideration has  been
             given to the failure of Judge  Herlihy  to  properly  consider
             paragraph 39E of the Immigration Rules  (in  combination  with
             paragraph 276B).

         22.  The Defendant submits that, UTJ Kekic's statement that  "[t]he
             Judge properly considered all the available evidence" and  his
             emphasis on the Claimant's failure to show that the outcome of
             the  FTT  appeal  "is  arguably  tainted  by   legal   errors"
             demonstrates that he considered the grounds  of  appeal  along
             with the FTT's determination and reached his decision  on  the
             basis of such a consideration.

         23.  In any event, the Defendant submits that Paragraph 39E of  the
             Immigration Rules 'Exceptions for overstayers' does not apply.
              Paragraph 39E states:

                  "This paragraph applies where:

                        1) the application was made within 14  days  of  the
                           applicant's leave expiring and the  Secretary  of
                           State considers that  there  was  a  good  reason
                           beyond the control  of  the  applicant  or  their
                           representative,   provided   in   or   with   the
                           application, why the  application  could  not  be
                           made in-time; or

                        2)      the application was made:

                            a)  following  the  refusal   of   a   previous
                               application for leave  which  was  made  in-
                               time; and

                            b) within 14 days of:

                               (i)  the refusal of the previous application
                                   for leave; or

                               (ii) the expiry of  any  leave  extended  by
                                   section 3C of the Immigration Act  1971;
                                   or

                               (iii)    the expiry of  the  time-limit  for
                                   making  an   in-time   application   for
                                   administrative review or  appeal  (where
                                   applicable); or

                               (iv) any  administration  review  or  appeal
                                   being concluded, withdrawn or  abandoned
                                   or lapsing.

         24.  The FTT determination, at paragraph 18,  finds  that  "As  the
             appellant's lawful leave expired on 19 September 2016 when his
             appeal rights were exhausted, I find that his leave could  not
             be extended by virtue of section 3C when  submitting  a  fresh
             application and there was a break  in  his  lawful  residence.
             The Appellant needs to rely  on  the  statutory  extension  of
             leave allowed by section 3C as he had  not  accrued  10  years
             lawful continuous residence when he made his application on 19
             September 2016" [see DB/6].  Before the FTT the Claimants' and
             the Defendant's positions as to the date upon which section 3C
             leave expired differed.  The Claimant submitted  that  section
             3C leave expired on 19 September  2016  whilst  the  Defendant
             submitted that it expired prior to 26 January  2015  when  the
             Claimant lodged his appeal in relation to  the  refusal  of  6
             January 2015 out of time.  The Defendant accepts that the  FTT
             determination proceeds on the basis that 3C leave  expired  on
             19 September 2016.  The Claimant then made a fresh application
             on the basis of family and private life on 13 October 2016.

         25.  The Claimant appears to rely on Paragraph  39E(2)(ii)  on  the
             basis that his family  and  private  life  application  of  13
             October 2016 was made following the refusal of a previous  in-
             time application for leave and within 28  days  of  any  leave
             extended by section 3C.  The Claimant submits  that  Paragraph
             39E was amended in November 2016  so  that  the  reference  at
             subparagraph 1 to '14 days' replaced an earlier  reference  to
             '28 days'.  The Defendant submits that this is incorrect.  The
             Defendant emphasises that Paragraph 39E did not  exist  before
             it was inserted into the Immigration Rules on 24 November 2016
             (see paragraph 1.13 of the Statement of  Changes  at  DB/17-18
             and, as such, it does not apply to applications made prior  to
             this date.  Prior to that date, the applicable  paragraph  was
             the former Paragraph 276B, as in place  at  the  time  of  the
             application dated 13 October 2016, which read:

                  "276B.   The requirements to be met by  an  applicant  for
                        indefinite leave to remain on the  ground  of  long
                        residence in the United Kingdom are that:

                        (i) (a)     he has had at least 10 years continuous
                              lawful residence in the United Kingdom.

                        (ii)   having regard to the public  interest  there
                              are no reasons why it would be undesirable for
                              him to be given indefinite leave to remain  on
                              the ground  of  long  residence,  taking  into
                              account his:

                               (a)  age; and

                               (b)  strength of connections in  the  United
                                   Kingdom; and

                               (c)  personal history, including  character,
                                   conduct,  associations  and   employment
                                   record; and

                               (d)  domestic circumstances; and

                               (e)  compassionate circumstances; and

                               (f)  any  representations  received  on  the
                                   person's behalf; and

                        (iii)  the applicant  does  not  fall  for  refusal
                              under the general grounds for refusal.

                        (iv)   the applicant  has  demonstrated  sufficient
                              knowledge  of   the   English   language   and
                              sufficient knowledge about life in the  United
                              Kingdom, in accordance with Appendix KoLL.

                        (v)    the applicant must  not  be  in  the  UK  in
                              breach of immigration  laws  except  that  any
                              period of overstaying for a period of 28  days
                              or less will be disregard, as will any  period
                              of  overstaying  between  periods   of   entry
                              clearance, leave to enter or leave  to  remain
                              of up to 28 days and any period of overstaying
                              pending the determination  of  an  application
                              made within that 28 days period."

         26.  Upon insertion of Paragraph 39E into  the  Immigration  Rules,
             Paragraph 276B was substituted as follows [see paragraph  7.11
             of the Statement of Changes at DB/19:

                  "v   the applicant must not be in  the  UK  in  breach  of
                      immigration laws, except that, where paragraph 39E of
                      these  Rules   applies,   any   current   period   of
                      overstaying will be disregarded.  Any previous period
                      of overstaying between periods of leave will also  be
                      disregarded where -

                      (a)  the  further  application  was  made  before  24
                           November 2016 and within 28 days of the expiry of
                           leave ; or

                      (b)  the further application was made on or after  24
                           November 2016 and paragraph 39E  of  these  Rules
                           applied."

         27.  The Defendant submits that  the  amended  Paragraph  276B  (at
             paragraph 26 above) only applies to applications  made  on  or
             after 24 November 2016 per  the  Statement  of  Changes  which
             states that the changes set out in paragraph 7.11  "...  shall
             take effect from 24 November 2016,  but  will  only  apply  to
             applications made on or after 24 November 2016"  [see  DB/15].
             As the  application  is  dated  13  October  2016  the  former
             Paragraph 276B applies (see paragraph 25  above).   Therefore,
             if Claimant had met the requirements of Paragraph  276B(i)(a),
             which he did not as he did not have  10  years  of  continuous
             lawful leave, the overstaying  of  24  days  could  have  been
             disregarded in accordance with the former  Paragraph  276B(v).
             The Defendant submits that  it  is  on  this  basis  that  the
             application of 13  October  2016  was  refused  (see  decision
             letter dated 20 June 2018 at DB/20-27] not,  as  the  Claimant
             argues, on the basis of him being an overstayer.

         28.  The Defendant submits that  the  correct  application  of  the
             Immigration Rules is not  as  set  out  above.   The  Claimant
             argues  that  proper  consideration  has  not  been  given  to
             Paragraph 39E however, the  Defendant  submits  that  this  is
             because Paragraph 39E simply does not apply."

18. Before us, Mr Turner applied for an  adjournment,  which  we  declined.
    Both he and Mr Deller, who appeared for the Secretary of  State,  noted
    that cases involving paragraph 276B(v) were pending before the Court of
    Appeal.  As matters stood on 15 September, however, Mr Turner  accepted
    that the judgment of Sweeny J in R (Juned Ahmed) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2019] UKUT 10 (IAC) and the citable permission
    decision of the Court of Appeal in R (Masum Ahmed) v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1070 stood in the  way  of  the
    appellant, so far as concerned his ability to  show  that  he  met  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  276B.   We  would  merely  add  that  this
    concession is underscored by  the  now  disclosed  summary  grounds  of
    defence of the respondent, which  explain  why  paragraph  39E  of  the
    Immigration Rules in fact could have no application to the  appellant's
    case.

19. Since the hearing on 15 September, the Court of Appeal has handed  down
    its judgments in Hoque v Secretary of State for the Home Department and
    Another [2020] EWCA Civ 1357.  By a majority, the Court held that where
    an individual became an overstayer and remained as  such,  neither  (a)
    the reference in present  paragraph  276B  to  the  current  period  of
    overstaying being disregarded where paragraph 39E applies, nor (b)  the
    reference in the previous version of paragraph 276B to "any  period  of
    overstaying for a period of 28 days or less" being disregarded  enabled
    an individual to satisfy 276B(i)(a), by counting any part of the period
    of overstaying so as to show 10 years continuous lawful residence .  In
    each case, the overstaying is, in Underhill  LJ's  phrase,  open-ended.
    Properly construed, paragraph 276B does not enable  a  person  who  had
    leave but who becomes an overstayer and remains  as  such,  to  contend
    that  such  open-ended  overstaying  counts   towards   the   10   year
    requirement.

20. As we have seen, the appellant was, on any view, several  months  short
    of 10 years' continuous lawful residence, when he became appeal  rights
    exhausted on 19 or 29 September  2016.   The  fact  that  he  may  have
    applied for further leave to remain within 28 days of  becoming  appeal
    rights exhausted is irrelevant.

21. Before us, Mr Turner, understandably, did  not  pursue  the  Article  8
    proportionality ground with any vigour (see paragraph 13 above).   That
    ground, as articulated in the  grounds  of  application  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, is entirely hopeless.  Judge Herlihy carefully examined  such
    evidence as there was regarding the appellant's  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom.  She contrasted  that  with  what  he  would  face,  if
    returned to Bangladesh.  Her conclusions disclosed no hint of  arguable
    error.

22. For these reasons, we refuse permission to appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Mr Justice Lane
                      Signed                     Date: 13 November 2020


                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber








