
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/13923/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 Without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Hearing                              |                                     |
|At Field House                       |                                     |
|On 23 October 2020                   |On 2 November 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                  KOJO [O]
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ian  Howard  promulgated  on  5  February  2020,
    dismissing his appeal under the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 against a decision of the respondent  made  on  25  July  2019  to
    refuse him leave to remain and his human rights claim.

 2. The appellant sought leave to remain on the basis of long residence and
    on the basis that he meets the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE(1)(vi)
    of the Immigration Rules as there are very significant obstacles to his
    integration into Ghana. The respondent did not accept that, or that his
    removal would be disproportionate.

 3. The judge found that the appellant is dependant on  alcohol,  something
    he has been unable to manage despite numerous efforts, and  lives  from
    hand-to-mouth with no help from his family in the United Kingdom  which
    includes three brothers [19].  He has other  relatively  minor  chronic
    conditions related to his dependency [10] but  that  the  appellant  is
    able to function adequately [20] but this is blighted by his  inability
    to resolve his alcohol dependency.

 4. The judge noted the appellant's evidence that he had extended family in
    Ghana [17] but did not accept [23] that he  has  no  knowledge  of  the
    existence of extended family currently living in  Ghana,  his  evidence
    being highly suggestive that there  are  cousins  still  living  within
    their own family or families in Ghana, in contrast to what he had said.
    And so was not satisfied that there is no  family  support  network  of
    which he could avail himself if returned to Ghana [24]  and  that  [25]
    there were not very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into
    Ghana.

 5. The judge also found that the  appellant's  removal  would  not  be  an
    interference of such gravity as would engage article 8(1) [30], [31].

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:

      i) In assuming that the appellant would be able to turn to his  family
         in Ghana when he had been neglected by his  family  in  the  United
         Kingdom, there being no consideration of whether they would be able
         and willing to support the appellant on  return;  and,  had  failed
         properly to apply the "very significant obstacles" test;

     ii) In not giving sufficient reasoning for the  conclusion  that  there
         would not be very  significant  obstacles,  there  being  no  other
         findings in relation to whether he could form a private life there;

    iii) In failing to have regard to the  report  on  Extreme  Poverty  and
         Human Rights in Ghana indicating that there  would  be  significant
         problems in relation to unemployment;

     iv) In assessing article outside the rules in failing at [29] take into
         account relevant background evidence, such that  he  might,  absent
         government support, be in a situation of destitution.

 7. On 25 June 2020 Upper Tribunal Judge  Lindsley  granted  permission  to
    appeal and gave directions which provided amongst other matters:

         "5.  In the light of the present need to take  precautions  against
             the spread of Covid-19, and the overriding objective expressed
             in the Procedure Rules[1],  I  have  reached  the  provisional
             view,  that it would in this case be appropriate to  determine
             the following questions without a hearing:


               a) whether the making of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
                  involved the making of an error of law, and, if so


               b) whether that decision should be set aside.


         6.   I therefore make the following DIRECTIONS:


               i) The appellant may submit further submissions in support of
                  the assertion of an error of  law,  and  on  the  question
                  whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision should  be  set
                  aside if error of law is found, to be filed and served  on
                  all other parties no later than 14 days after this  notice
                  is sent out (the date of sending is on the covering letter
                  or covering email);


              ii)  Any  other  party  may  file  and  serve  submissions  in
                  response, no later than 21 days after this notice is  sent
                  out;


             iii) If submissions are made in accordance with paragraph  (ii)
                  above the party who sought permission to appeal  may  file
                  and serve a reply no later than 28 days after this  notice
                  is sent out.


              iv) All submissions that rely on any document  not  previously
                  provided to all other parties in electronic form  must  be
                  accompanied by electronic copies of any such document.


         7.   Any party who considers that despite the foregoing  directions
             a hearing is necessary to consider the questions  set  out  in
             paragraph 1 (or either of them) above must submit reasons  for
             that view no later than 21 days after this notice is sent  out
             and they will be taken into  account  by  the  Tribunal.   The
             directions in paragraph 2 above must be complied with in every
             case."


 8. On 7 September 2020, the respondent made submission to the  effect  the
    grounds are simply a disagreement with  properly  reasoned  conclusions
    supported by negative credibility findings.  It  is  further  submitted
    that the judge's findings with respect to article 8 are sustainable.

 9. On 1 September 2020, the respondent replied to the directions,  relying
    on  the  initial  and  renewed  grounds  for  permission.  No   further
    submissions were  made,  nor  was  there  any  objection  made  to  the
    provisional view taken that there is no need for a hearing.

10. The Tribunal has the power to make the decision without a hearing under
    Rule 34 of the Procedure Rules.  Rule 34(2) requires me to have  regard
    to the views of the parties.  Bearing in mind the overriding  objective
    in Rule 2 to enable the Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and  justly.
    Neither party has objected to this, and I  am  satisfied  that  in  the
    particular circumstances of this case that it would be correct to  make
    a decision being made in the absence of a hearing.

11. It was for the appellant to satisfy the  First-tier  Tribunal,  on  the
    balance of probabilities, that there were very significant obstacles to
    his integration. It was asserted in the skeleton  argument  put  before
    the judge that he had no family in Ghana, a  position  consistent  with
    his evidence as set out in his witness statement of  10  December  2019
    where he says that he would not be able to get  employment  as  he  has
    never worked, has no one to support him, and has no relatives to   whom
    he could look for support in Ghana.

12. It is of note that he simply says [7] he has no  family  in  Ghana  and
    that [19] he has no family  or  friends  to  whom  he  could  look  for
    support.  I bear in mind, that an  individual  may  have  family  in  a
    country, but they may not be able to support him as, for example,  they
    are destitute or ill and so these statements are not inconsistent.

13. There is no challenge to the judge's summary of the evidence  that  the
    appellant said he had a lot of cousins, giving their ages as between 10
    and more than 33.  He said only that  he  believes  most  have  settled
    outside Ghana.  The reasoning at [23] - that the evidence suggests that
    there are cousins still  living  within  their  families  in  Ghana  is
    adequate and sustainable given their ages, and  that  they  would  have
    been born around the time he left.

14. It was for the appellant to satisfy the judge that he had no family  to
    whom he could turn in Ghana. The judge did not believe the claim he had
    no family which is how he put  it.   That  his  family  in  the  United
    Kingdom do not support him is  not  a  sufficient  basis  on  which  to
    conclude that the family  in  Ghana  would  not  support  him.  As  the
    respondent submits, the judge did make an adverse credibility  finding,
    and he thus gave adequate reasons for doubting the appellant's  account
    of what support he would face in Ghana.

15. While I note the terms of the grant of permission, it remains the  case
    that it was for the appellant to show that his family would not support
    him, not for the respondent to disprove that assertion.  While  it  may
    well be that they would not, that was not the appellant's case; it  was
    his case that he had no family in Ghana, or that he  did  not  know  if
    they were there. He did not assert that he had family there  who  would
    not or could not assist him,  and  in  that  context  the  decision  is
    sustainable.

16. In summary, the judge gave adequate and sustainable, if brief,  reasons
    for not accepting the appellant's claim that he has no family  to  turn
    to in Ghana.

17. In that context, it was open to the judge to find  that  the  appellant
    had not shown he  had  no  family  support,  and  to  conclude,  albeit
    briefly, that he could not show that there would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to integration. The grounds do  not  properly  identify  what
    these would be if he has family to turn to.

18. In this context, it cannot be  argued  that  the  judge  erred  in  not
    referring to the report on poverty in Ghana, it not being arguable that
    in the light of the sustainable findings, it was material.

19. Accordingly, the conclusion  that  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules  is  adequately  and  sustainably
    reasoned and so is upheld.

20. The judge found that article 8 was not engaged. That,  given  the  very
    restricted nature of this appellant's private life was a  finding  open
    to him and is not properly challenged in the grounds.   Having  reached
    that conclusion, then any error with respect to proportionality is  not
    material. Further, and in any event, in the light  of  the  sustainable
    findings as set out above, and bearing in mind section 117B of the 2002
    Act, such that there is a significant public interest in removal as the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules  are  not  met.  Further,  little
    weight could be attached to the appellant's private life and he is  not
    self-supporting.   It  cannot  therefore  be  argued,   even   in   the
    alternative, that the removal is disproportionate.

21. For these reasons, I conclude  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of law and I uphold it.





Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold it.




       Signed                                Date 28 October 2020


       Jeremy K H Rintoul
       Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
-----------------------
[1] The overriding objective is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with
cases fairly and justly: rule 2(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008; see also rule 2(2) to (4).

