
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13019/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 March 2020                               |On 19 March 2020              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                LEKHAN UDDIN
                          (NO Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms D Khatun, Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Richards-Clarke  in
    which  she  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh, against the decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse
    his application for leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 2. The Secretary of State's decision  was  made  on  12  July  2019.   The
    Appellant exercised his right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appeal came before Judge Richards-Clarke on 13 September  2019  and
    was dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  His application was granted by  Judge  Simpson  on  10
    January 2020 in the following terms

       Permission to  appeal  is  granted  because  the  Decision  arguably
       disclosed:


          i)  Failure overall to make findings and provide  an  adequacy  of
             reasoning on matters in issue in the appellant's  Art  8  human
             rights  appeal,   not   involving   deportation,   within   the
             Immigration Rules, 276ADE(1)(i)(iv), and outwith the Rules.


         ii) All grounds otherwise arguable.




    By a Rule 24 response dated 29 January 2020 the Respondent opposed  the
    grounds  of  appeal  and  argued  that  the  Judge   directed   herself
    appropriately.




Background


 3. The history of this appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  Appellant  is  a
    citizen of Bangladesh who claims to have been born on 29  January  1971
    and to have arrived in the United Kingdom in 1992 with his parents  and
    to  have  been  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain.  In  2001   the
    Appellant's indefinite  leave  stamp  was  transferred  to  his  second
    Bangladeshi passport and in  2005  he  claims  that  he  misplaced  his
    passport. In 2012 the Appellant applied  for  British  citizenship  and
    this was eventually refused in 2014 because discrepancies  between  the
    details on the passport that the Appellant claimed to have lost and the
    information given in his citizenship application led the Respondent  to
    the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  was  guilty  of  deception.   In
    particular the original passport showed a date of birth of  29  January
    1974 with entry to the UK on 1 June 1985  whilst  the  application  for
    citizenship showed a date of birth of 29 January 1971 with entry to the
    UK on 5 October 1992.


 4. In  refusing  the  application  for  indefinite  leave  the  Respondent
    considered the application under paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration
    Rules but decided that the   Appellant had  deliberately  attempted  to
    mislead a government  department  and  therefore  failed  to  meet  the
    suitability requirements of paragraph S-LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules and that due to the use of deception he  also  failed
    to meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  S-LTR.2.2(a).  The  Appellant
    exercised his right of appeal on human rights grounds.

 5. In dismissing the appeal the Judge identified that  the  issues  to  be
    decided were whether the application fell to be refused for the  stated
    reasons, whether the Appellant had lived  continuously  in  the  United
    Kingdom for 20  years  or  whether  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his return to Bangladesh and whether the  decision  caused
    the Respondent to be in breach of Article  8  ECHR.  On  all  of  these
    issues the Judge found against the Appellant.


Submissions

 6. For the Appellant Ms Khatun said  that  the  Judge  has  erred  in  the
    application of  the  law  and  referred  to  her  written  submissions.
    Referred by me to paragraph 276A  Ms  Khatun  said  she  would  not  be
    pursuing the 276ADE submission as she accepted that 276A of Appendix FM
    made it clear that the Appellant had not spent 20 years continuously in
    the United Kingdom.


 7. Ms Khatun said that as  a  result  it  was  only  Article  8  that  was
    relevant. In this respect the Judge accepts that Article 8  is  engaged
    and that it is a question of proportionality and that section  117B  of
    the 2002 Act falls in the Appellant's favour. However, Ms  Khatun  also
    accepted that 117B factors are neutral. She said that when dealing with
    the  public  interest  the  Judge  makes  conflicting  statements.   At
    paragraph 18 the Judge finds  that  the  Appellant's  presence  is  not
    conducive to public good but at paragraph 23 she says the opposite. The
    Judge erred by mixing Appendix FM suitability requirements with Article
    8. This is incorrect application of the law.


 8. If Article 8 is engaged as accepted at paragraph  23  it  was  for  the
    Respondent  to  show  the  interference  was  justified  necessary  and
    proportionate. Ms Khatun submitted that the Judge erred in  not  taking
    all  the  factors  into  consideration.  The  Appellant  provided   his
    reasoning for what was alleged against him. His residence  is  accepted
    at paragraph 19. Even with a break of 12 months he spent  the  majority
    of life in the UK. This has not been weighed in the balance.


 9. Referring to SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ  813  Ms  Khatun  said  that
    integration was not just about going back and starting life afresh.  It
    his ability to function and build new  relationships  and  adapt  to  a
    different environment. Paragraph  19  of  the  decision  is  worded  in
    similar terms to the refusal letter. This is not  a  broad  evaluation.
    The Judge has failed to properly consider the Appellant's circumstances
    as set out in paragraph 13 of his statement.


10. For the Secretary of State Mr Howells referred to the Rule 24 response.
    He said that it was noteworthy that written and  oral  submissions  did
    not pursue the point in paragraph 5 of the  written  grounds  that  the
    Judge  erred  in  finding  against   the   Appellant   on   suitability
    requirements at paragraph 18. If that is not challenged  any  error  in
    respect of paragraph 276ADE (1) (iii) and (vi) is not relevant  as  all
    suitability requirements are not met. The Judge's  findings  are  fully
    considered.  It  is  clear  that  she  did  not  find  the  Appellant's
    explanation of fraudulent submission of passport coherent or plausible.


11. The written grounds relied on Parveen v SSHD [2018] EWCA  Civ  932  and
    paragraph 9 of the grounds asserts that the Judge failed to  appreciate
    the obstacles to  integration  relied  upon.  The  written  submissions
    before Judge and the statement put the main obstacle to integration  as
    the  Appellant's  medical  condition.  This  is  dealt  with   at   the
    penultimate sentence of paragraph 19 of  the  decision.  The  Appellant
    does not bring forward evidence on health treatment  in  Bangladesh  or
    difficulties in travel. In response to paragraph 8  of  grounds  it  is
    clear that that the Judge was aware of the Appellant's  claim  that  he
    arrived at age 21.

12. Today the focus is on Article 8. This is considered briefly but  in  an
    adequate and sustainable manner. The Judge refers to section 117B which
    Rhuppiah says are neutral factors. There was no reason why the  failure
    to meet Immigration Rules should not be taken into account.  The  issue
    was private life not family life and no witnesses  were  called  o  the
    Appellant's behalf.

13. I reserved my decision.


Decision


14. As Mr Howells noted the grounds of appeal and the  written  submissions
    do not fully  align.  I  will  deal  with  the  issues  and  assertions
    contained in both.




15. The first is straightforward and was accepted by  Ms  Khatun  as  being
    erroneous. The submissions suggest that the '20-year rule is not clear'
    on what period of time breaks continuity. Paragraph 276A in fact  makes
    this abundantly clear.




    276A. For the purposes of paragraphs 276B to 276D and 276ADE (1).

(a) "continuous residence" means residence in  the  United  Kingdom  for  an
unbroken period, and for these purposes a period shall not be considered  to
have been broken where an applicant is absent from the United Kingdom for  a
period of 6 months or less at any one time, ...




    It is accepted that the Appellant was in Bangladesh from 29 March  2002
    to 18 March 2003. This is a period of more  than  six  months  and  the
    Judge did not  err  in  finding  that  this  broke  his  continuity  of
    residence.




16. Turning to paragraph 276ADE (vi) upon which the application  was  based
    it  is  a  prerequisite  that  the  Appellant  meets  the   suitability
    requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.  In  this  respect  the  issue
    related  to  the  circumstances  under  which   his   application   for
    citizenship had been refused. On the basis that the Appellant attempted
    to mislead a  government  department  using  deception  the  Respondent
    considered that the Appellant did not meet the suitability requirements
    under paragraph  S.LTR.1.6  and  S.LTR.2.2(a).   The  Judge  finds,  at
    paragraph 18, that on the evidence before her she is not satisfied that
    the Appellant has been able to satisfactorily explain the discrepancies
    that have led the  Respondent  to  believe  that  he  has  fraudulently
    obtained a passport. She did not find  his  evidence  in  this  respect
    coherent or plausible.




17. The grounds and written submissions do not take issue with the  Judge's
    findings in this respect. In oral submissions Ms Khatun suggested  that
    the  Judge  had  not  given  full  consideration  to  the   Appellant's
    explanation and had merely followed the terms of the refusal letter. In
    my judgment there is no basis for this  assertion.  It  is  clear  from
    paragraphs  17  and  19  of  the  decision  that  the  Judge  took  the
    Appellant's explanation into account. It  is  in  my  judgement  hardly
    surprising that the Judge did not accept that  there  was  an  innocent
    explanation for a situation where the Appellant's stated date of  birth
    differed by three years and his entry to the UK by seven years.  Indeed
    the only 'explanation' is contained  at  paragraphs  7  to  10  of  the
    Appellant's witness statement which, in summary, say the discrepancy is
    down to a Home Office error  and  the  Home  Office  has  mistaken  the
    Appellant for someone else.




18. Ms Khatun's submission was that  it  was  only  really  the  Article  8
    assessment that was relevant to the appeal and that in this respect the
    Judge confused the suitability test under the  Immigration  Rules  with
    the Article 8 proportionality assessment. In my judgement there was  no
    such discrepancy. The Judge found at paragraph 18 that his presence  in
    the United Kingdom was not conducive to the public good. The finding at
    paragraph 23 that he meets the public interest  requirements  of  s117B
    (because he speaks English and is not reliant on  public  funds)  is  a
    wholly different test.  The  two  tests  are  neither  conflicting  nor
    mutually exclusive. It is entirely possible, and indeed it is the  case
    here, for a person who speaks English and is self-sufficient not to  be
    of good character.




19. In reaching her conclusion in respect of Article 8 the Judge deals with
    matters briefly but in my judgment, there is no material error  of  law
    in her decision. The  Appellant  has  no  family  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom. It had been  found  that  his  presence  in  the  UK  was  not
    conducive to the public  good.  Whereas  he  submitted  in  his  appeal
    statement that he had friends in the UK none were called to  give  oral
    evidence. The Appellant witness statement is vague not saying when  and
    where  his  late  parents  died,  giving  no  details  of  his   living
    circumstances in the United Kingdom, giving no explanation of where  he
    lived or who he visited in the year he spent in Bangladesh  and  merely
    saying (at paragraph 12) "I have established my private life here  with
    my friends".  So far as his  integration  in  Bangladesh  is  concerned
    there was a similar lack  of  fundamental  detail  in  the  Appellant's
    statement only stating that he has  no  family  or  other  contacts  in
    Bangladesh with no details given about his late  parents  circumstances
    or his contact with Bangladesh over the years. It would  be  impossible
    given the lack of any  real  detail  for  any  Tribunal  to  reach  the
    conclusion that the interference in the Appellant's private life caused
    by his removal would be  disproportionate.  There  is  nothing  in  the
    statement  of  evidence  to  show  that  there  is  any   significantly
    qualitative aspect to  the  Appellant's  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.




20. My conclusion from all of the above is that there is no error of law in
    the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  was  material  to  the
    decision to dismiss this appeal.











Summary of decision

21. Appeal dismissed. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.






Signed                                  Date: 10 March 2020


J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


