
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13915/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 March 2018                              |On 5 April 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Ab
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION continued)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant/Secretary of State:   Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office
                                   Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Omoboade, Legal Representative of CTM
                                   Immigration & Welfare Legal Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Throughout this decision I  shall  refer  to  the  Respondent  as  "the
    Appellant" as he was before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone and his date of birth  is  [
    ] 1999. His mother, GM, is the Sponsor in this case.  She is a  British
    citizen.  Her date of birth  is  [  ]  1979.   The  Appellant  made  an
    application for entry clearance to join the Sponsor in  the  UK  on  28
    January 2016.  The  application  was  refused  by  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer on 15 April 2016.  The Appellant appealed against that decision
    and his appeal was allowed  under  Article  8  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT") Judge P S Aujla in a decision that was promulgated on 2  August
    2017 following a hearing on 24 July 2017

3.   The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  by  FtT  Judge
    Page on 23 January 2018. Thus, the matter came before me.  Judge  Aujla
    heard evidence from the Sponsor.  The application was  refused  by  the
    ECO because it was not accepted that the Appellant was related  to  the
    Sponsor as claimed.  This was not an issue that  was  advanced  at  the
    hearing before the FtT following the production of DNA  evidence.   The
    ECO was not satisfied that the Appellant's father was deceased  in  the
    light of a discrepancy  about  the  date  of  birth  disclosed  in  the
    documents produced by the Appellant.  The ECO was  not  satisfied  that
    the Sponsor would be able to maintain the Appellant adequately  without
    further recourse to public funds.  These  matters  were  issues  before
    Judge Aujla.

The Findings of the FtT

4.    In  respect  of  the  discrepant  documents  produced  concerning  the
    father's death the judge made findings at paragraphs 29, 30 and 31:-

         "29. The Appellant claimed that his father had died on  [  ]  1999,
             just under 7 months before he was born,  on  [  ]  1999.   The
             Appellant's  birth  certificate   and   his   father's   death
             certificate were issued on 22 December 2015  and  08  February
             2016 respectively.  The death certificate appears on page  40.
             It was issued by the Chief Registrar at the  Office  of  Chief
             Registrar, Ministry of Health and stated that the  Appellant's
             father died on 15 January 1999.  The document on page  44  was
             issued on 03 May  2016,  a  few  days  after  the  Appellant's
             application was refused, on 15 April 2016.  That document  was
             issued by The Deputy Chief  Registrar.   It  stated  that  the
             Appellant's father died on [ ] 1999.  There  are  therefore  2
             separate documents issued by the Office of Chief Registrar  on
             2 separate dates confirming that the Appellant's  father  died
             on [ ] 1999.


         30.  I now turn  to  the  documents  on  page  35  and  45.   Those
             documents were issued  by  the  Ministry  of  Social  Welfare,
             Gender and Children's Affairs, not  by  the  Office  of  Chief
             Registrar.  The document on page 35 was issued on 24  November
             2015 and stated that the Appellant's father died on [ ]  2013.
             The document on page  45,  which  is  an  exact  copy  of  the
             document on page 35 except that it was issued on 03 May  2016,
             the same day as the document on page 44 was issued and  stated
             that he died on [ ]  1999.   I  therefore  have  before  me  4
             documents, 3 of which stated that the date of death  was  [  ]
             1999 and 1 stated that it was [ ] 2013.


         31.  Whilst  I  note  that  it  would  have  been  better  had  the
             authorities stated in the document on page 45  that  they  had
             made an error when issuing the document on  page  35,  when  I
             consider that I have 3 documents, 2 of which  were  issued  by
             the  Office  of  the  Registrar,  I  am  satisfied  that   the
             discrepancy must have arisen as a result of an error.  I  have
             3 documents issued by the authorities which confirmed that the
             Appellant's father died on [ ] 1999.  Bearing in mind that the
             Appellant only had to make out his  case  on  the  balance  of
             probabilities, I am prepared to accept the contents  of  those
             documents and find that the Appellant's  father  was  deceased
             and he died on [ ] 1999."

5.   The  judge  accepted  the  Sponsor's  evidence  about  the  Appellant's
    father's death and the documents.  He  accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    grandmother with whom he was living died on 17 August  2015  and  since
    then he had been cared for by neighbours.  The  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant was not able to satisfy the maintenance requirements  of  the
    Rules.  This was conceded by the Appellant.  The judge  considered  the
    Appellant's best interests and  he  directed  himself  in  relation  to
    Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC).   The  judge
    considered Article  8  and  made  the  following  salient  findings  at
    paragraphs 40, 41 and 42:-

         "40. On the evidence before me,  I  find  that  the  Appellant  was
             living alone since 17 August 2015.  He was born on [  ]  1999.
             He is 17  years  old  now  and  was  16  years  old  when  the
             Respondent made the decision.  He was cared for by neighbours,
             no doubt on a temporary basis until the Sponsor  was  able  to
             make some arrangements for his care or bring him over  to  the
             United Kingdom.  I have found that the Sponsor  was  the  sole
             surviving parent of the Appellant.  Had it not  been  for  the
             Sponsor not being able to satisfy the maintenance  requirement
             in the Immigration Rules, this appeal would have been  allowed
             without regard to  article  8  being  considered  outside  the
             Immigration Rules.  In the particular  circumstances  of  this
             case, I find that there  were  compelling  circumstances  that
             justified grant of entry  clearance  outside  the  Immigration
             Rules.


         41.  For the sake of completeness, I further  find  that,  for  the
             same reasons as stated above there were serious and compelling
             family or other considerations in this  case  which  made  the
             Appellants'  (sic)   exclusion   from   the   United   Kingdom
             undesirable.


         42.  On the evidence  before  me,  I  find  that  the  Respondent's
             decision would place the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of  its
             obligations under the 1950 convention as well as under section
             55 of 2009 Act.  The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds
             under article 8."

The Grounds of Appeal

6.    The  grounds  challenge  the  judge's  reasoning  in  respect  of  the
    documents concerning the father's death  and  the  conclusions  of  the
    judge under Article 8.

The Error of Law

7.   The Sponsor's evidence was that there was a  mistake  on  the  document
    from the Ministry of Social Welfare, Gender and Children's Affairs  and
    in response to this she produced a corrected  document  from  the  same
    organisation and a letter from  a  doctor  corroborating  the  date  of
    death.  The judge accepted the Sponsor's  evidence  that  there  was  a
    mistake in the document at page 35  of  the  AB,  having  accepted  the
    evidence from the Sponsor on the issue.   The  judge  was  entitled  to
    attach weight to the three documents which stated that the date of  the
    father's death was [ ] 1999.  Thus, the judge was entitled to  conclude
    that the Appellant satisfied the  Immigration  Rules  (under  paragraph
    297) save the maintenance requirements of  the  Rules.   The  Appellant
    conceded that he could not meet the maintenance rules.

8.       The decision under Article 8 is inadequately reasoned.   The  judge
    concluded that there were compelling circumstances, however he did  not
    set out what these are.  The Appellant was not living alone as recorded
    by the judge. He was living with a neighbour, SK, whose evidence is  at
    page 35 of the Appellant's bundle.  The judge attached significance  to
    the fact that  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  failure  to  meet  the
    maintenance requirements of the Rules he would have allowed the  appeal
    under the Rules.  There was no attempt made by the  judge  to  identify
    the public interest. It is not clear what, if any, weight  he  attached
    to it.  There is no mention of the relevant factors at Section 117B  of
    the 2002 Act and whether account was  taken  of  them.  The  assessment
    under Article 8 is materially flawed.  I set aside the decision of  the
    FtT to allow the appeal under Article 8.

Conclusions

9.   The Sponsor was in attendance at the hearing before me.  There  was  no
    further witness statement from her in the event that the appeal was  to
    be remade by me at the  error  of  law  hearing;  a  situation  clearly
    envisaged by the directions issued to the parties.  I  noted  that  her
    witness statement of  3  July  2017  before  the  FtT  was  lacking  in
    sufficient detail.  The judge did not set out her  evidence  in  detail
    and the Record of Proceedings did not suggest that her oral evidence at
    the hearing significantly expanded upon that in her  statement.   There
    was application made for an adjournment and I proceeded to  remake  the
    matter. I suggested that the Sponsor oral evidence before me  and  both
    parties agreed to this course of action.  I  indicated  that  I  sought
    clarification on a couple of issues to properly engage with the  appeal
    under Article 8.  I informed the Sponsor that I  needed  to  know  more
    about the history of the family and the  Appellant's  circumstances  in
    Sierra Leone.

10.      The Sponsor's evidence before me was that she last saw her  son  in
    2007.  She speaks to him everyday.  She is unable to travel  to  Sierra
    Leone following an accident in 2015.  She has not  been  able  to  work
    since and is dependent on benefit.  Since the death of the  Appellant's
    grandmother he has lived with a neighbour, SK, in a flat  in  the  same
    compound as that  where  he  lived  with  his  grandmother.   The  flat
    comprises two bedrooms and a living room.  SK's sons reside there.  The
    Appellant does not have a bedroom. He has to sleep in the living  room.
    He has malaria as a result.  Since the decision  he  has  had  typhoid.
    The current arrangements  cannot  continue  because  the  Appellant  is
    unhappy.  He has no family in Sierra Leone and he feels alone.   He  is
    sad and his school work is deteriorating.  The  Sponsor  pays  for  his
    school fees.  She sends money to SK.  It is hoped  that  the  Appellant
    will finish school this year and attend university thereafter.

11.  The Sponsor submitted further evidence at  the  hearing  before  me  in
    respect of her health. She relied on evidence from Dr Morgan of 2 March
    2018 confirming that she has "ongoing disability with  discoid  lateral
    meniscus tear and chondromalacia patellae."  She is under the  care  of
    the orthopaedics team and is currently mobilising with crutches and  is
    undergoing physiotherapy.  In the doctor's opinion  the  Sponsor  would
    benefit from the help of  the  Appellant  in  taking  her  9  year  old
    daughter to and from school and making it possible for  her  to  attend
    hospital  appointments  regularly  which  would  facilitate  a  quicker
    recovery and return to work.  There  is  a  document  from  Lewisham  &
    Greenwich NHS Trust of 27  April  2017  which  confirms  the  Sponsor's
    diagnosis as stated by Dr Morgan.

12.  There are a number of documents in the  Appellant's  bundle  which  was
    before the FtT which I have taken into account.  There is a letter from
    Albert Academy which is the school the Appellant  attended  of  23  May
    2016.  In the letter it is asserted that the  Appellant's  conduct  and
    academic performance is deteriorating and the  advice  is  that  he  is
    reunited with his mother.  About the Appellant the following is stated;



         "... presently a very sad lad since his grandma died, that had been
         a source of solace for him and  he  is  not  the  same  person  any
         longer.


         The school has learnt that he is also alone with nobody  else  here
         to take the place of the late woman.  Surviving here has  become  a
         daily struggle for him ...".

13.  There is a letter from the Government  of  Sierra  Leone,  Ministry  of
    Health and Sanitation from Dr Ngobeh of  8  February  2016.  Dr  Ngobeh
    states that AB has been regularly  visiting  his  clinic  for  "medical
    appraisal" and that he has been the family physician for the past  year
    and has been receiving and sending correspondence  to  the  Appellant's
    mother who is responsible for his medical  bills.   The  Appellant  has
    presented with episodes of malaria and moderate anaemia  for  which  he
    has been treated.  The Appellant is currently residing with a neighbour
    where he is unavoidably  exposed  to  recurrent  episodes  of  mosquito
    bites, hence the course of his illness. Dr Ngobeh  recommends  that  he
    goes to stay with his mother  abroad.   There  is  a  "declaration  and
    testimony" from SK of 3 May 2016.  Her evidence is that she has been  a
    guardian for AB since the death of his grandmother.

14.  It is important in this case to understand the timeline which  was  not
    made entirely clear by the FtT.  The Appellant was born  on  10  August
    1999.  His father died shortly after his birth.  His mother left Sierra
    Leone in 2004 from which time the Appellant lived with his  grandmother
    until she passed away  in  2015.   She  visited  Sierra  Leone  on  two
    occasions only; in 2005 and 2007.  The decision of the  ECO,  which  is
    the subject of this appeal, is dated 15 April 2016, four months  before
    the Appellant's 17th birthday.  The Appellant's  mother,  the  Sponsor,
    was working in the UK until she had an accident in  2015.   Since  then
    she has been reliant on public funds. She became a British  citizen  in
    2016.  She has not seen the Appellant since 2007.  She had  a  daughter
    here in the UK in 2008.

15.  I must consider Article 8 based on the position  at  the  date  of  the
    decision. There is family life between the Appellant and  the  Sponsor.
    There is no doubt about this.  Article 8 is engaged.   However,  it  is
    far from clear on the evidence  before  me  that  there  is  a  serious
    interference with it.  As a matter of fact, the Appellant has not lived
    with his mother since he was aged 4 or 5.   He  has  not  seen  her  in
    person since he was aged 8 or 9.  Since she left Sierra Leone  in  2004
    she has visited him twice.  There is no evidence before me that he  has
    ever seen his sister in person.

16.  There is evidence that since the death of  the  grandmother  there  has
    been regular contact between the Appellant and the Sponsor. The Sponsor
    pays the Appellant's school and medical fees  and  funds  his  everyday
    needs. However, the extent of the  interference  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8 must be considered in the light  of  the  realities  of  this
    relationship which is made clear when the timeline is  appreciated.   I
    conclude that there is no interference with family life.

17.  In any event, the decision  is  proportionate.   The  Appellant  was  a
    child at the date of the decision. The evidence of  the  Sponsor  about
    whether SK received payment for looking  after  her  son  was  unclear.
    There is no evidence that SK is unwilling to continue with whatever the
    arrangement is. In her evidence she does not refer to the inadequacy of
    accommodation or of there being a health  risk.   Her  evidence  is  as
    follows:

         "[SK] has given her unconditional consent to the Ministry for  [AB]
         to reunite with his biological mother in LONDON indefinitely as  he
         needs proper care and protection.  Similarly the biological mother,
         [GM], has heartily requested from the Ministry for her son to  join
         her in LONDON ...".

18.   The  Appellant  is  sleeping  in  a  living  room  and  is  bitten  by
    mosquitoes. However, he lives in the same compound as he did whilst  he
    was living with his grandmother.  There is no persuasive evidence  that
    the medical problems he has suffered have  been  caused  by  inadequate
    accommodation.  The Sponsor's evidence before  me  was  that  that  the
    Appellant has had typhoid since  the  decision.   There  is  no  cogent
    evidence to connect  the  accommodation  with  the  Appellant's  health
    problems.  The Appellant sought medical treatment in Sierra  Leone  for
    which he received and which is funded  by  his  mother.   There  is  no
    evidence that his mother will not be able to continue to maintain  him.
    There is no reason advanced before me  why  he  will  not  be  able  to
    continue with his studies.

19.  The letter from the school suggests that the Appellant grieves for  his
    grandmother. This is  understandable  and  reasonably  likely  to  have
    caused deterioration  in  his  grades.   It  is  not  clear  upon  what
    information the school or  the  doctor  in  Sierra  Leone  based  their
    opinions in relation to the Appellant being reunited with  his  mother.
    However, I have considered that the Appellant would prefer to  be  here
    with his mother and that she very much wants him to join  her.  I  have
    considered the practical assistance  the  Sponsor  would  benefit  from
    should the Appellant join her here.  I accept that at present  she  may
    not be able to fly, but there is no evidence that  this  is  long-term.
    She has made only two visits to date.

20.      The best interests of a child are  usually  best  served  by  being
    with a parent.  This is an entry clearance case and unusual insofar  as
    face-to-face contact between the Appellant and his mother has been very
    limited. The Appellant's best interests are a primary consideration and
    I attach weight to this in the proportionality assessment.  There is no
    evidence before me which would lead to  a  conclusion  that  there  are
    family or other considerations which would make exclusion  undesirable.
    There is no evidence of neglect or abuse or that the Appellant's  needs
    are unmet.  There is no evidence that the arrangement is not stable for
    his physical care.  Continuity of residence is  a  significant  factor.
    The Appellant has lived in Sierra Leone all his life.  He is  now  aged
    18. At the date of the decision he was shortly to turn 17. He  has  not
    lived with his mother since he was aged 4 or 5. He has seen  her  since
    then on two occasions  only.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  his  mother  is
    dependent on funds and living in social housing.  Whilst  this  may  be
    temporary there is no evidence to establish when  she  will  return  to
    work or that her earnings before the accident were sufficient  to  meet
    the requirements of the Rules.  If  the  Appellant  were  to  join  his
    mother here there will be a burden on public services.   There  are  no
    compelling circumstances identified in  this  case.  If  there  were  a
    serious interference with the Appellant's family life (there is not  in
    this case), the decision is proportionate.

21.    The Appellant's appeal is dismissed under Article 8.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 3 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

