
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/13895/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester Civil Justice   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On: 21st June 2019                   |On: 23rd August 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           SYED ASJID HUSSAIN SHAH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Harvey, Counsel instructed by Farani Taylor
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Respondent is a national of Pakistan  born  on  the  22nd  August
       1980.  On the 30th September  2018  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
       Foudy) allowed his human rights appeal. The Secretary  of  State  was
       granted permission to  appeal  against  that  decision  on  the  22nd
       January 2019.

    2. Permission was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hanson  in  narrow
       terms. The case concerned the decision to  deport  Mr  Shah.  It  was
       common ground that in order to defeat that decision Mr  Shah  had  to
       demonstrate that he fell within one or more of the  'exceptions'  set
       out in s33 of the Borders Act 2007, those exceptions  being  set  out
       and explained at paragraphs 398-399A of the Immigration  Rules.    Mr
       Shah had been sentenced to two years' imprisonment, and relied on the
       presence of his children in the United Kingdom. The relevant parts of
       the Rules were therefore:

           398. Where a person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
           contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8  of  the  Human
           Rights Convention, and

           (a)   the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
           the public good and in the public  interest  because  they  have
           been convicted of an offence for which they have been  sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

           (b)   the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
           the public good and in the public  interest  because  they  have
           been convicted of an offence for which they have been  sentenced
           to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12
           months; or

           (c)   the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
           the public good and in the public interest because, in the  view
           of the Secretary of State, their offending  has  caused  serious
           harm or they are a persistent offender who  shows  a  particular
           disregard for the law, the Secretary of State in assessing  that
           claim will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A  applies  and,
           if it does not, the public interest in deportation will only  be
           outweighed by other factors  where  there  are  very  compelling
           circumstances over and above those described in  paragraphs  399
           and 399A.




           399. This paragraph applies  where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
           applies if -

           (a)    the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a child under the age of 18 years  who  is  in
           the UK, and

                (i)    the child is a British Citizen; or

                (ii)   the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                least the 7 years immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the
                immigration decision; and in either case

                    (a)      it would be unduly harsh for the child to  live
                    in the country to which the person is  to  be  deported;
                    and

                    (b)      it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  child  to
                    remain in the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                    deported; or

           ....

    3. Judge Foudy had found that Mr Shah's deportation  would  have  unduly
       harsh consequences for his children should he  be  removed,  but  the
       determination was silent on the matter raised at 399(a)(i)(a):  would
       it be 'unduly harsh' for the child(ren) to live  in  the  country  to
       which Mr Shah was to  be  deported,  namely  Pakistan.  It  was  this
       omission that Judge Hanson considered to be an arguable error of law.
       As Mr McVeety agreed, that was the sole ground upon which  permission
       was granted.

    4. I accept that Judge Foudy did not expressly make a finding on whether
       it would be unduly harsh to expect the children to leave  the  United
       Kingdom and go to Pakistan with Mr Shah. I also find  that  there  is
       good reason for that: this was a matter that had been conceded by the
       Secretary of State.

    5. The factual matrix in this appeal was that Mr Shah is  married  to  a
       British citizen of Somali origin. She and her son  had  come  to  the
       United Kingdom as refugees; they  had  been  granted  protection  and
       subsequently naturalised as British nationals. It was not in  dispute
       that Mr Shah had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife,
       and  that  he  further  had  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
       relationship with his step-son, who had suffered badly when  Mr  Shah
       was absent from the family home during his imprisonment.  The  couple
       also had a child together.

    6. Having had regard to those  family  relationships  the  Secretary  of
       State, at the date of the decision to deport, had expressly  conceded
       that it would be unduly harsh for Mr Shah's stepson to have to go and
       live in Pakistan with him.  The 'reasons for refusal' letter contains
       the rather simplistic reasoning that this was because he  is  not  Mr
       Shah's biological son: one might think it was actually because he was
       a British citizen of Somali origin, but whatever the reason  for  it,
       the concession was made. When the appeal came before Judge Foudy  the
       Secretary of State was represented by a very  experienced  Presenting
       Officer, Mr T. Dillon. Mr Dillon noted the terms of  that  concession
       and decided that in view of it he would not argue that  it  would  be
       reasonable for the boy's mother and half-brother to  go:  this  would
       have the quite illogical effect of creating a  family  split  between
       members of the family who had had no involvement in  the  criminality
       at the heart of the case. Accordingly the Secretary of  State's  case
       before the First-tier Tribunal was exclusively that  Mr  Shah's  wife
       and the two children could reasonably be expected to  remain  in  the
       United Kingdom without him.

    7. On this matter, Judge Foudy's findings are clear.  In a detailed  and
       careful determination she assesses the evidence that Mr  Shah's  wife
       was suffering from significant mental  health  issues  and  that  her
       eldest son was going through a very difficult time. He had failed his
       GCSEs, was truanting from school and had  generally  been  exhibiting
       very troubled behaviour.   The  younger  child  was  also  presenting
       challenging attitudes towards his mother who was not well  placed  to
       address these issues.   Judge Foudy accepted the evidence that  these
       children - and their mother- needed Mr Shah to remain with the family
       unit in the United Kingdom and it was on that basis that she  allowed
       the appeal. As Judge Hanson notes, these were findings  plainly  open
       to Judge Foudy on the evidence;  he  found  no  arguable  grounds  to
       interfere with them.

    8. It follows that the Secretary of State's appeal  must  be  dismissed,
       since  the  sole  ground  upon  which  permission  was  granted   was
       misconceived. Even if Mr Dillon's decision  at  hearing  were  to  be
       disregarded the concession had already been made in  respect  of  one
       child of the family, and that was enough.




    Decisions

    9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  does  not  contain  any
       material error of law and it is upheld.

   10. There is no order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              21st June 2019
