
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13599/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26th January 2018                   |On 27th February 2018               |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                              miss sabita bura
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Nnamani, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal whose date of birth is recorded  as
    24th June  1989.   On  12th  October  2015  she  made  application  for
    settlement in the United Kingdom on the basis of being a daughter of an
    ex-Gurkha soldier presently settled in the United Kingdom together with
    his wife (the Appellant's mother).

 2. On 10th November 2015 a decision was made to refuse the application and
    the Appellant appealed.  The appeal was heard on 3rd May 2017 by  Judge
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  Geraint  Jones  QC.   He  found  that  the
    Appellant had failed to demonstrate family life  between  her  and  her
    parents such that the appeal fell to be dismissed.  He  made  plain  at
    paragraph 31 that he found Article 8 was not engaged.  He  went  on  to
    say however that  even  if  it  were  engaged  he  would  have  had  no
    hesitation  in  arriving  at  the  conclusion  that  it  would  not  be
    disproportionate of the  United  Kingdom  to  decline  to  enhance  the
    "minimal family life" currently enjoyed between the Appellant  and  her
    parents, especially  given  the  status  quo  has  arisen  through  the
    choices, freely made, on the part of her parents.

 3. Clearly, when read as a whole but focusing on that particular paragraph
    (31), significant weight was given by the judge to the decision of  the
    Appellant's parents to leave the Appellant behind when they came to the
    United Kingdom.

 4. Not content with the decision of Judge Jones QC, by  notice  dated  1st
    June 2017 the Appellant made  application  for  permission  to  appeal.
    There were three grounds.

 5. Firstly, it was submitted that the judge had erred in law by failing to
    have regard to the guidance in the cases of Gurung [2012] EWCA  Civ  62
    and Ghising 2012 UKUT 377; [2013] UKUT 567.  Secondly, that  the  judge
    had failed to make a proper assessment of whether the Appellant enjoyed
    family life with her parents.  Thirdly, that  there  was  an  erroneous
    finding on proportionality.

 6. In the event the issues narrowed because Mr  Clarke  quite  fairly  and
    properly accepted that if there were established to  have  been  family
    life between the Appellant and her parents, on the facts of  this  case
    the proportionality assessment would necessarily lead to  a  conclusion
    that the Appellant should be admitted to the United Kingdom.   However,
    that did not mean that Mr Clarke did  not  forcefully  argue  that  the
    finding of Judge Jones QC with respect to there not being  family  life
    should not be maintained.

 7. In part, the reason why the applicable Rule, Appendix K, was not relied
    upon below was because it was submitted that it did not adequately deal
    with the historical wrong done to families of Gurkhas,  well-documented
    and dealt with in the authorities.

 8. Although this was the Appellant's appeal Mr Clarke addressed me  first,
    placing before me the case of PT (Sri Lanka) v Entry Clearance  Officer
    [2016] EWCA Civ 612.   At  paragraph  22  Underhill  LJ  who  gave  the
    judgment of the court,  posed  this  question,  "Were  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 rights engaged?  He went on to say:

         "22. As regards the law, I can start with Kugathas." In  that  case
             the appellant was resisting removal to Sri Lanka on the  basis
             of his continuing family life with his mother, his brother and
             his married sister, who all lived in  Germany.  He  had  lived
             with them for many years in  Germany  before  coming  to  this
             country about three years prior to the decision under  appeal.
             The leading judgment was given by Sedley LJ at paragraph 14 of
             his judgment he quoted the statement of the Commission in S  v
             United Kingdom that:

                  'Generally, the protection of family life under Article  8
                  involves cohabiting dependants, such as parents and  their
                  dependent, minor children. Whether  it  extends  to  other
                  relationships  depends  on  the   circumstances   of   the
                  particular case. Relationships between  adults,  a  mother
                  and her 33 year old son in the  present  case,  would  not
                  necessarily require the protection of  Article  8  of  the
                  Convention  without  evidence  of  further   elements   of
                  dependency,  involving  more  than  the  normal  emotional
                  ties'."

     He went on at paragraph 23 to say:

         "23. It appears to have been the case that some tribunals have read
             Kugathas as establishing a rebuttable presumption against  any
             relationship  between  an  adult  child  and  his  parents  or
             siblings being sufficient to engage article 8.  In  Ghising  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]  UKUT  00160
             (IAT) the Upper Tribunal was  critical  of  that  reading.  It
             observed at  paragraph  56  of  its  determination  that  'the
             judgment in Kugathas has been interpreted too restrictively in
             the past and ought to be  read  in  the  light  of  subsequent
             decisions  of  the  domestic  and   Strasbourg   courts'.   It
             continued,  at  paragraph  57,  to  point  out  that   several
             authorities had  recognised  that  family  life  may  continue
             between parent and child even after the child has reached  the
             age of majority."

 9. Judge Jones QC then went on to consider a  number  of  authorities  but
    principally Mr Clarke relied on what appears at paragraph 25  in  which
    reference was made to the case of Singh [2015] EWCA Civ  630  in  which
    Sir Stanley Burnton reviewing the authorities but not to Ghising itself
    or Gurung concluded that:

         "A young adult living with his parents or  siblings  will  normally
         have a family life to  be  respected  under  Article  8.   A  child
         enjoying a family life with his parents does not suddenly cease  to
         have a family life at midnight as he turns 18 years of age.  On the
         other hand a young adult living independently of  his  parents  may
         well not have a family life for the purposes of Article 8."

    That contrasts with other guidance more recently the  case  of  AA  -v-
    United Kingdom (Application No.8000/8 in the European  Court  of  Human
    Rights in which it was said that:

         "An examination of the courts case law would tend to  suggest  that
         the applicant, a young adult of 24 years old, who resides with  his
         mother and has not yet founded a family of his own can be  regarded
         as having family life."

    That in fact was a point helpful to the Secretary of State  insofar  as
    in that case the adult was living with the parent.

10. The grounds, and I focus on Ground 2, because that is where  the  focus
    of the appeal was, suggested that in essence the decision of the  judge
    was against the weight of the evidence. It is perfectly clear,  reading
    the decision, that Judge Jones  QC  gave  considerable  weight  to  the
    decision of the parents to leave the Appellant behind as evidence of  a
    lack of family life between the Appellant and her parents in the United
    Kingdom.  He recognised that there was a policy  in  Appendix  K  which
    was, he said, the response of Parliament to  the  perceived  historical
    wrong done to Gurkha children.  He noted that no application  was  made
    by the Appellant to live in the United Kingdom until  the  2015  policy
    was introduced by which time the Appellant was 26 and by that time  she
    lived independently of her parents and had done so for just  over  four
    years.  He notes that the Appellant's father's evidence was that it was
    not acceptable for a young female  to  live  on  her  own  without  her
    parents but Judge Jones QC  went  on  to  observe  that  there  was  no
    suggestion in the evidence that the Appellant had done  anything  other
    than that since her parents chose to come  to  the  United  Kingdom  in
    September 2011, to settle.  If there was some  cultural  impediment  to
    separation then they would not, he found, have chosen  to  relocate  to
    the United Kingdom.  He noted that money was being sent to the daughter
    but that the evidence suggested that payments began  at  or  about  the
    time of the decision to make the application.  There was no  sufficient
    evidence he said of the Appellant's living  arrangements  or  expenses.
    As I have said he went on to focus on  the  remittances  such  as  they
    were, noting that they only began in February 2015, some  eight  months
    prior to the Appellant's settlement application being made.

11. He then went on to make specific findings of fact all of which are  set
    out at paragraph 23 of the decision.  Then at  paragraph  26  he  found
    that the Appellant had not established that there is, or  continues  to
    be family life within the meaning of Article 8 and he did so for  these
    reasons:

      i) The Appellant had been living independently of  her  parents  since
         September 2011.

     ii) The Appellant had been attending  university  and  most  inevitable
         that as a student she had built up her own circle  of  friends  and
         acquaintances.

    iii)  He rejected the assertion that an adult child, an adult  daughter,
         remains the responsibility of her  parents  if  that  assertion  is
         intended to extent to that responsibility being fulfilled  when  it
         is convenient for it to be said to be necessary of fulfilment in an
         immigration context, but not otherwise.

     iv) The telephone or other electronic  contact  that  has  taken  place
         between the Appellant and her  daughters  is  no  more  than  might
         reasonably be expected between parents and  their  adult  children,
         even though, I must acknowledge, that will vary  considerably  from
         family to family and individual to individual.

      v) Although the Appellant's parents have made visits to Nepal, that is
         not indicate of, nor was it claimed to be in  consequence  of,  the
         Appellant being emotionally dependent upon them so that such visits
         were a matter of necessity rather than choice.

     vi) The Appellant is 27 years of age.  She is a young woman who,  as  I
         have found, has lived independently since September 2011.

12. I was taken to the case of Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320.  The question as to
    whether or not Article 8 was engaged with reference to paragraph 17  of
    the judgment which reads:

         "If dependency is read down as meaning 'support', in  the  personal
         sense, and if  one  adds,  echoing  the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence,
         'real' or 'committed' or 'effective' to the word 'support', then it
         represents ... the irreducible minimum of what family life implies.
          Arden LJ said (in paragraph 24 of her judgment) that the 'relevant
         factors ... include identifying who are the near relatives  of  the
         Appellant, the nature of the links between them and the  Appellant,
         the age of the Appellant, where and with whom he has resided in the
         past, and the forms of contact he has  maintained  with  the  other
         members of the family with whom he claims to have a  family  life'.
         She acknowledged (at paragraph 25) that 'there is no presumption of
         family life'. Thus 'a family life is  not  established  between  an
         adult child and his  surviving  parent  or  other  siblings  unless
         something more exists than normal emotional ties'. She  added  that
         '[such] ties might exist if the Appellant  were  dependent  on  his
         family or vice versa', but it  was  'not  ...  essential  that  the
         members of the family should be in the same country'. In Patel  and
         others v Entry Clearance Officer, Mumbai [2010] EWCA Civ 17, Sedley
         LJ said (in paragraph 14 of his judgment, with which  Longmore  and
         Aikens LJJ agreed) that 'what may constitute an extant family  life
         falls well short of what constitutes dependency, and  a  good  many
         adult children ... may still have a family life  with  parents  who
         are now settled here not by leave or by force of  circumstance  but
         by long-delayed right'."

13. Then at paragraph 39 in the case of Rai it is of note that an issue  of
    fact goes to proportionality rather more than  family  life  but  still
    relevant in considering the decision as a whole.  That reads:

         "The Upper Tribunal judge referred repeatedly  to  the  appellant's
         parents having chosen to settle in the United Kingdom, leaving  the
         appellant in the family home in Nepal. Each  time  he  did  so,  he
         stressed the fact that this was a decision they  had  freely  made:
         '... not compulsory but ... voluntarily undertaken ...'  (paragraph
         20), '... having made the choice to come to the  [United  Kingdom]'
         (paragraph 21), '... the willingness of the parents to  leave  ...'
         but that, in my view, was not to  confront  the  real  issue  under
         article 8(1) in this case, which was whether, as a matter of  fact,
         the appellant had demonstrated that he had a family life  with  his
         parents, which had existed at the time of their departure to settle
         in the United Kingdom and had endured  beyond  it,  notwithstanding
         their having left Nepal when they did."

14. The final passage in the case of Rai was at paragraph 61  forming  part
    of the judgment of Lord Justice Beatson who again referred to the  case
    of Singh but saying there was no requirement of 'exceptionality',  that
    all depends on the facts and that there must be something more than the
    love and affection between an adult and his parents or  siblings  which
    will not in itself justify a finding of family life.

15. I have looked with great care at the decision of  Judge  Jones  QC.  An
    error of law based on findings of fact is one which the Upper  Tribunal
    should be slow to make but in my view it was not open to the  judge  on
    the evidence to find that there was no family life.  The  statement  of
    the Appellant's  father  was  to  the  effect  that  he  did  not  make
    application for his daughter earlier than he did because of the  advice
    that he had received to the effect that it would be refused.  His  wife
    came to the United Kingdom to strengthen the case for  their  daughter.
    That was the advice they had received. At paragraph 8 he said  that  he
    and his wife had travelled to Nepal  to  see  their  daughter  on  four
    occasions in all and had tried to maintain their spirits  in  the  hope
    that they would soon be reunited with their daughter. As  soon  as  the
    policy was announced allowing Gurkha children to  make  application  he
    was very happy.  There are four children of the marriage but only  this
    Appellant is living alone dependent on  him,  the  others  are  leading
    their own independent lives.  He said at paragraph 19 that his daughter
    is still emotionally and financially dependent  on  him  whilst  saying
    that in his culture it was not acceptable for a young, single, child to
    live on their own without their parents.  I pause to observe that it is
    important in this jurisdiction generally to take  account  of  cultural
    imperatives.   As  to  contact,  regular  telephone  calls  were  made,
    notwithstanding the expense, and money would be sent as required.   His
    evidence was supported by that of his wife.  There was  also  a  signed
    witness statement of the Appellant herself.

16. Given that the Secretary of State was not represented  at  the  hearing
    below the evidence  of  the  Appellant,  her  father  and  mother  went
    unchallenged.  The decision of the judge  to  dismiss  the  appeal  was
    clearly, in  my  judgment,  when  reading  the  decision  as  a  whole,
    influenced by the decision of the Appellant's parents to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom and leave their daughter  behind  but  that  factor  has
    played too large a part in my view in his finding  that  there  was  no
    family life. To do, as  Judge  Jones  QC  has  done  imports  the  very
    historical wrong which goes certainly to proportionality  but  also  in
    the mind of this judge when one reads the  decision  has  informed  the
    finding that there was no family life.

17. If the family life is no more than  the  normal  emotional  ties  of  a
    parent and child, in the ordinary case that would be  the  end  of  the
    matter and the appeal would be dismissed but not so in the  case  of  a
    Gurkha child.  As Mr Clarke quite rightly and  properly  accepted,  the
    proportionality assessment in this case  on  the  remaking  necessarily
    would lead to the conclusion that the appeal should be allowed.  He was
    right to make that concession but it does mean that it is not necessary
    for me to go through the various proportionality considerations in  the
    light of that concession.

18. I have no hesitation whatsoever in finding that  the  judge  materially
    erred in finding against the weight of the evidence that there  was  no
    family life.  Article 8(1) was clearly engaged  on  the  basis  of  the
    available evidence.  Contact has been maintained  but  there  was  also
    evidence of dependency even if the  documentary  evidence  was  lacking
    but, even allowing for the evidence on balance of probabilities, in the
    absence of challenge  from  the  Secretary  of  State  and  with  three
    witnesses speaking to the emotional and financial support it was not in
    my judgment open to the judge to find that there  was  no  family  life
    unless he could point to something more material which entitled him and
    justified his decision to reject their evidence.

19. In all the circumstances the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set
    aside and remade such that I find there to be family life  and  on  the
    basis of the concession, it being disproportionate  to  withhold  entry
    clearance from the Appellant, the appeal is  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date: 22 February 2018



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
