
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/13657/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 July 2018                         |On 08 October 2018                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                              mr Hassan Soriya
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Manley, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Iran.  On 6 August 2015 he made a  human
    rights application for leave to remain on the basis of his  family  and
    private life in the UK.  The respondent refused this application  on  6
    May 2016.  On page 3 of the Reasons for Refusal Letter  the  respondent
    wrote:  "It  is  accepted  that  you  meet  the  requirements  of  para
    276ADE(1)(i)", which is the  suitability  requirement.   The  appellant
    appealed.  At his hearing he gave evidence, as did several witnesses on
    his behalf.  The evidence of the witnesses was  concerned  solely  with
    his private and family life  ties  in  the  UK,  particularly  with  Ms
    Ireland.  It was his relationship with  her  that  had  led  the  Upper
    Tribunal in 2012 to allow his appeal on  family  life  grounds.   In  a
    decision sent on 31 May 2017 Judge Troup  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (FtT) dismissed his appeal.  Noting that since 2012 the  appellant  and
    Ms Ireland no longer live together, the judge concluded at paragraph 56
    that:

         "56. From the evidence before me, I find that the Appellant and Mrs
             Ireland have been in a stable relationship for about ten years
             since 2007, but there is  no  intention  to  develop  it  into
             anything more than the arrangement  of  mutual  convenience  I
             have found above.  I go on to find from the  evidence  of  Mrs
             Ireland in  particular  that  the  couple  do  not  intend  to
             cohabit, let alone marry or to have  children  (if  that  were
             possible).  I find therefore that the relationship between the
             Appellant and Mrs Ireland cannot  be  categorised  as  'family
             life' in the ordinary meaning of the phrase, namely:

                  'A primary social group consisting of  parents  and  their
                  offspring, the principal function of  which  is  provision
                  for its members' (Collins Dictionary, 9th edition)."

    At paragraphs 59-61 the judge stated:


         "59.  As  for  private  life  and  paragraph  276  ADE(1)  of   the
             Immigration Rules, the Appellant does not meet the suitability
             requirements of sub-paragraph (i) which in turn refers to 'the
             suitability - leave to remain' provisions at S-LTR  1.5  which
             provides that:


                  'The presence of the applicant in the UK is not  conducive
                  to the public good because, in the view of  the  Secretary
                  of State, their offending has caused serious harm or  they
                  are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard
                  for the law."


             This  Appellant  was  sentenced   in   2010   to   26   weeks'
             imprisonment, albeit suspended, and his presence in the UK  is
             not therefore conducive to the public good.

         60.  In any event the Appellant does not meet the  requirements  of
             sub-paragraphs (iii)-(v).

             Sub-paragraph (vi) relates to an applicant who is:

                  "... aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the
                  UK for less than twenty years ... but there would be  very
                  significant obstacles to the applicant's integration  into
                  the country to which he would have to go  if  required  to
                  leave the UK."

         61.  The Appellant says, in terms, that his religion and  political
             views would result in persecution in the event of  his  return
             to Iran.  I note however that his application  for  asylum  in
             the UK was refused and his appeal dismissed in 2001/02 and  no
             further claim has been brought since.  I find  therefore,  for
             the reasons submitted by the Respondent,  that  there  are  no
             very  significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  in  Iran  and
             consequently I dismiss the appeal on private life grounds."

2.   It  can  immediately  be  seen  that  the  judge  overlooked  that  the
    respondent had been satisfied that the appellant  met  the  suitability
    requirement.  Since there was no  exceptional  circumstance  justifying
    the judge to go behind that concession, this was  a  clear  error:  see
    Kalidas (Agreed facts - best practice) [2012] UKUT 00327  (IAC).   Both
    representatives were in agreement on  this  matter.   The  matter  they
    disagreed over concerned whether it was material.

3.   Mr Manley submitted that the judge's  error  was  material  because  it
    necessarily impacted on the judge's treatment of the appellant's  case,
    in particular the appellant's  private  life  circumstances  under  the
    Rules and also outside of  the  Rules.   The  judge  made  no  separate
    assessment once he decided  on  the  appellant's  position  as  regards
    suitability.  The judge also erred in failing to deal with  issues  the
    appellant had raised about risk on return arising from the fact that he
    was an atheist.  Mr Howells submitted to opposite effect.

4.   I am not persuaded that the judge's error as  regards  the  suitability
    requirements of the Rules (overlooking that the  respondent  had  found
    them met) gave rise to a material error.  First of all, the  judge  did
    not say that the (inadvertent) decision he made in paragraph 59 -  that
    the appellant did not meet the suitability requirements - entailed that
    he could not meet the substantive requirements of paragraph 276ADE:  he
    expressly stated at paragraph 60 that in any event  the  appellant  did
    not meet the requirements  of  subparagraphs  (iii)-(v).   Second,  the
    judge addressed these substantive  requirements  and  reached  distinct
    conclusions on them.  Third, the reasons given or  alluded  to  by  the
    judge did not relate to lack of suitability.  Mr  Manley  submits  that
    the judge's reasons for  finding  the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii)-(v) are cursory and this is  a
    result of the adverse finding on  suitability,  but  there  is  nothing
    stated by the judge to suggest that his findings on  these  substantive
    requirements were driven by his adverse finding on suitability. Nor  do
    I accept that they were cursory since as set out in paragraph  62  they
    were cross-referenced to the respondent's reasons ("I  find  therefore,
    for the reasons submitted by the respondent, that  there  are  no  very
    significant obstacles to the reintegration in Iran and  consequently  I
    dismiss the appeal on private life grounds").  At  an  abstract  level,
    failure by a judge to rely on  the  respondent's  reasons  without  any
    separate analysis of why they were afforded weight  can  give  rise  to
    error, but the appellant's grounds before the  Upper  Tribunal  do  not
    challenge the respondent's reasons on this basis; they are confined  to
    an adequacy challenge.

5.      The submissions made on behalf  of  the  appellant  at  the  hearing
    before Judge Troup did raise one issue at paragraph 45, concerning risk
    on return:

         "45. As for private  life,  there  is  'global  awareness'  of  the
             situation in Iran and if a citizen of that country  is  to  do
             the slightest thing wrong it will lead to execution.  He is an
             atheist, does not believe the word of the Prophet  and  abhors
             the regime in Iran, thus making return impossible."

    But the judge dealt with this in paragraph 61.  (I consider the judge's
    treatment about risk on  return  separately  below.)   Further,  it  is
    readily apparent from the appellant's grounds of appeal to the FtT  and
    from the witnesses called and submissions made,  that  the  appellant's
    principal basis for appealing was because he considered he had a family
    life relationship (still) with Ms Ireland.  The only  point  he  raised
    regarding very significant obstacles concerned risk on return.

6.   Turning to the judge's treatment of the risk on return  issue,  I  have
    already noted that the judge addressed it.  Mr Manley submits that  the
    judge's reasoning for doing so was flawed because he essentially did no
    more than rely on the dismissal of his  asylum  appeal  in  June  2002,
    whereas the appellant was now saying he  was  an  atheist.   I  do  not
    consider this submission identifies an error of law on the part of  the
    judge for several reasons: (i) on Devaseelan principles the  judge  was
    entitled to treat the adverse findings made on the  appellant's  asylum
    claim in 2002 as a starting point; (ii) the appellant did not  seek  in
    the intervening years to make further representations  in  relation  to
    risk on return; (iii) the application he made for leave  to  remain  in
    2015 was confined to family  and  private  life  grounds  and  made  no
    reference to risk on return; (iv) his grounds of  appeal  against  this
    refusal made  no  mention  of  risk  on  return;  (v)  in  response  to
    directions that he produce evidence in support of his appeal  prior  to
    the hearing the appellant sent no evidence relating to risk  on  return
    and his witnesses spoke solely  about  his  circumstances  in  the  UK.
    Against that background I consider  that  the  judge  did  not  err  in
    confining his assessment to noting that the appellant's  asylum  appeal
    was dismissed in 2002 "and no further claim has  been  brought  since".
    At the abstract level,  I  would  accept  that  the  concept  of  "very
    significant obstacles to reintegration" can encompass  risk  on  return
    factors; that might be considered a matter of common sense if not  also
    ordinary meaning.   Risk  on  return  is  clearly  a  serious  type  of
    difficulty.  The problem in the appellant's case is that on the judge's
    findings there was no evidential basis to substantiate his  claim  that
    he would be at risk on return.

7.   The grounds do not as such impugn the judge's findings as  regards  the
    appellant's Article 8  circumstances  outside  the  Rules,  but  it  is
    entirely clear that in light  of  the  judge's  findings  on  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(i)-(iii)   that   he   could   not    establish    compelling
    circumstances.  Indeed, by virtue of S117B of the NIAA 2002  the  judge
    was obliged to attach little weight to  the  appellant's  private  life
    ties which has been  established  whilst  his  immigration  status  was
    precarious.  In addition, the appellant had a criminal history as a sex
    offender and a poor record of compliance with reporting conditions.

8.   For the above reasons I conclude that whilst the judge erred in law  in
    respect of the appellant's position under paragraph  276ADE(1)(i),  his
    decision contained no material error.  Accordingly it must stand.




No anonymity direction is made.






Signed:                                 Date: 3 OCTOBER 2018

[pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




