
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13383/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 December 2019                   |On 3 December 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     AOS
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms M Butler, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP
For the respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant(s).

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Freer promulgated 2.7.19, dismissing her appeal on human
    rights grounds against the decision of the Secretary  of  State,  dated
    24.5.18, to refuse her application made on 15.12.17 for entry clearance
    for settlement to join her mother, as the child  of  a  person  granted
    refugee status in the UK on the basis of  being  the  victim  of  human
    trafficking.

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    13.9.19. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor granted permission on  all
    grounds on 24.10.19, finding those grounds 'strongly arguable'.

 3.  The  grounds  submit  that  the  judge  had  engaged  in   speculation
    unsupported by evidence; failed to have regard to  several  sources  of
    apparently unchallenged expert  evidence;  failed  to  consider  and/or
    apply  relevant  Country  Guidance,  including  HD  (trafficked  women)
    Nigeria CG [2016] UKUT 454; and  reached  an  unsustainable  conclusion
    that there was no article 8 ECHR family life between the appellant  and
    her mother.

 4. Pursuant to the directions  issued  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Norton-
    Taylor, on 26.11.19, the respondent has now served, outside the 10  day
    time limited provided, its Rule 24 response to the grounds  of  appeal.
    No objection was taken by Ms Butler.

Error of Law

 5. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set aside.

 6. The appellant was born on 29.5.98. Her mother raised  her  in  Nigeria,
    until coming to the UK in 2005, at which time the appellant was only  7
    years of age. It was submitted to the respondent and to the  First-tier
    Tribunal on appeal that notwithstanding the fact that by  the  date  of
    the application in 2017 the appellant had  already  reached  adulthood,
    there was cogent and compelling of continuing emotional  and  financial
    dependency between her and her mother in the UK. It is  suggested  that
    in requiring 'credible and compelling proof' of financial  support  the
    judge applied the incorrect standard of proof.

 7. Amongst the evidence put before the First-tier  Tribunal  were  several
    expert reports addressing the appellant's circumstances in Nigeria  and
    the sponsor's mental health in the UK.  This  evidence  suggested  that
    bringing the appellant to the UK to be reunited with her  mother  would
    likely result in a significant  improvement  in  the  sponsor's  mental
    health. On the other hand, if the appeal was to be dismissed the expert
    would be concerned at a further significant deterioration in her mental
    health.

 8. The Entry Clearance Officer decision did not address the family reunion
    provisions under paragraph 353D but rather those within  paragraph  317
    in relation to a dependent relative of a person present and settled  in
    the UK. Applied to the facts of this  case,  under  paragraph  317  the
    appellant would have to show that she is living alone outside the UK in
    the most exceptional compassionate circumstances,  and  is  financially
    wholly or mainly dependent on her mother in the UK, and can and will be
    accommodated  adequately  without   recourse   to   public   funds   in
    accommodation which the sponsor owns or occupies exclusively,  and  can
    and will be maintained adequately without recourse to public funds, and
    has no other close relatives in her own country to whom she could  turn
    for financial support. The Entry Clearance Officer concluded  that  she
    failed to demonstrate that she was financially dependent on her  mother
    in the UK, and that she has other relatives to whom she  can  turn  for
    help. In addition, it was  not  shown  that  there  would  be  adequate
    maintenance to support the appellant in the UK.

 9. The appellant's representatives accepted that given her age at the date
    of application, the appellant cannot meet the requirements of paragraph
    353D of the Immigration Rules. Neither was it  argued  that  she  could
    meet the requirements of paragraph  317.  Instead,  they  sought  entry
    clearance outside the Rules on the grounds of exceptional circumstances
    on article 8 ECHR grounds and in application of the Home Office Policy.



10. Crucial to the First-tier Tribunal's  article  8  ECHR  assessment  was
    whether there continued to be family life between the appellant and the
    sponsor, despite their long separation since 2005 and  given  that  the
    appellant was an adult  by  the  date  of  application.  Following  the
    principle established in Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ  31,  elements
    of dependency more than those normal  emotional  ties  to  be  expected
    between adult relatives is required to establish family  life  engaging
    article 8 ECHR.

11. The sponsor contended that it was through no fault of her own that  she
    was unable to apply to bring the appellant to the UK under  the  family
    reunion provisions. The process of obtaining refugee status in  the  UK
    took a long time. She argued that had she been able to apply  in  2016,
    before the appellant turned 18, paragraph 353D would have been met.

12. The grounds appear to me to confuse the issue as to whether  there  was
    family life between the appellant and the sponsor with issues as to the
    conditions in which the appellant lives in Nigeria,  the  relevance  of
    which to an article 8 claim for entry clearance to join her  mother  is
    not entirely clear. Many of the arguments advanced in the  grounds  are
    more akin to a person seeking international protection  against  return
    to Nigeria. Issues are raised  as  to  poor  living  conditions;  being
    denied medical  treatment;  whether  she  could  find  protection;  and
    whether on  return  the  appellant  could  take  advantage  of  women's
    shelters. However, the only right of appeal is on human rights grounds.
    At the hearing before me, Ms Butler made it clear that she was  neither
    pursuing a protection claim nor article 8 private life.

13. It is clear from [34] of the decision that the judge  read  the  entire
    file and has taken everything into account in the round, whether or not
    specifically mentioned. The judge is not required to provide  a  pr�cis
    of the evidence or to resolve every factual issue, provided it is clear
    that all relevant information has been taken into account. The decision
    must provide cogent reasoning open to the  judge  on  the  evidence  to
    support the findings and conclusions reached.

14. The judge outlined a number of factors relevant to  both  consideration
    within the Rules and outside the Rules on article 8 ECHR  grounds.  The
    judge found that there was no modern means of communication between the
    appellant and the sponsor; she has no access to a phone. There  was  no
    evidence of any direct communication and, of course, they have not seen
    each other since 2005. Neither was  there  any  evidence  of  financial
    support by way of documentary evidence of receipts for money transfers,
    and any money that was sent was sent  to  the  sponsor's  brother.  The
    judge found that the appellant had lived with her  uncle  and  received
    financial support from him.

15. Further, it was not proposed that the appellant live with the  sponsor,
    who does not live in accommodation which she occupies exclusively,  but
    that the appellant be housed  with  an  uncle  she  does  not  know  in
    accommodation at a different location to the sponsor.  This  would  not
    have met the accommodation requirement under paragraph 317.

16. It follows from the above, that the appellant could not  succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules on any basis.  This  much  was  conceded  on  the
    appellant's behalf. At the hearing before me  Ms  Butler  repeated  the
    concession but relied on article  8  family  life  and  on  the  Family
    Reunion Guidance.

Family Reunion Guidance

17. The First-tier Tribunal Judge gave consideration to the Family  Reunion
    Guidance, which addresses exceptional circumstances  for  persons  over
    the age of 18, but pointed out that the appellant does not live alone.

18. The policy at p30 provides:

         "Where an application for family  reunion  under  Part  11  of  the
         Immigration Rules is received from a family unit of  a  refugee  or
         someone with humanitarian  protection,  and  includes  a  child  or
         children who are over 18, the child or children  who  are  over  18
         must be refused under the Immigration Rules. The caseworker must go
         on in every case to  consider  whether  there  are  exceptional  or
         compassionate circumstances, including the best interests of  other
         children in the family, which warrant a grant of leave to enter  or
         remain outside the Immigration Rules on Article  8  grounds.  These
         could be that the applicant would be left in  a  conflict  zone  or
         dangerous situation and become destitute  on  their  own;  have  no
         other relatives that they could live with or turn to for support in
         their country; are not leading an independent life and the rest  of
         the  family  intend  to  travel  to   the   UK.   See   Exceptional
         circumstances or compassionate factors for further information."

19. The exceptional circumstances section provides:

         "There may be exceptional circumstances raised in  the  application
         which make refusal of entry clearance a breach of  ECHR  Article  8
         (the right to respect for family life) because refusal would result
         in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the  applicant  or  their
         family. Compassionate factors are,  broadly  speaking,  exceptional
         circumstances, which might mean that a refusal of leave  to  remain
         would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the  applicant
         or their family, but not constitute a breach of Article 8.

         "It  is  for  the  applicant  to  demonstrate  as  part  of   their
         application what the  exceptional  circumstances  or  compassionate
         factors are in their  case.  Each  case  must  be  decided  on  its
         individual merits. Entry clearance or a grant of leave outside  the
         Immigration Rules is likely  to  be  appropriate  only  rarely  and
         consideration should be given to interviewing  both  the  applicant
         and sponsor where further information is needed to make an informed
         decision. The following examples may  lead  to  a  grant  of  leave
         outside the rules:

         "an applicant who cannot qualify to join parents  under  the  rules
         because they are over 18 but all the following apply:

            . their immediate family, including siblings under  18  qualify
              for family reunion and intend  to  travel,  or  have  already
              travelled, to the UK;

            . they would be left alone in  a  conflict  zone  or  dangerous
              situation;

            . they are dependent on immediate  family  in  the  country  of
              origin and are not leading an independent life;

            . there are no other relatives to turn to and  would  therefore
              have no means of support and would likely become destitute on
              their own."

20.  Although  the  appellant  may  live  in  difficult  and   even   harsh
    circumstances in  Nigeria,  the  judge  found  little  to  support  the
    contention of family life between the appellant  and  the  sponsor,  or
    exceptional circumstances justifying granting entry clearance to the UK
    when the Rules cannot be met.

21. At [56] of the decision, the judge was not satisfied that bringing  the
    appellant to the UK would cure the sponsor's mental health  issues  and
    observed that increased  responsibility  would  probably  increase  the
    stress. However, those findings contradict the expert evidence and  may
    border on speculation by the judge without evidential support.

22. The grounds also complain at [17(d) & (e)] that at [59] of the decision
    the judge stated that it did not follow that  the  sponsor  was  barred
    from the whole of Nigeria, "or perhaps any of it  forever."  The  judge
    also suggested that the appellant circulating amongst Yoruba people  in
    London would put her at risk of trafficking. It is submitted that these
    matters were not in evidence and the finding relating to the return and
    relocation of the sponsor in  Nigeria  is  contrary  to  the  grant  of
    international protection to the sponsor.

23. In its Rule 24 response, the respondent  accepts  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  made  findings  contrary  to  the  expert  and  factual
    evidence and it is accepted that the judge did  err  in  law  in  these
    findings (ground two) and in  relation  to  the  Kugathas  family  life
    considerations (ground four).

24. However, the respondent does not accept that  there  was  any  material
    error of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  consideration  of  the
    Family Reunion Guidance. It is pointed out that  as  the  appellant  is
    outside of the UK, her circumstances and human rights (family life) are
    only relevant insofar as they affect the family rights of  the  sponsor
    in the UK. For example, it  is  argued  on  behalf  of  the  appellant,
    relying on the medical evidence, that  the  effects  on  the  sponsor's
    mental health  of  no  reunion  with  the  appellant  would  amount  to
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for the mother, as  a  member  of  the
    appellant's family within the jurisdiction of the UK whose human rights
    are affected. Ms Butler argues that the circumstances of the  appellant
    are within the Guidance and also that there is family life between  the
    appellant and the sponsor that engages article 8 ECHR.

25. The respondent takes the point that the appellant is outside the UK and
    her circumstances in Nigeria are  not  directly  relevant  to  a  human
    rights claim for entry clearance. Article 1  of  the  ECHR  applies  to
    those within the jurisdiction of a Contracting  Party  but,  obviously,
    the appellant is not within the jurisdiction of the UK. The  respondent
    relies on the decision of the Court of Appeal in SSHD  v  Abbas  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1393, where the  issue  of  territoriality  was  addressed  in
    relation to an article 8 case involving private life. The Court pointed
    out that "In article 8 cases involving family  life,  even  though  the
    spouse or child seeking entry to the territory of a  Contracting  Party
    will be outside that territory, members of the family whose rights  are
    affected are undoubtedly within it. That  provides  the  jurisdictional
    peg. I have already indicated why that does not read  over  to  private
    life claims, so no analogous  argument  relating  to  jurisdiction  can
    succeed. No other argument to  suggest  that  the  respondent  and  his
    family were within the jurisdiction of the United Kingdom  when  making
    the application for entry clearance could prosper in the  face  of  the
    decisions of the Grand Chamber of the Strasbourg Court  in  Bankovic  v
    Belgium (Admissibility) (52207/990 (2007) 44 EHRR SE5 and Al Skeini."

26. It is not clear that  the  authority  relied  on  greatly  assists  the
    respondent's case. On the facts of that case, the Court of Appeal found
    that the UK had no obligation on private life grounds  to  grant  entry
    clearance to the applicant to visit an elderly relative in  the  UK  in
    the circumstances where there was no family life within article 8 ECHR.
    In the present case the issue is not in relation to  private  life  but
    whether or not there is family  life  between  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor sufficient to engage  article  8  and  whether  refusing  entry
    clearance, including the effect on the sponsor's mental health, amounts
    to a disproportionate interference with the sponsor's right to  respect
    for family life. However, the case does emphasis that it is  the  human
    rights of the family member in the UK that is potentially relevant.  To
    that extent, the effect refusal of entry  clearance  may  have  on  the
    sponsor's mental health may be a relevant consideration in the  overall
    article 8 assessment.

27. As held in Khan v United Kingdom (2014) 58 EHRR SE15, the  interference
    with the family life of one is an interference with the rights  of  all
    those within the ambit of the family whose rights are engaged.   Beoku-
    Betts v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] AC  115  held
    that the rights  of  all  family  members,  and  not  only  the  person
    immediately affected by a removal decision, must be considered  in  the
    article 8 balance. All of the above begs the question whether there  is
    family life between the appellant and the sponsor which engages article
    8 ECHR.

28. However, I accept there are  clear  errors  of  fact  and  law  in  the
    decision which bear upon the article 8 ECHR family life assessment.  In
    his submissions to me, Mr Kotas frankly accepted  that  the  judge  had
    erred in the family life assessment, in the ways  described  above.  Mr
    Kotas did not resist Ms Butler's argument that the  erroneous  findings
    were so  critical  to  the  family  life  assessment  that  it  was  so
    undermined and flawed  that  it  was  in  material  error  of  law.  He
    continued to resist the grounds relating to the Guidance but Ms  Butler
    indicated that she did not directly rely on this as a ground of appeal,
    only in support of the article 8 family life considerations.

29. I bear in mind that a tribunal must not use  article  8  as  a  general
    dispensing power (see Patel v SSHD [2014] AC 651, per Lord Carnwath  at
    paragraph  57).  However,  having  considered  the  matter   carefully,
    including the  submissions  of  both  parties,  I  accept  Ms  Butler's
    submissions as to material errors the First-tier Tribunal's  article  8
    family life assessment. For the reasons set out above, I  am  satisfied
    that there was such error of law in the making of the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal that it cannot stand and must be set  aside  to  be
    remade.

Remittal

30. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge vitiates all other findings of fact and the  conclusions
    from those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of
    the issues in the appeal. I accept Ms Butler's submissions that this is
    a heavily fact sensitive issue and that up to  date  evidence  will  be
    required before the tribunal can remake the decision, so that the  case
    should be remitted. Mr Kotas also considered the matter appropriate for
    remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.

31. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.

Decision

32. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.

     Signed


         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated    2 December 2019



Consequential Directions

    1. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Taylor
       House;

    2. No interpreter will be required;

    3. The appeal  is  to  be  decided  afresh  with  no  findings  of  fact
       preserved;

    4. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  with
       the exception of Judges Freer and Andrew;

    5. The appellant is to ensure that all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
       contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated  bundle
       of all objective and subjective material, together with any  skeleton
       argument and copies of all case authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
       Tribunal will not accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
       forthcoming appeal hearing;

    6. The  First-tier  Tribunal  will  give  such  further  or  alternative
       directions as are deemed appropriate.
     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        2 December 2019
