
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13801/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th July 2019                    |On 14th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    H. C.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION  MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Lams of Counsel instructed by Oaks Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Monson
    made following a hearing at Taylor House on 17th January 2019.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bolivia and is 8 years old.   His  mother
    arrived in the UK on 23rd June 2002 with entry clearance as  a  visitor
    and overstayed.  She met and married another Bolivian citizen  in  2008
    and on 27th August 2011 gave birth  to  the  appellant.   He  was  born
    prematurely and remained in  hospital  for  several  weeks  because  he
    developed chronic lung disease.  He was  later  found  to  suffer  from
    autism, developmental delay and Brown's disease of the eye which causes
    a malfunction of the optic nerves.

 3. The judge reviewed the medical evidence and concluded at  paragraph  45
    as follows:

         "Having reviewed the evidence I find that the appellant's autism is
         mild.  I accept that the paediatrician does not apply this gloss to
         his assessment.  But if the appellant's autism  was  anything  more
         than mild, I would have expected him to have said so.  In addition,
         I consider that all the evidence points to the  appellant's  autism
         and learning delay being mild".

 4. The judge recognised that the key issue in the appeal  was  whether  it
    would be reasonable for the  appellant,  who  has  accrued  over  seven
    years' residence in the UK, to leave the UK with his  mother,  although
    he accepted overall it would be in his best interests to remain here.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had reached an irrational conclusion in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    autism given the content of the report from Guy's and  St  Thomas'  NHS
    Foundation Trust, which said that H has  significant  problems  due  to
    autism especially in the areas of communication and social interaction.
     The characterisation of his condition as being mild was also  at  odds
    with  the  fact  that  in  addition  to  the  autism  he  suffers  from
    significant developmental  delay  and  learning  difficulty  which  was
    recorded in the report as being in the moderate to severe range.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on 21st June 2019 by Judge Saffer.

 7. Mr Tufan did not disagree with the  points  made  in  the  grounds  and
    accepted that the decision would have to be re-made.

 8. The decision of Judge Monson is set aside.  He erred in law because his
    conclusion that  the  appellant  suffered  from  mild  autism  was  not
    consistent with the medical evidence before him.

 9. It was agreed between all parties that the decision could be re-made.

Submissions

10. Mr Tufan accepted that this was a  finely  balanced  case  but  in  his
    submission the appellant does  not  cross  the  required  threshold  to
    establish that his removal would be unreasonable.  He  noted  that  the
    appellant was presently in mainstream schooling and that, according  to
    the findings of the Immigration Judge, there was provision  in  Bolivia
    for the appellant to continue his education  there  and  that  adequate
    medical facilities would be available albeit at a significant cost.

11. Mr Lams submitted that it would be  plainly  disproportionate  for  the
    appellant  to  be  removed  since  he  suffered  from   a   significant
    disability.  The appellant was coping in his present school but he  had
    been there since the age of 2 and it was a  feature  of  his  condition
    that change would be difficult for him to cope with.  He had never been
    to Bolivia.  He requires  a  significant  number  of  professionals  to
    assist him and even with all the help that he was receiving,  he  still
    was unable to meet the expectations of the educational system here.

Findings and Conclusions

12. The appellant's mother is a long term overstayer having been in the  UK
    for seventeen years, almost all of it unlawfully.  This  is  a  serious
    and substantial argument in favour of her removal  and  must  be  given
    significant weight. She has not established any right to  remain  other
    than in relation to the appellant who makes his case on the basis  that
    he satisfies paragraph 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, namely  that  in  cases
    not involving deportation, the public interest  does  not  require  the
    person's  removal  where  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  a
    qua;ifying child to leave the UK.  The appellant was born in  2011  and
    has therefore accrued eight years' residence here.

13. There are a  number  of  medical  reports  in  the  papers.   The  most
    significant  is  dated  6th  December  2017  from  Dr  N  Chukwurah,  a
    specialist in community paediatrics who in  fact  has  dealt  with  the
    appellant for a number of years.  He was also the author  of  a  report
    dated 4th September 2013.  In that report Dr Chukwurah  said  that  the
    appellant has hypotonia, low muscle tone  and  gross  motor  delay  for
    which he was under the consultant neurologist and physiotherapist.   He
    also suffers from autism and was under a speech and language  therapist
    for delayed speech and communication skills.  In 2013 he was  noted  to
    show signs of social communication disorder, not interacting with other
    children in the playgroup and  not  engaging  with  adults  except  his
    parents; he preferred to play alone.  He became anxious if  there  were
    any changes to his  routines  and  things  which  were  familiar.   His
    vocabulary was very limited.

14. Dr Chukwurah said that autism  was  a  lifelong  disorder  and  without
    intervention he would  remain  significantly  delayed  with  very  poor
    educational attainment.

15. In December 2017 Dr Chukwurah said that H found it difficult to  relate
    to people especially strangers due to his autism.  The  implication  of
    this is that in a new environment he would struggle to adapt, which may
    result in significant distress and  disruption  of  both  his  and  his
    family's life.  He was easily confused by  changes  and  took  time  to
    adjust.  Dr Chukwurah also said that he had a history of  developmental
    delay translating into a learning difficulty in the moderate to  severe
    range. He is currently functioning at the level of a 4 year old in non-
    verbal cognitive skills which is very delayed.  He  needs  considerable
    support in the classroom in the form of a differentiated curriculum  to
    be able to access learning.  He also suffers from an eye disease.

16. The conclusion of the report is as follows:

         "H was born very  prematurely  at  St  Thomas'  Hospital.   He  has
         developmental issues as a result of his prematurity.  Also, he  has
         autism and an  eye  disease.   He  has  benefited  from  consistent
         monitoring and various therapeutic  interventions  through  several
         professionals.  Withdrawal of these interventions will lead to poor
         outcome  in  general  and  are  likely  to  adversely  affect   his
         education, health and  social  wellbeing.   His  family  come  from
         Bolivia.  Bolivian healthcare is one of  the  worst  amongst  South
         American  countries  and  second  to  the  worst  in  the   Western
         hemisphere after Haiti.  Bolivia is unlikely to have the resources,
         expertise and equipment to manage some of the  conditions  that  he
         has listed above".

17. There is also evidence from H's school.  His head teacher in  a  letter
    dated 6th October 2018 says that H receives adult support in  class  as
    he is working below expectations for a child of his age although he  is
    developing academically and socially and tries to work  hard.   He  has
    been attending the school from the age of 2 and feels safe  within  the
    school environment.  The school believes that it will be detrimental to
    his psychological wellbeing should he be refused leave to remain.

18. I note that one of the appellants in the case of MA and Ors, R (on  the
    application of) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  &
    Anor [2006] EWCA Civ 705 had severe autism. The court held in that case
    it was not open to the judge to consider that it would be reasonable to
    expect  him  to  return  to  his  country  of  nationality  "given  the
    overwhelming and permanent harm which would be caused to  this  child's
    way of life if he were to return".  It was recognised that the child in
    that case was young and, but for the autism, there would  be  a  strong
    case for saying that it would not be  unreasonable  to  expect  him  to
    leave with his parents and younger brother, but  the  consequences  for
    him would be little short of catastrophic.

19. Whilst H's autism is less  debilitating,  it  is  quite  clear  that  H
    suffers from a number of medical conditions which taken as a whole mean
    that  he  is  unable  to  manage  without  a  significant   number   of
    professionals' involvement, namely community paediatricians,  a  speech
    and language therapist at Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Community  Trust,  a
    consultant  ophthalmologist  and  an  extra  adult  in  his  classroom.
    Removal to Bolivia would take him away  from  everything  he  has  ever
    known, which in his particular case would have very severe consequences
    indeed.  Moreover Judge Monson accepted that it was unlikely  that  his
    parents would be able to afford to provide him with  targeted  learning
    support which he needs in Bolivia.

20. In these circumstances it seems to me to be absolutely plain  that  his
    best interests lie in remaining in the UK and that his  best  interests
    should be followed in this case because he meets  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 117B(6).  It would be plainly unreasonable for him to have to
    leave the UK.

Decision

21. The judge erred in law. His decision is set  aside.  It  is  remade  as
    follows. The appellants appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 24 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

