
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/13149/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 July 2019                         |On 8 August 2019                     |
|                                        |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                SOMIA ISHTIAQ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:            Mr M Iyaz of Law Tec Solicitors
For the Respondent:         Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Andrew promulgated on 29 October 2018,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.




Background


3. The Appellant was born on 3 March 1994 and is a national of Pakistan.  On
13 October 2017 the respondent refused the appellant's for leave  to  remain
in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Andrew ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal on article 8  ECHR  grounds.
Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 4 February 2019  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Martin granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

      2. In a short decision  and  reasons  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      appears to accept that the appellant's application for  further  leave
      to remain as a spouse was refused solely because  it  was  made  three
      weeks after the expiry  of  her  leave.  The  Judge  appears  to  have
      accepted the explanation for that.


      3. It is arguable that the Judge has failed to engage with article  8,
      not conducted a balancing exercise and failed to engage with s.117B of
      the Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The Hearing

5. For the appellant, Mr Iyaz moved the grounds of appeal. He told  me  that
the Judge's article 8 assessment is flawed. He told  me  that  the  decision
does not contain a balancing exercise. At [7] of  the  decision,  the  Judge
finds that article 8 family life exists for the appellant. He told  me  that
the Judge's decision is made entirely on the ability  of  the  appellant  to
apply for entry clearance from Pakistan. He told me that the Judge  did  not
weigh the impact of the respondent's decision against article 8  family  and
private life so that the requisite balancing exercise has not  been  carried
out.

6. For the respondent, Mr Mills told me that the decision does  not  contain
an error of law. He told me that it  is  not  disputed  that  the  appellant
cannot meet the requirements of the immigration rules. He  argued  that  the
appellant would have to establish unjustifiably harsh  consequences  arising
from the respondent's decision. He told me that (to succeed)  the  appellant
does not establish that there are unjustifiably harsh consequences,  and  so
cannot establish that the decision is a disproportionate  interference  with
article 8 rights. He asked me to dismiss the appeal and allow  the  decision
to stand.

Analysis

7. In  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  the  respondent  finds  that  the
appellant meets all of the suitability and eligibility requirements  of  the
rules apart from E-LTRP 2.2. The appellant  cannot  meet  that  because  her
leave to remain in the UK expired on 5 February 2017,  and  her  application
for further leave to remain was not made  until  11  March  2017.  The  only
reason that application was refused is  that  the  appellant  submitted  her
application 34 days late.

8. At [7] of the decision,  the  Judge  finds  that  article  8  family  and
private life exist. At [8], the Judge finds that the appellant  cannot  meet
the  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  because  she  submitted  her
application after the previous grant of leave  to  remain  expired.  Between
[9] and [12] the Judge finds that the appellant can  return  to  Pakistan  &
make a successful application for entry clearance from there.

9. The Judge gives no  consideration  to  the  impact  of  the  respondent's
decision on the appellant's established  article  8  rights.  No  meaningful
balancing exercise was carried out. The  Judge  does  not  explain  how  she
reaches the conclusion at the final sentence of [12] of  the  decision.  The
Judge does not take guidance from section 117B  of  the  2002  Act.  In  the
first sentence of [12] of the decision, the Judge searches  for  exceptional
circumstances as a threshold before considering article  8  grounds  outside
the immigration rules.

10. In R (on the application of Chen) v SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -
temporary separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC)  it  was
held that (i) Appendix FM does not include  consideration  of  the  question
whether it would be disproportionate to expect an individual  to  return  to
his home country to make an entry clearance application  to  re-join  family
members in the U.K. There may be cases in which there are no  insurmountable
obstacles to family life being enjoyed outside the U.K. but where  temporary
separation to  enable  an  individual  to  make  an  application  for  entry
clearance may be  disproportionate.  In  all  cases,  it  will  be  for  the
individual to place  before  the  Secretary  of  State  evidence  that  such
temporary  separation  will  interfere  disproportionately  with   protected
rights. It will not be enough to rely solely upon  the  case-law  concerning
Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40. (ii) Lord  Brown  was  not  laying  down  a
legal test when he suggested in Chikwamba that requiring a claimant to  make
an application for entry clearance  would  only  "comparatively  rarely"  be
proportionate in a case involving children.   However, where  a  failure  to
comply in a particular capacity is the only issue so far as  the  Rules  are
concerned, that may well be an insufficient reason  for  refusing  the  case
under Article 8 outside the rules.

11.  In Agyarko [2017] UKSC 10 Lord Reed said again that  if  an  applicant,
even if residing in the UK unlawfully, was otherwise certain to  be  granted
leave to enter, at least if an application were made from  outside  the  UK,
then there might be no public interest in his or her removal and that  point
was illustrated by Chikwamba.

12. The Judge's decision is tainted by material  error  of  law.  The  Judge
races to conclusions without carrying out a  properly  considered  balancing
exercise. The Judge simply decides that the appellant can go to Pakistan  to
make an application for entry clearance from there,  and  does  not  explain
why  the  journey  to  Pakistan,  why  an  uncertain  future   &   temporary
separation, outweighs the right to  respect  for  both  family  and  private
life.

13. The decision contains a material error of law I set it aside.  There  is
sufficient information available for me to substitute my own decision.

The Facts

14. The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 03/03/1994. On  15/04/2011
she married the sponsor in Pakistan. The sponsor is a British citizen.

15. The appellant entered the UK on 20/05/2014  as  the  wife  of  a  person
present and settled in the UK. She has lived with her  husband  since  then.
The appellant's parents and siblings remain in Pakistan

16. The appellant's leave to remain expired on 05/02/2017. It was not  until
34 days later (on 11 March 2017) that  she  submitted  her  application  for
leave to remain in the UK.  The  appellant  meets  all  of  the  substantive
requirements of the immigration  rules,  but  her  application  was  refused
because she submitted the application after leave to remain had expired.

My Decision

17. Article 8 family life exists for the appellant because  she  lives  with
her husband. The appellant has been in the UK since 2014.  Her  home  is  in
the UK. Private life  within  the  meaning  of  article  8  exists  for  the
appellant in the UK. It is not disputed  that  the  appellant's  application
would have been successful if she had submitted it on time.

18. In Hesham Ali (Iraq)  v SSHD   [2016] UKSC 60 it  was  made  clear  that
(even in a deportation case) the Rules are not a complete  code.  Lord  Reed
at paragraphs 47 to 50 endorsed the structured approach  to  proportionality
(to be found in Razgar) and  said  "what  has  now  become  the  established
method of analysis can therefore continue  to  be  followed..."  In  Agyarko
[2017] UKSC 11, Lord Reed (when explaining how a court  or  tribunal  should
consider whether a refusal of leave to remain was  compatible  with  Article
8) made clear that the critical issue  was  generally  whether,  giving  due
weight to the strength of the public interest  in  removal,  the  article  8
claim was sufficiently strong to outweigh it.  There  is  no  suggestion  of
any  threshold  to  be  overcome  before  proportionality   can   be   fully
considered.

19. I have to determine the following separate questions:

     (i) Does family life,  private  life,  home  or  correspondence  exist
    within the meaning of Article 8
    (ii) If so, has the right to respect for this been interfered with
    (iii) If so, was the interference in accordance with the law
    (iv) If so, was the interference in pursuit of one  of  the  legitimate
    aims set out in Article 8(2); and
    (v) If so, is the interference proportionate  to  the  pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aim?
20. Section 117B of the 2002 Act tells me that  immigration  control  is  in
the public interest. In AM  (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that an appellant can obtain no positive right to a  grant  of
leave to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever  the  degree  of  his
fluency in English, or the strength of his financial  resources.  In  Forman
(ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the
public  interest  in  firm  immigration  control  is  not  diluted  by   the
consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at  no
time been a financial burden on  the  state  or  is  self-sufficient  or  is
likely to remain so indefinitely.  The  significance  of  these  factors  is
that where they are not present the public interest is fortified.

21. (a) The only part of appendix FM that the appellant cannot  meet  is  E-
LTRP.2.2, and that is because the appellant submitted her application  after
the previous  grant  of  leave  to  remain  had  expired.  The  respondent's
position is that if the appellant returns to Pakistan she  can  successfully
make an application for entry clearance to be reunited with her  husband  in
the UK.

(b) On the facts as I find them to be,  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
subsisting relationship with her British Citizen husband. Article  8  family
life exists for the appellant. On the  facts  as  I  find  them  to  be  the
appellant could meet the  requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  if  she
returns to Pakistan and makes an application from there.

22. The respondent's position is that all article 8 ECHR considerations are
embraced by the Immigration Rules. The fact that I find that the  appellant
can meet the requirements of  the  immigration  rules  indicates  that  the
respondent has a willingness to grant leave to remain  to  this  appellant.
The respondent's decision must therefore be a  disproportionate  breach  of
the right to respect for family life. The respondent's own  rules  indicate
that the decision is a disproportionate  interference  with  the  right  to
respect for family life.

23. Family life within the meaning of article  8  is  established  for  the
appellant. The respondent's decision is an interference  with  that  family
life. The burden therefore shifts  to  the  respondent  to  show  that  the
interference was justified. The respondent  relies  solely  on  the  public
interest in effective immigration control. On the facts as I find  them  to
be the appellant can meet the requirements of  the  immigration  rules,  so
that granting leave to remain creates no conflict with the public  interest
in effective immigration control.

24. The respondent says that the appellant can return to Pakistan  and  make
an application for leave to enter from there.   In R (on the application  of
Chen)  v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba   -   temporary   separation   -
proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) it was held  that  Appendix  FM
does  not  include  consideration  of  the  question  whether  it  would  be
disproportionate to expect an individual to return to his  home  country  to
make an entry clearance application to re-join family members  in  the  U.K.
There may be cases in which there are no insurmountable obstacles to  family
life being enjoyed outside  the  U.K.  but  where  temporary  separation  to
enable an individual to make an  application  for  entry  clearance  may  be
disproportionate. Where a failure to comply in a particular capacity is  the
only issue so  far  as  the  Rules  are  concerned,  that  may  well  be  an
insufficient reason for refusing  the  case  under  Article  8  outside  the
rules.

25. The refusal of leave to remain must  therefore  be  a  disproportionate
breach of the right to respect for family life. The respondent's own  rules
indicate that the decision is  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
right to respect for family life.

26. In Mostafa (Article 8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC) it  was
held that the decision in Shamin Box [2002] UKIAT 02212 is to  be  followed
and that the obligation imposed by Article 8 is to promote the family  life
of those affected by the decision. At paragraph 9 it was  said  that  where
the ground of appeal is limited to human rights " Clearly there can  be  no
question of entertaining an appeal on grounds alleging  that  the  decision
was not in accordance with the law or the immigration rules. These are  not
permissible grounds. However if ...the claimant has shown that refusing him
entry ... does interfere with his ...family life then it will be  necessary
to assess the evidence to see if the claimant meets the  substance  of  the
rules. This is because... the ability to satisfy the rules illuminates  the
proportionality of the decision to refuse him entry clearance".

27. Even when  I  give  little  weight  to  the  relationship  between  the
appellant and her husband, the relationship still carries sufficient weight
because the appellant can meet each substantive  part  of  the  immigration
rules.

28.  I find that this appeal succeeds on article 8 ECHR grounds.

Decision

 The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 29 October  2018  is
tainted by material errors of law and is set aside.

 I substitute my own decision

 The appeal is allowed on article 8 ECHR grounds.
Signed
               Date: 5 August 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
