
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13709/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On January 21, 2019                   |On February 12, 2019                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                               MR MALCOM MYRIE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Laing, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Jamaican national who applied for entry clearance to
    the United Kingdom under paragraph 297 HC 395 based on his relationship
    with his parents. The respondent refused that  application  on  October
    13, 2017.

 2. The appellant  appealed  that  decision  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on October  25,  2017  and
    his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Henderson  on
    October 2, 2018 and in a decision promulgated on October 22,  2018  she
    dismissed his appeal.


 3. Grounds of appeal were lodged on November 9, 2018. Within those grounds
    it was argued that the Judge had erred in her proportionality
    assessment under article 8 ECHR in circumstances where the Judge
    accepted that the appellant met the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules and in the alternative had failed to consider whether the
    appellant had satisfied paragraph 297(i)(f) HC 395.

 4. In granting permission to appeal on November  21,  2018  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Swaney found it was arguable  that  the  Judge  had
    reached unclear findings on whether  the  Immigration  Rules  were  met
    having  stated  at  paragraph  31  that  the  appellant  had  met   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules that then  at  paragraph  32  the
    Judge reached an alternative conclusion. It was also an  arguable  that
    the  Judge  had  failed  to  give  due  consideration  to  whether  the
    appellant's mother had had sole responsibility (paragraph 297(i)(e)  HC
    395) or whether there were serious and compelling  circumstances  which
    made the appellant's  exclusion  undesirable  (paragraph  297(i)(f)  HC
    395).

 5. No anonymity direction is made.

    SUBMISSIONS

 6. Mr Laing adopted the content of a skeleton argument that  he  submitted
    to the Tribunal together with the  grounds  of  appeal  that  had  been
    lodged  by  the  appellant's  previous  representatives.   In   lengthy
    submissions, Mr Laing challenged the Judge's  decision  on  two  fronts
    namely:

      a) The finding that Michael Anthony  Myrie  was  not  the  appellant's
         father was irrational and the Judge erred  by  failing  to  make  a
         positive finding under paragraph 297(i)(a) HC 395; and

      b) The finding that Lorraine Annette Baxter (the  appellant's  mother)
         did not have sole responsibility was irrational and the Judge erred
         by failing to make a positive finding under paragraph 297(i)(e)  HC
         395.

 7. Positive findings under either section, he submitted, should  have  led
    to a grant of discretionary leave under article 8 ECHR in light  of  TZ
    (Pakistan) and PG (India) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1109.

 8. With regard to the first issue, Mr Laing submitted that the  Judge  had
    made irrational findings with regard to the  appellant's  parents.  The
    Judge had accepted Ms Baxter was the appellant's mother but refused  to
    accept Mr Myrie was the  appellant's  father.  There  was  an  original
    Jamaican birth certificate that identified him as  the  child's  father
    and there were various statements contained in the  appellant's  bundle
    that supported what both he and Ms  Baxter  had  stated.  Although  the
    Judge found the appellant's father's and mother's  accounts  about  the
    father's alleged contact to be inconsistent, there was a consistency in
    the fact they both stated that he was the appellant's  father  and  his
    passport demonstrated that he had visited Jamaica  in  2014,  2015  and
    2016. There was evidence from the appellant himself that this male  was
    his father and there were photographs before the Tribunal showing  them
    together. Both the appellant's mother and father had addressed why  his
    name was not on the 2010 birth certificate and the  Judge  should  have
    made a finding that the 2016 certificate was a forgery if no weight was
    to be attached to it especially as both names had been amended  in  the
    2016 certificate.

 9. With regard to the second issue,  Mr  Laing  submitted  the  Judge  had
    failed to properly take into account all the evidence when  considering
    whether Ms Baxter had sole responsibility of the appellant. He reminded
    the Tribunal that all the appellant's mother  had  to  demonstrate  was
    whether she had continuing control  and  direction  of  his  upbringing
    including making all the important decisions in the  appellant's  life.
    He submitted the evidence showed that this was the case and  he  placed
    reliance not only on the evidence of the appellant's  mother  but  also
    the affidavit from the aunt, a letter from the school and the  numerous
    money transfers that had taken place.

10. Mr Tan opposed the application and submitted in respect  of  the  first
    issue the Judge had given reasons,  and  these  were  set  out  in  her
    decision. The Judge differentiated between the appellant's  mother  and
    father and gave adequate  reasoning  for  that  conclusion.  The  Judge
    considered the documents and concluded they could not be relied on  and
    that it had been open to the appellant, his mother and father  to  have
    had a DNA  test  done  which  would  have  conclusively  confirmed  the
    appellant's parentage. All findings made under paragraph  297(i)(a)  HC
    395 were open to the Judge.

11. In relation to the second issue, Mr Tan submitted the Judge  considered
    all the evidence and concluded the test was not met.  Apart  from  what
    the appellant's mother said there was a lack  of  independent  evidence
    and he noted there was no  evidence  from  the  school  and  the  money
    transfers were not paid by her.

12. In response, Mr Laing referred  to  the  Tribunal  to  a  letter  dated
    September 24, 2018 that confirmed she was in contact  with  the  school
    and she had attended the schools Parents Teachers  Association  meeting
    in 2010.

13. I reserved my decision but indicated that in the  event  there  was  an
    error in law it was likely the matter would have to be remitted back to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

    FINDINGS

14. This is an appeal against the decision to refuse  the  appellant  entry
    clearance as a dependent child under paragraph 297 HC 395.

15. Permission to appeal had been granted on the basis Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Swaney found there was an inconsistency  in  the  Judge's
    findings in paragraphs 31 and 32 and the Judge had  arguably  erred  in
    her approach to sole responsibility and had not considered the position
    as at the date of decision. There was also an arguable  error  made  in
    respect of paragraph 297(i)(f) HC 395.

16. Two of these issues can be dealt with quite  swiftly.  I  am  satisfied
    that any inconsistency between paragraphs 31 and 32 of the decision was
    a typographical error. This issue was not pursued by Mr  Laing  at  the
    hearing and I am satisfied, having read the whole decision, that  where
    the Judge concluded, paragraph 31 of the decision, that  the  appellant
    satisfied the Immigration Rules she meant that he had  "not"  satisfied
    the Immigration Rules as evidenced by the  numerous  findings  she  had
    made. The other matter was the alleged error in  respect  of  paragraph
    297(i)(f) HC 395. This matter was  not  pursued  by  Mr  Laing  and  on
    reading the record of proceedings I am satisfied this was not  advanced
    before the Judge.

17. Mr Laing spent a considerable period of time addressing me on paragraph
    297(i)(a) HC 395. The Judge had noted that when  the  original  hearing
    was adjourned due to a lack of time  the  Judge  had  given  directions
    permitting further evidence from the appellant, including a DNA report,
    to be served at least five days before the next hearing date.

18. The  appellant's  previous  representatives  took  the  view  that  the
    respondent should bear the cost of such a report because  the  decision
    letter did not state there were any doubts that Mr Myrie or  Ms  Baxter
    were the appellant's parents. However, it is clear  from  the  decision
    letter that the respondent was not satisfied that they had demonstrated
    their relationships were as claimed or that they were  the  appellant's
    parents. Why the appellant's  representatives  suggested  otherwise  is
    unclear because the obtaining of a DNA report would have ultimately led
    to paragraph 297(i)(a) HC 395 being met if the report  supported  their
    claims.

19. The Judge was entitled to have concerns about the lack of a DNA  report
    in circumstances where the appellant was not only relying  on  a  birth
    certificate that  post-dated  his  birth  by  almost  17  years  but  a
    certificate which contained different information to the one  that  had
    been issued on June 7, 2010. The 2016 certificate included  Mr  Myrie's
    details for the first time and a  slightly  different  spelling  to  Ms
    Baxter's middle name.

20. Mr Laing argued vociferously that the  original  2016  certificate  had
    been produced and if the Judge wished to reject it, he would  have  had
    to be satisfied, by the respondent, that it was a forgery.  I  disagree
    with that  submission.  The  document  was  obtained  as  a  result  of
    information being provided by Mr Myrie to a Registrar who  then  issued
    the certificate. The respondent was not suggesting the certificate  was
    a forgery or a fraudulent document but  simply  invited  the  Judge  to
    consider the date on the certificate and the  fact  that  the  father's
    name had not been entered on the 2010 certificate when considering  the
    weight to attach to the document. Contrary to  Mr  Laing's  submission,
    the Judge considered the explanations put forward and was not satisfied
    with the anomalies between the aforementioned documents.

21. Mr Laing submitted that  if  the  Judge  accepted  Ms  Baxter  was  the
    appellant's mother then she should  have  accepted  Mr  Myrie  was  his
    father because both names had been altered on the 2016  certificate.  I
    disagree with  that  submission,  as  did  the  First-tier  Judge.  She
    accepted the spelling error in relation to the  mother  was  adequately
    explained and she addressed  this  in  paragraphs  25  and  28  of  her
    decision.

22. There was a significant difference in the positions of the  mother  and
    father. In their statements they gave different accounts as to the role
    played by Mr Myrie. He claimed he saw his son at least once a week when
    he was in Jamaica whereas Ms  Baxter  made  it  clear  in  her  witness
    statement that she remained in contact with him and informed him  about
    their child's upbringing, but nowhere did she state that he visited his
    son as he claimed. At paragraph 29 of her decision the Judge considered
    the evidence and preferred the mother's evidence.

23. Mr Laing referred to photographs that had been submitted and there  was
    no dispute there were photographs or that Mr Myrie had visited Jamaica.
    However, the photographs were all recent and did not satisfy the Judge,
    to the relevant standard, that Mr  Myrie  was  his  father.  They  were
    simply a snapshot of a recent visit.

24. There was a witness statement from the appellant's aunt. She stated  at
    paragraph 11 of her statement that Mr Myrie had visited  the  appellant
    in 2011, 2013 and 2016 and they spent "quite a bit of  time  together".
    The Judge considered this evidence but placed  greater  weight  on  the
    absence of independent evidence such as letters or telephone records or
    earlier photographs to conclude that the appellant  could  not  satisfy
    paragraph 297(i)(a) HC 395 and having considered the Judge's decision I
    am satisfied that the findings on this specific issue were open to  the
    Judge.

25. The issues raised by Mr Laing in relation to paragraph 297(i)(a) HC 395
    were an attempt by a new advocate to re-argue the points that had  been
    presented to the Judge. His claims of irrationality were not  made  out
    as the Judge had correctly asked herself, "why the  appellant  and  his
    parents were not advised to obtain DNA test results  which  would  have
    ended the speculation surrounding his parentage  as  a  result  of  the
    changes to his birth certificates". There was no error of  law  on  the
    first issue.

26. With regard to paragraph 297(i)(e) HC  395,  Mr  Laing  submitted  that
    there was overwhelming evidence that Ms Baxter had sole  responsibility
    and the Judge had erred by seeking evidence to show  longstanding  sole
    responsibility.

27. At paragraph 31 of  the  Judge's  decision  she  set  out  the  leading
    authority on "sole  responsibility".  The  Tribunal  in  TD  (paragraph
    297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT  00049  considered
    the correct  approach  court  should  take  when  considering  who  had
    responsibility for a child's upbringing and whether that responsibility
    was sole responsibility would be a factual matter to be  decided  after
    having regard to all the evidence. It was  necessary  to  look  at  who
    exercised responsibility for the child, and it was possible  that  such
    responsibility may have been exercised for a short  duration  with  the
    arrangements having begun quite recently.

28. The appellant was born in October 1999 and when he was  born  only  his
    mother registered the birth. He lived with  his  mother  until  October
    2002 during which time she claimed that she was solely responsible  for
    his upbringing, welfare, education and general needs.

29. When she came to the United Kingdom,  she  made  arrangements  for  the
    appellant's grandmother to look after the appellant and he  lived  with
    her for seven years until she died.

30. The appellant's claim was that his mother remained in  regular  contact
    with his grandmother and him by telephone and that his mother made  all
    the important decisions in his life. Such decisions included  enrolling
    him in Castleton Basic School  and  thereafter  Castleton  Primary  and
    Junior and High School. After the death of the  appellant  grandmother,
    the appellant stayed with his great-aunt until November 2013  when  she
    went to live in  the  United  States  of  America  at  which  time  the
    appellant's aunt took over responsibility and he continues to live with
    his aunt as at today's date.

31. The appellant provided evidence of communication  between  himself  and
    his mother. His  mother  stated  in  her  witness  statement  that  she
    organised his schooling and made all the important decisions  regarding
    his education and welfare and that money was sent to  him  through  her
    partner on a  regular  basis.  There  was  a  letter  from  the  school
    confirming her involvement and evidence of regular sums being  sent  to
    him since 2015.

32. At paragraph 30 of her decision the  Judge  concluded  that  the  "most
    likely scenario" was that  the  responsibility  of  looking  after  the
    appellant was shared jointly by the appellant's mother and other family
    members with the latter carrying out everyday responsibilities for  his
    care and the former working to support him. It is in this area that  it
    is argued there is an error in law.

33. In assessing overall responsibility,  the  Judge  concluded  there  was
    little evidence prior to 2015 which made it  difficult  to  assess  the
    extent  to  which  the  mother  could  be  said  to  have  had  overall
    responsibility. The Judge made an adverse finding against  her  because
    she had not been back to see him  and  concluded  that  she  could  not
    demonstrate sole responsibility.

34. Permission to appeal had been given on the basis it  was  arguable  the
    Judge had  applied  too  high  a  test  when  considering  whether  the
    appellant had sole responsibility. The Judge had  evidence  before  her
    that the appellant was being financially supported through payment sent
    by his mother's current partner  and  there  was  evidence  of  ongoing
    dialogue and telephone calls and the school confirmed her  involvement.
    There is no doubt that relatives cared for him on a daily basis but the
    question the Judge should have considered was whether they were  caring
    for him at the behest of his mother and whether she made the day to day
    decisions. Importantly, it is unnecessary for his mother  to  show  she
    had sole  responsibility  since  2002.  If  she  can  demonstrate  sole
    responsibility for a shorter period, such as 2015 to  2017,  then  case
    law suggests this would be sufficient.

35. Bearing in mind sole responsibility can be for a short period and  does
    not have to cover a period prior to 2015 but simply a period  prior  to
    the date of application I accept Mr Laing's submission that there is an
    error in law because there is documentary evidence  that  supports  his
    claim that his mother had sole responsibility  for  him  with  everyday
    help from family members.

36. I considered whether to adjourn for a further hearing but concluded  no
    further evidence would assist me to remake this decision. I  find  that
    having found the Judge erred by applying too narrow a  definition  when
    assessing sole responsibility, the only outcome would be to allow  this
    appeal on the basis that the appellant satisfied paragraph 297(i)(e) HC
    395.

37. The appeal cannot be allowed under the Immigration Rules but  following
    the Court of Appeal decision in TZ, to refuse him entry clearance under
    article 8 ECHR would be disproportionate. I therefore allow his  appeal
    under article 8 ECHR.

Notice of Decision

There is an error of law and I set aside the original decision and I  remake
the decision and allow the appeal.

Signed                              Date     21/01/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award  as  I  have  allowed  the  appeal  based  on  the
evidence placed before the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed                              Date     21/01/2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



