
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/13350/2016
                                                               HU/18112/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Birmingham    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 9th January 2019    On 8th February 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   [J B M]
                                    [A M]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:  Mrs Chaggar, Counsel, instructed by Rockland Law
For the respondent: Mrs Aboni, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The 1st named appellant is the lead appellant. He came to the United
       Kingdom on a student visa on 9 September 2010. The 2nd appellant is
       his wife who joined him as his dependent on 15 December 2011.They
       have a son, [JD], who was born on 3 January 2015. All are nationals
       of Sierra Leone.

    2. The 1st named appellant made an application on 27th January 2016 for
       leave to remain. This was based on his relationship with his British
       daughter, [L], born on 15 July 2012. [L] was born following a short
       relationship he had with Ms [O] (nee [T]), a British national. His
       wife and son's status were dependent upon the outcome of his
       application. It was suggested that [L] was not only bonding with the
       1st named appellant but also with her half sibling and to remove the
       appellant and his family would breach the article 8 rights engaged.

    3. He had been asked to provide evidence of contact. It was indicated
       that [L]'s mother would not provide a letter of support. He did
       provide a letter from Shropshire Council stating he was involved with
       his daughter. Furthermore, there had been proceedings in the Family
       Court which provided for unsupervised access to his daughter.

    4. His application was refused on 9 May 2016.The respondent did not
       accept that the 1st named appellant saw his daughter on a regular
       basis.

    5. No other basis was seen for the grant of leave to remain. The 1st
       named appellant could not benefit under the immigration rules in
       respect of his own family as they were not British and formed a unit.
       In terms of his private life he had not been here the necessary
       period and there were no issues identified in relation to integration
       to his home country. No other basis was seen justifying leave.

The appeal

    6. The 1st appellant appealed the refusal. The notice of appeal included
       [L]'s birth certificate; a DNA report; the letter referred to from
       the Council as well as the Court Order; plus photographs as evidence
       of contact. The right of appeal was restricted to consideration of
       article 8 albeit initially through the prism of the rules.

    7. The appeal was heard at Birmingham on 15 August 2017 before Judge of
       the First-tier Tribunal N Lodge. The appellants were not represented.
       The 1st appellant gave evidence to the effect that following the
       Court Order he initially saw his daughter every fortnight for 2 hours
       and that now she would stay for weekends. He said she had been
       staying with him every other weekend over the past year. The judge
       referred to the Court Order which confirmed access as the 1st
       appellant stated. There was also a letter from the Council dated 25
       April 2016 confirming the appellant was involved in his daughter's
       life. There was also a letter from a social worker to the same
       effect. There was also evidence of financial contributions made.

    8. The judge correctly identified the issue for determination if the
       rules were applicable at paragraph 24: whether the appellant was
       taking an active role in his daughter's upbringing. The judge
       concluded that this was not established. At paragraph 26 the judge
       referred to a letter from a social worker dated 12 May 2016 to the
       effect that contact was alternative Saturdays. The judge then
       referred to the 1st appellant's application in which he stated he
       last saw his daughter on 23 January 2016.The judge said that the
       application was dated 25 February 2016. Consequently, the judge
       concluded he was not in fact maintaining regular fortnightly contact
       as claimed.

The Upper Tribunal.

    9. Permission was granted on the basis the judge materially erred in law
       in rejecting the appellant's claim of fortnightly contact. This was
       because the judge's conclusion was based upon a factual error. The
       judge had concluded contact could not be fortnightly because the
       application was dated 25 February 2016 and he said he last saw his
       daughter on 23 January 2016. However the application in fact was
       dated 27 January 2016 and this was confirmed in the refusal letter.
       It was contended that this error caused a distortion in the
       evaluation of the 1st appellant's contact. By the time of the hearing
       the child's mother had provided a letter confirming the first
       appellant's involvement. The judge however qualified this because she
       had not attended the hearing. It was argued judge erred in doing so
       and elsewhere failed to properly evaluate the evidence. Permission to
       appeal was granted, primarily on the basis the factual error infected
       the remainder of the judge's findings.

   10. At hearing, Mrs Chaggar recited the evidence before the judge and the
       factual error and submitted that the outcome was unsafe. She referred
       to the need to consider the best interests of the child involved. She
       submitted that inadequate consideration had been given to the Contact
       Order and its application, along with the supporting evidence
       including the financial contributions made by the 1st appellant.

   11. In response, Mrs Aboni submitted that the judge self-directed
       appropriately and had provided adequate reasoning. It was accepted
       that the judge had made a factual error in relation to the
       application but it was submitted this was not material. The judge had
       referred to the absence of evidence from the child's school to show
       his involvement. There was a letter from the school which simply
       confirmed he was named as the child's father. There was also a letter
       from the child's GP which also stated he was the child's father but
       did not indicate his involvement in the key events in her life. The
       judge had referred to the bank statements showing payments made.

Conclusions

   12. The judge correctly identified the issue to be resolved. There was
       evidence to support the appellant's claim of involvement. The weight
       to be attached to the evidence was a matter for the judge.

   13. The judge took the view that it was extraordinary that the child's
       mother was unaware that the hearing was taking place or that her
       child would be attending. The judge commented on the fact that the
       child was conceived shortly after the appellant's marriage to the 2nd
       appellant and whilst he awaited her arrival in the United Kingdom.
       The judge then felt the precise date of the ending of the
       relationship to be relevant and did not accept the appellant's
       evidence on this. Whilst these issues may relate to the appellant's
       character they were not particularly relevant to the issue to be
       determined.

   14. The judge acknowledges the evidence presented in support of the
       claim. However, the judge then goes on to comment on the absence of
       evidence which could have further enhanced the claim.

   15. As stated, the judge had to evaluate the evidence and assess the
       level of the appellant's involvement in his daughter's life. It is
       common case that the judge in rejecting the claim of regularly
       fortnightly contact did so on a mistake of fact about the date of
       application.

   16. It is my conclusion that this error fundamentally undermines the
       decision. The appellant had put forward evidence of contact from
       independent sources. Whilst it was for the judge to evaluate this it
       was necessary that matters were adequately balanced. The judge has
       referred to the absence of evidence rather than evaluating the
       evidence presented. Furthermore, the judge has made comments about
       the appellant's relationship to the child's mother and the fact he
       was already married which are not particularly relevant to the issue.
       I have noted that the appellants were unrepresented. Central to the
       appeal is the best interests of the children involved. It is my
       conclusion that the decision is unsafe and will have to be remade de
       novo in the First-tier Tribunal

Decision.

The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal N Lodge materially errs in
law and is set aside. The appeal is to be reheard de novo in the First tier
Tribunal


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.                 Date: 3 February 2019


                                 DIRECTIONS

(i)  Relist for a de novo hearing at Birmingham excluding First-tier
Tribunal Judge Tribunal N Lodge.

(ii) An interpreter is not required. If for any reason this is not the case
the appellants should advise the Tribunal

(iii)    The appellants should prepare an updated bundle evidencing the
contact. The appellant's appeal would be assisted by evidence from
independent third parties to show an ongoing active role in the child's
upbringing.

(iv) The hearing should take no longer than 1 hour.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.
