
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/13421/2019 (P)
                                                           HU/14852/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|                                     |On 18 November 2020                  |


                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                           BHEEMREDDY & CHIDIPOTHU
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decisions, refusing the  appellants'  applications
         for leave to remain in the UK, based on long residence and  private
         life.

     ii) The appellants' grounds of appeal, on human rights, to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Minhas, promulgated on 21 January 2020.

     iv) The appellants' grounds of appeal, on error  of  law,  to  the  UT,
         stated in their application for permission dated 3 February 2020.

      v) The grant of permission by FtT Judge Keane, dated and issued on  13
         August 2020.

     vi) The UT's directions, issued on 21  August  2020,  with  a  view  to
         deciding without a hearing whether the FtT erred in law and, if so,
         whether its decision should be set aside.

    vii) The appellants' "further representations",  filed  on  4  September
         2020, linked to the skeleton argument which was before the FtT.

   viii) The respondent's "response under rule 24", dated 9 September 2020.

 2. The UT's directions also gave parties  the  opportunity  to  submit  on
    whether there should be a hearing.  Neither party seeks a hearing.  The
    UT may now decide the above questions, under rules 2 and 34, without  a
    hearing.

 3.  Having  considered  all  the  above,  I  find  that  the  grounds  and
    submissions do not disclose that the making of the decision by the  FtT
    involved the making of any error on a point of law.

 4. Ground 1 is error "by not considering the [appellants'] submissions ...
    in the skeleton argument". The considerations listed in  that  argument
    are at [8 (a) - (c)].

 5. Matters (a) and (b), the extent to  which  the  appellants  had  lawful
    leave, are to be found at [2, 3, 4, 10, & 25] of the decision.

 6. Matter (c), the first appellant's MBA, is at [19].  The  decision  does
    not suggest that she would be anything but "a credit to society".

 7. Matter (d), the alleged severe  hardship  facing  the  appellants  from
    their families, is explicitly decided  against  them,  for  reasons  in
    which no error is suggested.

 8. Matters (e), private and family life in the UK, and  (f),  friends  and
    family, are obviously the subject of the  decision  throughout.   There
    may be no explicit mention of plans to undertake  a  PhD  if  leave  is
    granted, but there is no error in not mentioning every  minute  detail.



 9. I see nothing in the decision to justify the  suggestion  that  matters
    which  the  judge  plainly  set  out  were  then  excluded   from   her
    proportionality assessment.  Ground 1 shows no oversight.

10. Ground 2 is error "in consideration of the legal test in GM [2019] EWCA
    Civ 1630".  The rules are said to be "not incremental" over the article
    8  test,  so  that  in  "merging"  the  "very  significant   obstacles"
    requirement in the rules into the proportionality assessment, the judge
    has set "a  far  higher  standard  than  ...  required  by  established
    jurisprudence".

11. The passage quoted from GM is to the effect that rules and  policy  are
    not to be construed as being more stringent than article 8.  It is  not
    an authority that if the rules are not satisfied, a lower test applies;
    which would subvert the whole scheme of the rules and of part 5A of the
    2002 Act.

12. KO (Nigeria) and others [2018] UKSC  53  was  about  the  treatment  of
    qualifying children and their parents under part 5A. Under the  heading
    "general approach" Lord Carnwath, giving the judgement  of  the  court,
    said:

         "[5] I start with the expectation that the purpose is to produce  a
         straightforward set of rules, and in particular  to  narrow  rather
         than widen the residual area  of  discretionary  judgment  for  the
         court to take account of  public  interest  or  other  factors  not
         directly reflected in the wording of the statute. I also start from
         the presumption, in the absence of clear language to the  contrary,
         that the provisions are intended to be consistent with the  general
         principles relating to the "best interests" of children ..."

13. This is not a  case  about  separation  of  family  members,  or  about
    children, but that general approach applies also to  "very  significant
    obstacles to integration".  The judge did not err by  finding  that  to
    fall short of that test did not leave the  appellants  with  an  easier
    one.

14. Further, the present case did not turn on any fine formulation  of  the
    legal  tests  surrounding  article  8,  but  on  its  own   facts   and
    circumstances.

15. It is difficult to see that any judge might  realistically  have  found
    the circumstances  of  the  appellants  to  disclose  very  significant
    obstacles, or have found anything to turn the  proportionality  balance
    in their favour.

16. Ground 2 shows no error.

17. The decision of the FtT shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




    Hugh Macleman


    UT Judge Macleman
    16 November 2020






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


 3.  Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

