
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14094/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 March 2018                             |On 22 March 2018              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    DONNETH ALLISON ANN YOULANDA HARRISON
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Brown, Counsel, instructed on a direct access
                    basis


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The Entry Clearance  Officer  (the  appellant)  appeals  against  the
       decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal N J Bennett (the judge),
       promulgated on 13 November 2017, allowing the human rights appeal  of
       Ms  Donneth  Harrison  (hereinafter   the   claimant)   against   the
       appellant's refusal to grant her entry clearance as the partner of  a
       British citizen under Appendix-FM of the immigration rules and  under
       the general grounds of refusal of entry clearance.




Background


    2. The claimant is a national of Jamaica, born on 3 December  1965.  She
       entered the UK in 1992 and remained here initially with lawful  leave
       as a student until 1995, and then without  lawful  leave  until  2009
       when she returned to Jamaica. She made an application  for  leave  to
       remain as the wife of a British citizen called Mr Symns  ("the  Symns
       application") in 1995, as a parent in 2001 ("the child  application")
       and for leave to remain on the basis of her long  residence  in  2005
       ("the long residence  application").


    3. The Symns application was refused on 23  November  1995  because  the
       claimant failed to produce documents required to  confirm  her  claim
       under the immigration rules. The appellant later  became  aware  that
       the claimant's marriage to Mr Symns was bigamous as he had acted as a
       sponsor in four other marriage applications.  The  child  application
       was refused because it was found that the claimant did not  have  any
       children in  the  UK  and  documents  submitted  in  support  of  the
       application were not genuine.  The  long  residence  application  was
       refused on 1 December 2008 on the basis that it  was  undesirable  to
       grant the claimant indefinite leave to remain due to doubts regarding
       her character and conduct. In reaching this conclusion the  Secretary
       of State relied on the  Symns  application  and  considered,  on  the
       balance of probabilities, that the claimant  would  have  been  fully
       aware that the application had no real basis and was  an  attempt  to
       obtain leave  by  deception.  The  Secretary  of  State  additionally
       considered that the claimant would have been  fully  aware  that  the
       child application was not genuine. As the claimant had  attempted  to
       previously obtain leave by deception it was not  appropriate,  having
       regard to her character conduct, to grant her leave to remain.


    4. On 3 February 2016 the claimant applied for entry clearance  to  join
       Mr Egerton Harrison, the claimant's spouse and a British citizen. The
       appellant refused the application under paragraph  320  (11)  of  the
       immigration rules on the basis that she previously  overstayed,  used
       deception  in  previous  applications,   and   had   made   frivolous
       applications. The  appellant  additionally  refused  the  application
       under the Relationship requirements of Appendix FM  having  not  been
       satisfied that the earlier bigamous marriage was indeed void  as  the
       claimant had not submitted any documentation to demonstrate  that  Mr
       Symns was not free to marry or any decree of nullity.  The  appellant
       was  satisfied  that  the  financial  requirements  and  the  English
       language requirements were met, and that the Suitability requirements
       were also met.


The First-tier Tribunal decision


    5. The judge set out in detail the background  to  the  appeal  and  the
       evidence adduced by both parties,  including  a  Registrar  General's
       letter confirming that the Symns marriage was bigamous and  that  the
       marriage contracted on 19 May 1995 appeared  void.  The  judge  heard
       oral evidence from Mr Harrison and recorded the submissions from both
       representatives.


    6. The judge set out the appropriate  legislative  provisions  including
       the whole of paragraph 320 (11) and Section ECP2.7  of  Appendix  FM.
       The judge reminded himself that he was dealing with  a  human  rights
       appeal. The judge then  carefully  considered  each  of  the  earlier
       applications made by the claimant. The judge considered the Registrar
       General's letter, which confirmed that Mr Symns had committed perjury
       and bigamy and that the claimant's  marriage  appeared  to  be  void.
       While the Registrar General's normal advice  would  be  to  obtain  a
       decree of nullity this  was  not  an  essential  requirement.  Having
       regard to the manner in which  the  Registrar  General's  letter  was
       written the judge accepted  that  the  Symns  marriage  was  probably
       bigamous  and  therefore  void  at  common  law.  In  reaching   this
       conclusion the judge made reference to Rayden & Jackson  on  Divorce.
       The judge consequently accepted that the claimant's  marriage  to  Mr
       Harrison was probably valid. In reaching this  conclusion  the  judge
       noted that the appellant had not challenged the  subsistence  of  the
       relationship with Mr Harrison, only the validity of the marriage.


    7. The judge then considered, within the context of his  proportionality
       assessment, the allegation of deception  in  relation  to  the  Symns
       application. At [30] the judge assessed the claimant's assertion that
       she had been unaware that her marriage to Mr Symns was bigamous.  The
       judge considered the claimant's statement  and,  in  particular,  her
       claim that the bigamous nature of her marriage only came to light  in
       June 2001 when she tried to obtain a duplicate marriage  certificate.
       The judge accepted that this part of the evidence  had  the  ring  of
       truth about it  and  was  further  supported  by  evidence  that  the
       claimant became pregnant before and after the marriage  to  Mr  Symns
       [31]. Having evaluated this evidence the judge was not satisfied that
       the claimant used deception in the Symns application.


    8. The judge did however find that the claimant had acted dishonestly in
       respect of the child application and gave  his  reasons  at  [32]  to
       [36]. Having found that claimant had been an overstayer and had  used
       deception, the judge went on to consider whether  there  were  "other
       aggravating circumstances"  necessary  to  support  a  refusal  under
       paragraph 320 (11).  The  judge  properly  noted  that  the  list  of
       aggravating circumstances in paragraph 320 (11) was illustrative  and
       not  exhaustive.  The  judge  additionally  noted   that   the   only
       aggravating circumstance identified by the  appellant  was  that  the
       claimant had made frivolous applications.


    9. At [38] the judge noted the reference to frivolous  applications  was
       plural and concluded that there  must  be  more  than  one  frivolous
       application. At [39] the judge stated that  a  frivolous  application
       "... must be an application which is made without proper  cause."  In
       light  of  the  judge's  earlier  conclusions  concerning  the  Symns
       application he concluded that this application could not be  said  to
       have been made frivolously. Nor was the  long  residence  application
       made frivolously because the appellant accepted that the claimant had
       lived in the UK for 14 years. The judge considered that there was, at
       most, one frivolous application, which  was  the  child  application.
       Having regard to the structure of paragraph 320 (11) the judge  could
       not accept, as a matter of construction, that it was intended that an
       application involving deception could  also  amount  to  a  frivolous
       application   when   deciding   whether   there   were    aggravating
       circumstances. Having regard to  the  construction  of  the  relevant
       immigration rule an aggravating  circumstance  had  to  be  something
       different from  overstaying,  deception,  or  the  other  factors  in
       paragraph 320 (11) (i) to (iv).


   10. At [41] the judge found  that,  in  any  event,  paragraph  320  (11)
       contained an element of discretion and, at [42], noted that there had
       to come a time when immigration offences were spent and that  it  was
       now over 16 years since the claimant  used  deception  in  the  child
       application and over 8 � years since she  returned  to  Jamaica.  The
       judge noted that  the  claimant  was  married  to  Mr  Harrison  who,
       although born in Jamaica, had lived in the UK  for  about  50  years.
       There was no challenge to his claim concerning his family connections
       in the UK and that he had no tangible connections to Jamaica.  Having
       considered this evidence holistically the judge  was  satisfied  that
       the discretion should, exceptionally, be exercised in the  claimant's
       favour. The judge  consequently  concluded  that  her  exclusion  was
       disproportionate and allowed the appeal.


The grounds of appeal and the parties' submissions


   11. It was accepted by both Mr Bramble and Ms Brown at the 'error of law'
       hearing that both the grounds of appeal,  and  indeed  the  grant  of
       permission,  were  difficult  to  follow.  The  grounds  inaccurately
       claimed that the claimant had  applications  refused  3  times  under
       paragraph 320 (11). This was self-evidently not the  case.  Paragraph
       320 (11) had only ever been utilised in rejecting the claimant's 2016
       entry clearance application.  The  Symns  application  had  not  been
       refused on the basis of deception. Indeed, the  judge  made  a  clear
       finding, supported by  adequate  reasons,  that  there  had  been  no
       deception in respect of  the  Symns  application.  The  grounds  then
       assert  that  the  claimant  made  3  attempts  to   circumvent   the
       immigration rules. Other than the child application, it is  difficult
       to ascertain what the other attempts to  circumvent  the  immigration
       rules were.  The  long  residence  application  was  made  under  the
       immigration rules, the claimant having  resided  in  the  UK  for  14
       years, and the Symns application was only refused because  there  was
       insufficient evidence to satisfy the Secretary of State in respect of
       the marriage. The grounds appear to assert that there was no evidence
       to back up the claimant's story in respect of her bigamous  marriage,
       an assertion which  is  entirely  unsustainable  given  the  evidence
       clearly considered by the judge at [30] and [31]. The grounds  go  on
       to assert that the claimant made the child application  fraudulently,
       a point accepted by the judge, and that  the  claimant,  having  been
       refused  3  times  under  paragraph  320  (11)  (which  is  factually
       inaccurate), did not  warrant  the  exercise  of  discretion  in  her
       favour.


   12.  The grant  of  permission  is  no  less  confusing.  The  First-tier
       Tribunal judge granting permission made  the  point  that  the  child
       application involved 'true dishonesty', and, despite  the  fact  that
       the grounds took no issue whatsoever with the judge's findings on the
       validity of her marriage to Mr Harrison, stated  that  it  was  'well
       arguable' that the judge's approach to the validity of  the  Harrison
       marriage was flawed. The grant of permission additionally stated that
       the judge's approach to the claimant's conduct was flawed and  failed
       to "afford it is  [sic]  true  and  full  significance."  It  is  not
       altogether clear what this means. The grant of leave stated that  the
       judge arguably erred in failing to find that the ECO had made out the
       legal burden of establishing that the claimant  previously  contrived
       in a significant way to frustrate the intentions of  the  immigration
       rules. The judge granting permission also found it arguable that  the
       judge  failed  to  approach  the  assessment  of  the  balancing   of
       proportionality  in  a  legally  sustainable  manner  and  failed  to
       appreciate the true weight of the public interest in the  refusal  of
       the application, and that even  on  his  own  findings  the  claimant
       failed the Suitability requirements of the  immigration  rules.  This
       last point is manifestly incorrect. In her Refusal of Entry Clearance
       decision, the  appellant  was  satisfied  that  all  the  Suitability
       requirements had been met.


Discussion


   13. I am extremely grateful to Mr Bramble who, at the commencement of the
       'error of law' hearing, sought to disentangle the mess established in
       the  grounds  and  the  grant  of  leave  in  order  to  advance  the
       appellant's case on a coherent and logical  basis.  Mr  Bramble  very
       properly accepted  that  there  was  nothing  wrong  in  the  judge's
       assessment of the claimant's marriage  to  Mr  Harrison.  Mr  Bramble
       accepted that no deception had been used by the claimant  in  respect
       of the Symns application, and that this application could not, on any
       rational view and in light of the judge's findings, be regarded as  a
       frivolous application. Mr Bramble submitted  that  the  grounds  were
       essentially a challenge to the judge's application of  paragraph  320
       (11). He submitted that the long residence application was  frivolous
       and that the judge's assessment at [39] was one not open to him. This
       was  because  the  claimant  ought  to  have  appreciated  that   her
       application would fall to be refused under the character and  conduct
       provisions of the long residence rule. It was additionally  submitted
       that  the  use  of  deception  in  an  application  may  render  that
       application frivolous.


   14. The only issue advanced by the appellant at the error of law  hearing
       relates to the judge's assessment of paragraph 310 (11). This reads,

           'Grounds on which entry clearance or leave to enter  the  United
           Kingdom should normally be refused


           ...


           (11)    where  the  applicant  has  previously  contrived  in  a
           significant way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:


                (i)    overstaying; or


                (ii)   breaching a condition attached to his leave; or


                (iii)  being an illegal entrant; or


                (iv)    using  deception  in  an   application   for   entry
                clearance, leave to enter or remain or in  order  to  obtain
                documents from the Secretary  of  State  or  a  third  party
                required in support of the application  (whether  successful
                or not); and


           there are other aggravating circumstances, such  as  absconding,
           not meeting temporary admission/reporting restrictions  or  bail
           conditions, using an assumed identity  or  multiple  identities,
           switching nationality,  making  frivolous  applications  or  not
           complying with the re-documentation process.'

   15. The immigration rules should be read sensibly, recognising that  they
       are statements of the Secretary of State's administrative policy (see
       the observations of Lord  Browne  JSC  in  Mahad  v  Entry  Clearance
       Officer [2009] UKSC 16; [2010] 1 WLR 48, para. 10).


   16. The judge found that the claimant had been  both  an  overstayer  and
       someone who had used deception in an application for leave to remain.
       The judge appreciated that the  aggravating  features  identified  in
       paragraph 320 (11)  were  not  exhaustive  but  illustrative.  It  is
       readily apparent that the requirement  of  aggravating  circumstances
       must be in addition to the basic elements identified in paragraph 320
       (11) (i) to (iv). This, as the judge noted at [40],  is  clear  as  a
       matter of construction. The use of the conjunctive 'and' at  the  end
       of paragraph 320 (11)  (iv)  can  only  sensibly  be  interpreted  as
       requiring, in addition to one or more of the factors in paragraph 320
       (11) (i) to (iv), the existence of aggravating circumstances.


   17. The appellant has only ever identified  'frivolous  applications'  as
       being the relevant aggravating circumstances.  The  judge  found,  at
       [39], that a frivolous  application  was  one  made  "without  proper
       cause." Having regard to the principles enunciated  in  Mahad  v  ECO
       [2010] 1 WLR 48 and having considered the  natural  language  of  the
       rule construed against the relevant background, I am  satisfied  that
       this is a fair assessment of the term. An application is frivolous if
       it is not one that, on its face, can seriously or sensibly  be  made.
       The judge concluded that  the  long  residence  application  was  not
       frivolously made as the Secretary of State accepted that the claimant
       had resided in the UK for a continuous period of 14 years. Mr Bramble
       submits that the claimant could not possibly have hoped to be granted
       indefinite leave to remain because of her use  of  deception  in  the
       child application. The assessment of a person's character and conduct
       is however discretionary and one that takes into account all relevant
       circumstances. While there may have been  obstacles  to  a  grant  of
       indefinite leave to remain, it cannot be said  that  her  application
       was  one  that  could  not  sensibly  have  been  made.  The  judge's
       conclusion in respect of the long residence application was therefore
       not outside the range of conclusions rationally open to him, and  was
       a conclusion supported by adequate reasoning.


   18. Mr Bramble further submits that the child  application  can  be  both
       frivolous and one involving deception, and that the judge should have
       considered that application as being the frivolous  application.  For
       the reasons I have given in paragraph 16 of this decision, I  am  not
       satisfied that an application that involved the use of deception can,
       on the proper  construction  of  paragraph  320  (11),  be  the  same
       application that is also frivolous for the purpose of the aggravating
       circumstances.  The  aggravating  circumstances  are  an   additional
       requirement to the factors in paragraph 320 (11) (i) to (iv). But  in
       any event, and for the detailed reasons given by the  judge  at  [41]
       and [42], he considered, in  the  alternative,  that  the  discretion
       should be exercised in favour of the claimant. In so  concluding  the
       judge took into account the claimant's  personal  circumstances,  the
       full extent of her immigration history, the period of time  that  had
       elapsed  since  the  previous  deception  and  the  impact   on   her
       relationship with Mr Harrison. The judge was consequently entitled to
       conclude   that   the   decision   refusing   entry   clearance   was
       disproportionate in his assessment  of  article  8  both  within  and
       outside the immigration rules.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law. The Entry Clearance Officer's  appeal  is
dismissed


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 20 March 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
