
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/14327/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined at Field House without a     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|hearing                                 |                                    |
|On 14 November 2019                     | On 14 November 2019                |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                          MEGHABEN JAYENDRA PANCHAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. On 7 October 2019, I granted permission to appeal in this case in these
    terms, with the following directions:


       1. It is arguable that the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
          was infected by procedural unfairness  in  that  the  appellant's
          representatives  had  sent  her  bundle  to  the  Tribunal,   and
          requested a hearing on the papers, on 24 June  2019  by  Recorded
          Delivery.  The application for permission to  appeal  includes  a
          copy of the "Signed for" delivery note,  demonstrating  that  the
          correspondence (including the  bundle)  was  received  by  Taylor
          House on 25 June 2019.  The hearing was  on  1  July  2019.   The
          judge recorded at [6] that he was without any evidence  from  the
          appellant and, accordingly, dismissed the appeal.   In  fact,  as
          confirmed by the Tribunal's file,  the  papers  were  stamped  as
          received on 25 June 2019, and have now been linked to the file.
       2. Although no fault of the  judge,  it  was  arguably  procedurally
          unfair for the tribunal to proceed under the circumstances.   The
          decision may have been different had the judge had the bundle.
       3. It is not clear why permission to appeal was refused by the First-
          tier Tribunal.  The file reveals that the papers were received in
          advance of the hearing.  The set-aside provisions in the Tribunal
          Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)
          Rules 2014 may have been a more appropriate avenue  for  redress,
          at least in the first instance.

       DIRECTIONS


       It is my preliminary view that the decision did involve  the  making
       of an error of law capable of affecting the outcome,  and  that  the
       decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set  aside,  the
       appropriate course of action being to remit the case to  the  First-
       tier Tribunal for a fresh determination on all issues.


       Unless within ten working days of  the  issue  of  these  directions
       there is any written objection to this course of  action,  supported
       by cogent argument, the Upper Tribunal will proceed to determine the
       appeal without an oral hearing and will remit it to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.


       In the absence of a timely response by a party, it will be  presumed
       that it has no objection to the course of action proposed.

Permission to appeal

 2. There has been  no  response  to  these  directions  by  either  party.
    Accordingly, I am satisfied that neither party objects  to  the  matter
    being determined without a hearing and has nothing further to say. I am
    satisfied that that the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    involve the making of an error of law for the reasons  set  out  above,
    and must therefore be set aside.  In  the  circumstances,  owing  to  a
    procedural unfairness, the appellant did not receive  a  fair  hearing,
    and the appropriate course is to remit the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh decision on all issues

Notice of Decision

     1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making
        of an error of law and I set it aside.


     2. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
        decision on all issues.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed Stephen H Smith                                Date 14 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
