
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/14077/2018
                                                               HU/14084/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 September 2019                  |On 18 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     MMO
                                     ed
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Malik, Counsel instructed by Calices Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                              REMAKING DECISION

 1. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria born  4  November  1980  and  19
    August 2010.  They are mother and son.  Together they appeal against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State taken on  19  June  2018  to  refuse
    their human rights claims.   The respondent's decision, and the reasons
    for it, are set out in a reasons for refusal letter of the same date.

 2. Their appeals were initially heard and dismissed by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge French, in a  decision  promulgated  on  18  March  2018.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 22  July  2019,  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Phillips found Judge French to have made an error of law such that  the
    decision had to  be  set  aside.   Judge  Phillips  directed  that  the
    decision be remade in the Upper Tribunal.  In those circumstances,  the
    matter came before me.

 3. The central issue in the case is what the best interests of the  second
    appellant  are,  for  the  purposes  of  establishing  whether  it   is
    reasonable to expect him to leave the United Kingdom.  Consideration of
    his best interests was a factor that Judge  French  did  not  expressly
    address.

The Appellant's Case and the Reasons for Refusal Letter

 4. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom in  January  2008  as  a
    student, with leave valid until 1 January 2011.  Her leave was  renewed
    such that it expired on 20 July 2012.  That was the final date on which
    she held valid leave to remain.  She applied for a  residence  card  as
    the family member of an EEA national in respect of her marriage  to  an
    EU citizen.  It is not necessary to detail  those  applications.   Each
    was refused.  The appellant then made a number of applications based on
    her private and family life in the United Kingdom,  culminating  in  an
    application on 22 March 2018.  That application was refused, and it  is
    that refusal decision which the appellants now appeal against in  these
    proceedings.

 5. The second appellant was born in the United  Kingdom  and  has  resided
    continuously here ever since.  He is  now  9  years  old.   It  is  the
    contention of both appellants that the best  interests  of  the  second
    appellant are overwhelmingly to remain in this country.   He  considers
    himself to be British, his extended family members are British,  he  is
    integrated at school, in his church, he has friends  and  family  here,
    and he is an aspiring footballer taking part in a football academy  run
    by a local football club.  He is also receiving tuition for the 11-plus
    exam which he is due to  take  shortly.   Mr  Malik  submits  that  the
    requirements of Article 8, as articulated by  section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"), are such
    that the removal of either appellant would be disproportionate  because
    it would not be reasonable to expect the second appellant to leave  the
    United Kingdom.  Mr Malik submits that the expectation  established  by
    the statutory framework is that leave should be granted to a  child  in
    the position of the second appellant.  Where a child has been  resident
    in the United Kingdom for seven years or more, there must be strong  or
    powerful reasons to the contrary, if leave is not to  be  granted.   Mr
    Malik submits that that is a high threshold, and that there are no such
    strong or powerful reasons in the present matter.  It is  not  possible
    to import into consideration of  that  issue  a  consideration  of  the
    immigration or other misconduct of the child's parents.

 6. The refusal letter addressed the position of both appellants  initially
    under the Rules.  The main finding of the refusal  letter  is  that  it
    would be reasonable for the second appellant to return to Nigeria.   He
    is from a Nigerian background and has been  brought  up  surrounded  by
    Nigerian culture, albeit in this country.  To the extent he is embedded
    in community life here, contends the respondent, he would  be  able  to
    replicate that in Nigeria.  In relation to the position  of  the  first
    appellant in her own personal capacity,  the  refusal  letter  contends
    that there would be no very significant obstacles  to  her  removal  to
    Nigeria.  Before me Mr Malik  helpfully  indicated  that  he  does  not
    contest that particular finding of the refusal  letter  concerning  the
    second appellant.

Legal Framework

 7. This is an appeal brought under Article 8 of the European Convention on
    Human Rights.  The essential issue for my consideration is  whether  it
    would  be  proportionate  under  the  terms  of  Article  8(2)  of  the
    Convention for the appellants to be removed, in light  of  the  private
    and family life they claim to have established here.  This issue is  to
    be addressed primarily through the lens of the respondent's Immigration
    Rules and by reference to the requirements of Article 8  directly,  see
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 at [17].  The relevant  Rules  are  contained  in
    paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 8. It is settled law that the best interests of the child  are  a  primary
    consideration when considering whether  the  removal  of  an  appellant
    under Article 8 would be proportionate, see ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4
    and Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 74
    at [10] per Lord Hodge.  In addition,  a  number  of  statutory  public
    interest factors are  set  out  in  Part  5A  of  the  Nationality  and
    Immigration Act 2002 which I must apply.

 9. Of significance for present purposes is section  117B(6)  of  the  2002
    Act.  It provides:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  a
             qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom."

10. It is common ground that in the present matter the second appellant  is
    a "qualifying child" as defined by section 117D(1): he has resided here
    continuously since birth, which exceeds seven years.

11. It is for the appellants to establish their  case  to  the  balance  of
    probabilities standard.

Evidence and Documents

12. I considered the bundle that had been prepared for the  initial  appeal
    before Judge French, in addition to a  supplementary  bundle  that  had
    been provided on the morning of the hearing by Mr Malik.  I  considered
    the skeleton argument that  Mr  Malik  had  relied  upon  before  Judge
    French, in addition to a refreshed skeleton argument provided  for  the
    purposes of the hearing before me.

13. The first appellant gave evidence and adopted her statement.   She  was
    cross-examined.  There is a full record of her evidence  based  on  the
    Upper Tribunal's audio recording system and in my note of her  evidence
    which will be on the Tribunal's file.  I  will  refer  to  the  salient
    aspects of her evidence to the extent that  it  is  necessary  to  give
    reasons for my findings.

Findings

14. I will address first the findings of fact that I need to  reach  before
    addressing the best interests of the second appellant and the  question
    of reasonableness.  It is common ground that  the  appellants  enjoy  a
    genuine   and   subsisting   parental   relationship.    It   is   also
    uncontroversial that the second appellant's father has no part  in  his
    upbringing; this is clear from part 9.6 of the appellants'  application
    to the respondent, page F89 of the main appellant's bundle.   See  also
    [5] of the first appellant's witness statement.

15. In the supplementary bundle, there is a letter  dated  17  August  2019
    from OBD, the brother of  the  father  of  the  second  appellant  (his
    uncle).  OBD writes that he provides extensive support  for  the  first
    appellant and  describes  himself  as  the  "guardian"  to  the  second
    appellant.  He states  he  has  assumed  that  role  since  the  second
    appellant was born.  He also writes that he  has  taken  responsibility
    for the first and second appellants financially, and in  terms  of  the
    second appellant's growth and development.

16. It is clear from the letter that the second appellant spends  a  degree
    of time with OBD.  The difficulty with the letter from the uncle of the
    second appellant is that it does not  provide  any  detail  as  to  the
    nature of the role which he claims to perform  as  a  guardian.   Other
    than an assertion that he has performed  that  role  since  the  second
    appellant's birth, it contains no detail as to what such support  looks
    like in practice.  It does not contain any particular detail that  will
    be necessary to make a finding, not  necessarily  that  he  performs  a
    genuine and subsisting parental role, but even to establish that  there
    is a relationship of depth and gravitas  such  that  it  amounts  to  a
    significant feature of the fabric of the second appellant's  Article  8
    rights.

17. I accept the first appellant's  evidence  that  she  and  her  son  are
    significantly involved church life; I have read the  letters  from  the
    pastors of their congregation which describes the  first  appellant  as
    performing the role of a lay pastor.  I  accept  that  she  is  heavily
    involved in her wider community.

18. The second appellant has an excellent record in  school.   He  displays
    promise as an aspiring footballer as demonstrated by his  participation
    in a local football club's youth  academy.   The  first  appellant  had
    accepted in oral evidence before Judge French that  she  was  still  in
    contact with her father the second appellant's grandfather in  Nigeria.
    Before me she said that he is now blind and  lives  on  his  own  in  a
    single room.  I accept that.

19. Towards the end of her evidence I asked the first appellant whether the
    financial support she enjoys at the moment from her sister and from the
    second appellant's uncle would be able to continue upon her  return  to
    Nigeria.  She stated that she did not think that it would.

20. I gave the opportunity to Mr Malik to ask  supplementary  questions  in
    response to these queries.  Mr Malik sought to question  the  appellant
    on this point with greater specificity.  The appellant  said  that  the
    reason she thought that it would not  be  possible  for  the  financial
    support to continue is because she would essentially be  out  of  sight
    and therefore out of mind.  She was  concerned  that  if  she  were  to
    return to Nigeria, because she would not be the presence that she is at
    the moment in the lives of the second  appellant's  uncle  and  in  her
    sister, that the financial support she currently  enjoys  would  cease.
    In my view this is speculation, albeit understandable  speculation,  on
    the part of the appellant.  The  letter  from  the  second  appellant's
    uncle states that he has "taken responsibility" for  her  and  for  the
    second appellant financially.  The letter from  her  sister  speaks  in
    similarly warm terms that letter is dated 22 August 2019 and it  states
    that there is a very strong emotional bond between the first  appellant
    and her sister.  I have not received sufficient information or evidence
    from  the  appellant  to  establish  that  the  financial  support  she
    currently enjoys from her wider family in this  country  would  dry  up
    upon her return.  I find that the support she receives  at  the  moment
    would continue upon her return to Nigeria, at least initially.

21. In light of those findings of fact I  now  turn  to  address  the  best
    interests of the second appellant.  In  KO  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53,  Lord  Carnwath  endorsed
    the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874  at  [58].   There,  the  Court  of
    Appeal had said the best interests of the child should be addressed  in
    these terms,

         "In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of
         the children must be made on the basis of the facts as they are  in
         the real world.  If one parent has no right to remain but the other
         parent does that is the background against which the assessment  is
         conducted.  If neither parent has the right to remain then that  is
         the background against which the assessment  is  conducted.   Thus,
         the ultimate question will be is it reasonable to expect the  child
         to follow the parent with no right to  remain  to  the  country  of
         origin."

22. Turning to the real world context of the first appellant, it  is  clear
    that she does not have the right to reside here.  She has  not  enjoyed
    leave to remain since July 2012, although I accept that she  sought  to
    regularise her status by means of an application as the  spouse  of  an
    EEA national.  I accept that there are many advantages  to  the  second
    appellant to his residence here; he is excelling at school and has  the
    potential of the 11- plus before him, he is embedded within church  and
    community life and is showing signs of promise in football.    It  will
    be difficult to replicate  those  features  of  his  life  in  Nigeria.
    However, adopting the approach of EV (Philippines), the best  interests
    of the second appellant are to be with his mother wherever  his  mother
    should be, unless there are significant fact-specific features  to  the
    contrary.   I have  considered  the  claimed  evidence  of  the  strong
    relationship with the second appellant's uncle as set out in the letter
    I referred to earlier.  However, over the bold assertions  featured  in
    that letter I do not have sufficient evidence to enable me to  reach  a
    more in-depth finding as to  the  breadth  and  depth  of  the  claimed
    relationship between  the  second  appellant's  uncle  and  the  second
    appellant.

23. The second appellant is 9 years old and therefore still at an age  when
    he can adapt.  There are church communities in Nigeria, his grandfather
    is there albeit, given his blindness, there  may  be  a  degree  of  an
    impediment to the relationship between the two forming  to  the  extent
    that would be possible otherwise.

24. His mother is a citizen of Nigeria, she will enjoy a  full  panoply  of
    rights as a citizen of Nigeria and will enjoy the ability to do  things
    that she is currently unable to do in this country,  for  example  work
    legally.

25. In light of the above factors, I find that the best  interests  of  the
    second appellant are to be with his mother wherever she lives,  whether
    here or in Nigeria.  This is a finely balanced assessment, taking  into
    account the strong desires that the family will have to remain here  in
    order to take advantage of the many  opportunities  that  life  in  the
    United Kingdom provides.  However, adopting the approach set out in  EV
    (Philippines), as endorsed by the Supreme Court in  KO  (Nigeria),  the
    ultimate question for me to address is whether it would  be  reasonable
    to expect the child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  in
    this country.

26. It is on that note that I turn to the second question I must address in
    light of the  best  interests  finding  namely,  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the second appellant to leave the United  Kingdom.
    This is the issue that is central to all provisions of the  Immigration
    Rules of potential relevance to this  appeal  in  particular  paragraph
    EX.1 of Appendix FM and in relation to the second appellant's  personal
    position paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and it is also the same test which  is
    encapsulated by section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  As such my assessment
    as to reasonableness will deal compendiously with each of  those  three
    separate issues, as they are united by the same underlying analysis.

27. The operation of section 117B(6) has recently been  considered  by  the
    Supreme  Court  in  KO  (Nigeria).   It  is  no  longer  necessary   to
    incorporate into the assessment of "reasonableness" the impact  of  any
    immigration or other misconduct of the parent of the qualifying  child.
     The immigration status of the parent  or  parents  of  the  qualifying
    child is only of indirect relevance to the overall assessment,  in  the
    sense that it goes to the real world  question  of  where  the  parents
    should be, as set out in EV (Philippines).  But for that consideration,
    section 117B(6) is a free-standing provision and "there is  nothing  in
    that sub-Section to import a reference to the conduct  of  the  parent"
    (KO at [17] per Lord Carnwath).

28. Lord Carnwath also held at [17] that  the  relevant  factors  going  to
    reasonableness contained in the  respondent's  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions then in force, Family Life (as a  partner  or  parent)  in
    Private Life: Ten Year Routes, August 2015,  were  "wholly  appropriate
    and sound in law".  The extract of that guidance  referred  to  by  His
    Lordship was as follows:

         "b.  Whether the child would be leaving with their parents.

             It is generally  the  case  that  it  is  in  a  child's  best
             interests to remain  with  their  parent(s).   Unless  special
             factors apply, it will generally be  reasonable  to  expect  a
             child to leave the UK with their  parent(s),  particularly  if
             the parent(s) have no right to remain in the UK."

29. In the context of the present matter, the second appellant would return
    to Nigeria with his mother who has no right to remain in this  country.
    That is the real world context.  Adopting this approach is not  to  say
    that the immigration history of the  first  appellant  is  to  be  held
    against the second appellant, far from it.  However, as  Lord  Carnwath
    observed at [18] of KO (Nigeria) the immigration  record  of  a  person
    such  as  the  first  appellant  in  the  present  matter  "may  become
    indirectly  material".   The  starting  point  for   my   consideration
    therefore is that it will "generally be reasonable to expect the  child
    to leave the UK" with his  mother.   I  do  not  consider  the  factors
    highlighted in in my assessment of his  best  interests  to  amount  to
    "special factors" of the sort envisaged by the guidance.  There are  no
    medical reasons or compelling family  or  private  life  reasons  which
    mitigate against this finding.

30. I reject Mr Malik's submissions that the MA (Pakistan) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 705 "starting point"  set
    out at [49], namely that leave should be granted in a seven year  child
    case unless there are  powerful  reasons  to  the  contrary,  has  been
    preserved.  Mr Malik additionally relied on MT  and  ET  (child's  best
    interests; ex  tempore  pilot)  Nigeria  [2018]  UKUT  00088  (IAC)  to
    demonstrate this point in practice.  He also relied on  JG  (s.117B(6):
    "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019]  UKUT  00072  (IAC)  Rev  1  as
    authority for the proposition that the president of  this  Tribunal  in
    remaking the decision in that case maintained  the  "powerful  reasons"
    approach.

31. The approach adopted by Lord Justice Elias in MA (Pakistan)  was  based
    on the now discredited premise that the wider  immigration  context  of
    the qualifying child's parents may be taken into consideration.  It was
    in that - now overturned  -  context  that  the  question  of  powerful
    reasons  displacing  the  starting  point  arose.   By  contrast,  Lord
    Carnwath made no mention of there being a "starting point" along  those
    lines.  Instead, he endorsed the Immigration  Directorate  Instructions
    quoted above that it will "generally be reasonable" to expect the child
    to return in a situation such as the present.  Were it  the  case  that
    the MA "starting point" were preserved by definition, there could be no
    suggestion that it  would  "generally  be  reasonable"  to  expect  the
    children to return with their parents.

32. Turning to the other authorities relied upon by Mr Malik, MT and ET  is
    authority primarily for the relatively uncontroversial proposition that
    the longer a child has resided in this country the stronger the child's
    best interests will be in favour of remaining here: see the Headnote.

         "A very young child, who has not started school  or  who  has  only
         recently done so, will have difficulty  in  establishing  that  her
         Article 8 private and family life has  a  material  element,  which
         lies outside her need to live with her parent or parents,  wherever
         that may be. This position, however, changes over  time,  with  the
         result  that  an  assessment  of  best  interests  must   adopt   a
         correspondingly wider focus, examining the child's position in  the
         wider world, of which school will usually be an important part."

33. MT's case concerned an older child who was at a crucial  stage  in  her
    GCSE education; in contrast to the second appellant  who  is  still  at
    primary school and has not yet  started  his  GCSE  education.   It  is
    always necessary to exercise caution  when  looking  to  fact  specific
    examples of general principles being applied.  It will rarely, if ever,
    be the case that the facts under consideration in the case  with  which
    the Tribunal is seized will be the same as the case  specific  decision
    relied upon.  To the extent that MT and ET survives KO,  it  is  simply
    authority for the above proposition; paragraph 34 of MT and ET does not
    establish a universal principle that a  qualifying  child  will  almost
    always result in an appeal  being  allowed.   Although  [34]  is  often
    cited, it is simply a case-specific application of the wider  principle
    reflected in the headnote.  In any event the focus of the discussion in
    [34] was the now discredited MA (Pakistan) approach  of  balancing  the
    conduct of the parents against the circumstances of the child.  I  find
    therefore that to the extent that MT and ET  previously  was  authority
    for an approach that qualifying children should generally be  permitted
    to remain in this country, barring strong reasons to the contrary, that
    principle has given weight to the  approach  of  Lord  Carnwath  in  KO
    (Nigeria).

34. Similarly, it is necessary to  exercise  a  degree  of  caution  before
    relying on JG, that again was  a  case  specific  assessment.   As  the
    President noted at [96] of the decision,  there  were  certain  factors
    which were relevant when the Panel reached its overall conclusion  that
    it would not be reasonable to expect the two children in that  case  to
    return to Turkey.  They included the children being raised in  a  Roman
    Catholic academic and social environment.  Turkey is a majority  Muslim
    country with very few Christians or  Roman  Catholics.   The  president
    observed at [93] that,  "It  is  likely  to  be  difficult  to  achieve
    anything similar for the children in Turkey".

35. In addition, the children could not speak  Turkish,  and  they  had  no
    material understanding of what it was like to live there.   Although  I
    accept that the second appellant in this case has only ever known  life
    in the United Kingdom, he is fluent in English  which  is  one  of  the
    official languages of Nigeria.  There are many churches in Nigeria, and
    football is widely played; it will therefore be possible  to  begin  to
    replicate something of the life that he has in this country  in  a  way
    that the children in JG  were  unable  to  do  so.   In  addition,  the
    appellant in JG had, as noted at [85], a strong case to apply for entry
    clearance were she to leave the United Kingdom.  Although the  Tribunal
    concluded it was not for them to usurp the role of the Entry  Clearance
    Officer in assessing such an  application,  there  was  nevertheless  a
    recognition that it was at least possible that such an application  may
    succeed, and the discussion therefore turned to whether  the  temporary
    disruption and all that would flow from that, given the likely strength
    of a future application for entry clearance, was something  that  would
    be reasonable to inflict upon the children.  In the present case  there
    is no suggestion that the first appellant would be  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules in similar circumstances.

36. Accordingly, the real world context is that the  first  appellant  does
    not have leave to remain in this country and will have to  go  back  to
    Nigeria.   Under  the  circumstances,  I  find  that  it  is   entirely
    reasonable and  consistent  with  the  best  interests  of  the  second
    appellant for him to return with her.  I do not consider  there  to  be
    "special factors", adopting the approach of the August 2015 Immigration
    Directorate Instructions, which apply here.  The private life which  Mr
    Malik emphasised the second appellant enjoys in this country  does  not
    have features of a particular quality such that they may  be  described
    as "special factors" rather, and not wishing in any way to diminish the
    quality of the life the second appellant enjoys in this  country,  they
    are all factors which would be expected of a child who has been brought
    up well and has  integrated  well  in  this  country.   Such  difficult
    considerations will always be inherent to the approach of the Court  of
    Appeal in EV (Philippines) to determining the  best  interests  of  the
    child, and the real  world  assessment  required  by  KO  (Nigeria)  in
    relation to the question of reasonableness.

37. In light of the findings that it would be  reasonable  for  the  second
    appellant to return to Nigeria,  it  follows  that  the  provisions  of
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act are not met.   It  is  not,  therefore,
    possible for the first appellant to satisfy the provisions of  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM and nor can it  be  said  that  the  second  appellant  can
    benefit from paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) in his own capacity.

38. That is not the end of the matter.  It is still  necessary  for  me  to
    address whether the appellant's removal is proportionate,  pursuant  to
    the Razgar criteria.

39. It is clear that the removal of the  appellants  would  interfere  with
    their rights under Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  Their removal would have consequences of such gravity so as to
    potentially engage the operation of Article 8.  Their removal would  be
    "in accordance with the law", in the sense that it would be governed by
    an established legal framework, coupled with a right of appeal to  this
    Tribunal.  It would, in principle, be  capable  of  being  regarded  as
    necessary  in  a  democratic  society  on  the  basis  of  one  of  the
    derogations contained in Article 8(2) of the European Convention.   The
    remaining question is whether the removal would be proportionate.

40. In order to address the proportionality  of  removal  I  will  adopt  a
    balance-sheet approach.

41. The factors in favour of the removal of the appellants are as  follows.



      a) The public interest in maintaining effective  immigration  controls
         as set out in section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act;

      b) Little  weight  is  to  be  attached  to  private  or  family  life
         established when a person is in the United  Kingdom  unlawfully  or
         precariously;

      c) Neither appellant meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules;

      d) The first appellant has been in the United Kingdom unlawfully since
         the middle of July 2012 (this is a factor in relation to the  first
         appellant in isolation);

      e)  There  is  no  material  from  a  social  worker  or  other   care
         professional stating that the second  appellant  is  unable  to  be
         removed to Nigeria;

      f) The second appellant will return to Nigeria with a  fluent  command
         of English which will place him in  good  stead  later  on  in  his
         educational and professional life;

      g) The first appellant will be able to work and provide for the second
         appellant in Nigeria in a way that she has not been able to  do  in
         this country;

      h) The appellants currently  enjoy  the  financial  support  of  their
         friends and family in this country, and for the reasons  previously
         stated,  there  is  no  reason  why  such  support  could  not   be
         resurrected or at least continue initially  upon  their  return  to
         Nigeria, taking advantage of the lower cost of living there.

      i) The second appellant  is  relatively  young  he  is  9  years  old.
         Although for some children who  are  older  removal  would  have  a
         disproportionate impact, "that may be less so when the children are
         very young because the focus  of  their  lives  will  be  on  their
         families" (that is MA (Pakistan) at [46]).

42. Factors in favour of the appellants remaining in this country include:

      a) The extensive private life they have  each  established,  they  are
         integrated in their church and community lives and  have  extensive
         friends and family in this country (although I have not  heard  any
         evidence suggesting that Article 8 is  engaged  on  a  family  life
         basis as regards the  appellants  and  other  non-immediate  family
         members);

      b) The second appellant is excelling at school and is  already  making
         preparations to study for the 11-plus;

      c) They each have an active role at their  church  and  have  received
         letters of commendation from the pastors;

      d) If the appellants were permitted to remain  in  this  country,  the
         relationship which the second appellant has with his uncle would be
         able to develop in a way that it would not if  he  is  returned  to
         Nigeria.  Similar considerations apply in relation  to  the  second
         appellant's relationship  with  his  aunt,  the  first  appellant's
         sister and, of course, there would be  disruption  to  the  private
         life of the first appellant as regards the interruption to her life
         with her sister and her sister's own private life;

      e) The appellants speak English and are  financially  independent  (in
         the sense that they are not reliant on state benefits);

      f) Fifthly, the second appellant is a promising young  footballer  and
         is involved in a football academy;

      g) The second appellant claims he will  become  eligible  for  British
         citizenship on a ten year basis next year.

43. Drawing these factors together and addressing where the balance lies, I
    consider that the factors in favour of removal outweigh those in favour
    of the appellants remaining.  The public interest in the maintenance of
    effective immigration controls is a weighty factor.  The matters  which
    have  been  outlined  to  me  do  not  reveal  considerations  of  such
    exceptionality which demonstrate that removal of the  appellants  would
    be unjustifiably harsh for the purposes of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  The second appellant is still of primary school age, and
    his removal is consistent with his best interests.  The  fact  that  he
    may be eligible for British citizenship in due  course  is  of  minimal
    relevance, as the date of assessment is the date of the hearing, and at
    present the second appellant holds only Nigerian nationality.

44. The removal of both appellants  may  take  place  without  placing  the
    United Kingdom in breach of its international obligations under Article
    8 of the European Convention on Human rights.

45. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed [pic]               Date 13 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.

[pic]

Signed                                       Date 13 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
