
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14882/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January and 1 April 2019                |On 5 April 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                              ms esther quarty
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Wilcox, Counsel, instructed by Blackrock
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                        REMAKING DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is  the  remaking  of  the  decision  in  the  Appellant's  appeal
    following my previous decision, promulgated on  21  February  2019,  in
    which I concluded that the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred  in
    law when dismissing her appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse her human rights claim (my error of  law  decision  is  annexed,
    below).

 2. This case is somewhat unusual in that the Appellant's appeal was  heard
    at the same time as that of her husband,  Mr  Adjar.   His  appeal  was
    allowed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  on  the  basis  that  he  had
    resided in the United Kingdom on a continuous  basis  for  over  twenty
    years and that as a result succeeded in his appeal by  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii) of the Immigration  Rules  ("the  Rules")  (whilst  this
    provision was not expressly stated, it is clear that it applied and  Mr
    Wilcox has not suggested that some other basis  for  success  had  been
    envisaged).

 3. In adjourning the case  following  my  decision  of  error  of  law,  I
    indicated that the core issues for consideration at the resumed hearing
    were:

      i) would it be proportionate to separate this  couple  of  very  long-
         standing marriage, either permanently or temporarily?

     ii) would it be proportionate for the couple to continue  their  family
         life together in Ghana by both of them leaving the  United  Kingdom
         notwithstanding Mr Adjar's success in  his  appeal  and  subsequent
         grant of limited leave to remain in this country.




The hearing before me

 4. In remaking the decision in this  appeal  I  have  had  regard  to  the
    Respondent's bundle together with the Appellant's  First-tier  Tribunal
    bundle, a bundle provided by her in respect  of  the  previous  hearing
    before me in January 2019, and up-to-date statements from  herself  and
    her husband.

 5. The Appellant and her husband were both called to give oral evidence, a
    full note of which is contained in the Record of Proceedings.

 6. The Appellant adopted her new statement and  was  then  cross-examined.
    She gave details of her seven  children  who  live  in  Ghana  and  she
    confirmed that it would not be right for her  and  her  husband  to  be
    separated.

 7. Mr Adjar adopted his new witness statement and was also cross-examined.
     He indicated that he would wish to remain in the United  Kingdom  even
    if his wife had to return to Ghana.




Submissions of the parties

 8. Mr Whitwell relied on the reasons for  refusal  letter.   He  suggested
    that the Respondent's strongest argument was that  both  the  Appellant
    and her husband could return to  Ghana  together.   He  submitted  that
    there were no very significant obstacles to the Appellant returning  to
    Ghana and reintegrating into the society of that country.  Outside  the
    context of the Rules  there  was  nothing  exceptional  in  this  case.
    Notwithstanding his grant for limited leave to remain Mr Adjar could go
    to Ghana as well.  He has spent his formative years there, his children
    were there and he clearly had strong ties to the country.   There  were
    no significant health issues.  Mr Whitwell  acknowledged,  although  he
    certainly did not concede the point, that Mr Adjar's limited  leave  to
    remain might preclude the Appellant from being able to  make  an  entry
    clearance application from Ghana in order to  re-join  her  husband  in
    this country.

 9. Mr Wilcox put his case in clear terms.  He submitted that as  a  result
    of Mr Adjar succeeding in his appeal it would, for that  reason  alone,
    be disproportionate to expect him to return to  Ghana  with  his  wife.
    The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  his  appeal  was
    effectively dispositive of the issue of the couple returning  together.
    Mr Wilcox then submitted that it would be disproportionate to  separate
    this couple.  They had a very strong family life together as  evidenced
    by their extremely long marriage.  He also relied on the fact  that  an
    entry clearance application would be impossible.




Findings of relevant facts and conclusions

The facts

10. There is no real factual dispute in  this  appeal.   I  find  that  the
    Appellant and Mr Adjar have indeed been married for  thirty-five  years
    or so.  I find that they lived together in Ghana before Mr  Adjar  came
    to this country in approximately 1993.

11. I find that the Appellant entered this country in 2003 and had  resided
    here with her husband ever since.

12. On the basis of the evidence before me I  find  that  the  couple  have
    seven adult children living in Ghana.  I  am  willing  to  accept  that
    their circumstances may not be ideal in terms of economic activity, but
    it is much more likely than not that they earn their livings in various
    respects.  It is also the case, as found by the First-tier Tribunal and
    recognised by me in my error of law decision, that  at  least  one  but
    probably more of the couple's  children  would  be  in  a  position  to
    provide meaningful support to their parents on return to Ghana, if that
    scenario came to pass.

13. I find that Mr Adjar is a  pensioner  and  is  likely  to  suffer  from
    diabetes and high blood pressure.  However, there is no evidence before
    me, and indeed no suggestion, that his health problems are  significant
    in any way.  There is certainly no indication that  relevant  treatment
    for diabetes and/or high blood pressure are  simply  not  available  in
    Ghana.

14.  I  readily  acknowledge  that  Mr  Adjar,  purely  from  a  subjective
    perspective, would wish to remain in the United Kingdom  and  that  the
    Appellant would want to continue living with her husband.





Conclusions

15. On the basis of the facts set out above, I turn to  my  conclusions  on
    the relevant legal questions.

16. There is clearly family life between the Appellant and her husband. The
    Appellant has also established a private life in the United Kingdom  by
    virtue of her fairly long residence here and the  ties  that  she  will
    have created. Mr Adjar enjoys his own private life, as indicated by the
    successful outcome to his appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

17.  The  Respondent's  refusal  of  the  Appellant's  human  rights  claim
    constitutes a  sufficiently  serious  interference  with  the  combined
    family and private lives to engage Article 8.

18. The Respondent's decision is in accordance with the law and it  pursues
    a legitimate aim.

19. I turn to the core issue of proportionality.

20. It is the case that Mr Adjar has been granted  thirty  months'  limited
    leave to remain as a result of his successful appeal.  He is of  course
    not "settled" in the United Kingdom.  In consequence of this, there  is
    no basis upon which  the  Appellant  can  rely  on  the  provisions  on
    Appendix FM to the Rules relating to leave to remain.

21. In addition, the husband's status means that she could  make  an  entry
    clearance application  from  Ghana  to  re-join  her  husband  in  this
    country.  To put it bluntly, she could not even get off first base,  as
    it were.  This effectively rules out the question of there being only a
    temporary separation of the couple if the Appellant were to  return  to
    Ghana alone.

22. Next, I conclude that a permanent separation of this particular  couple
    would be  disproportionate.   They  enjoy  a  marriage  of  significant
    longevity and, save for the period 1993  to  2003,  have  always  lived
    together.  To separate them permanently at this stage  of  their  lives
    would, in my view, lead to unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for  them
    both.

23. The question remains, could this couple both return to Ghana and  enjoy
    their family life in that country?  Taking all  relevant  matters  into
    account and giving effect to Mr Adjar's rights in line with Beoku-Betts
    [2008] UKHL 39, I conclude  that  they  could.   This  is  so  for  the
    following reasons.

24. First, there is nothing in terms  of  the  Appellant's  own  particular
    circumstances (leaving aside for the moment her family  life  with  her
    husband) which would render a return to Ghana disproportionate  in  any
    way.  She spent the majority of her life in that country, will still be
    well aware of the cultural and social mores  of  its  society,  has  no
    material health problems, and of course has very  strong  ties  through
    her seven adult children there.   On  any  view,  there  would  not  be
    significant obstacles to her reintegration, let alone very  significant
    obstacles. Thus, she cannot  satisfy  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Rules.

25. Second, I have found there would be meaningful and reliable support for
    both the Appellant and her husband should they return together.

26. Third, putting Mr Adjar's limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom
    to one side for the time being, there  would  not  be  any  significant
    obstacles to his reintegration into Ghanaian  society.  Whilst  he  has
    been in the United Kingdom from a considerable period of time,  he  had
    spent many years in Ghana, will have social,  cultural  and  linguistic
    ties to that country, has  no  significant  health  problems,  and  has
    strong familial bonds through his seven children.

27. Fourth, I reject Mr Wilcox's submission that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal to allow his appeal, ostensibly on the basis of paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii) is, of itself, dispositive of the question of whether Mr
    Adjar could be expected to return to Ghana.

28. He succeeded in his appeal on a narrow basis, namely the acquisition of
    a sufficiently long continuous residence in this country  in  order  to
    bring himself within the particular provision of the  Rules.    It  was
    not on the basis of there being a risk to his personal safety on return
    to Ghana or in respect of any significant medical problems.  It was, in
    essence, purely on the basis of his private life and with reference  to
    the arbitrary threshold of twenty years' continuous residence  in  this
    country required by the Rule.

29. This set of circumstances, in my view, in no way precludes a conclusion
    that it would be reasonable, and certainly  not  disproportionate,  for
    him to choose to return to Ghana with his wife.  That  is  not  to  say
    that it would be an easy choice: I accept that it would  not.  Yet  the
    considerations I have set  out  in  paragraphs  25-26  and  28,  above,
    together with his lack of settled status and the inescapable fact  that
    he and his wife had been in the United Kingdom  on  an  unlawful  basis
    throughout  their  residence  here,  have  the  cumulative  effect   of
    significantly outweighing the difficulty in making the choice to return
    to Ghana.

30. In light of the above I conclude that the Appellant's  appeal  must  be
    dismissed.  The Respondent's refusal of her human rights claim does not
    represent a disproportionate interference with her family life  and  is
    not therefore unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of  law
and I have set it aside.

I remake the decision by dismissing the Appellant's appeal.



No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 4 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor







TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 4 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION


                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14882/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January 2019                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                              ms esther quarty
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Wilcox, Counsel, instructed by Blackrock
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Freer (the judge), promulgated on 1  November  2018,  in
    which he dismissed her appeal against the Respondent's refusal  of  her
    human rights claim.

 2. Her appeal had been heard together with that of her husband, Mr  Adjar.
    Their appeals were essentially based upon their long residence  in  the
    United Kingdom, albeit virtually all of it on an unlawful basis.




The judge's decision

 3. The judge dealt at some length with a  previous  Tribunal  decision  in
    respect of the Appellant and her husband from 2013 and in light of  the
    well-known Devaseelan principles.  Having done so he concluded at  [34]
    that the Appellant's husband had in fact been continuously resident  in
    the United Kingdom since 1993. Without  stating  it  in  terms,  it  is
    fairly clear that the judge had in mind paragraph  276ADE(iii)  of  the
    Immigration Rules. He went on to conclude  that  the  husband's  appeal
    should be allowed.

 4. He formed  a  different  view  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's  case.
    Although he accepted that she had been in this country since 2003,  the
    judge found that she could be supported by her  adult  children  should
    she return to Ghana, that  she  possessed  very  strong  ties  to  that
    country, and that she could, if necessary, return to Ghana and make  an
    entry clearance application  to  re-join  her  husband  in  the  United
    Kingdom (see [36], [47], and [48]).  With reference to the judgment  of
    the Supreme Court in Agyarko [2017] UKSC  11  and  to  the  Appellant's
    private life, the  judge  concluded  that  her  removal  would  not  be
    disproportionate and he duly dismissed her appeal.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 5. The grounds complain that the judge had erred in  concluding  that  the
    Appellant's children could provide support for her on return  to  Ghana
    and that it would have been "unfair and difficult" for the Appellant to
    leave her husband in this country whilst she returned to Ghana.  It  is
    asserted that her husband was "fully  reliant"  on  the  Appellant  for
    "love, care and support".

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey  on
    22 November 2018.




The hearing before me

 7. Mr Wilcox relied on the grounds. Building on these, he  submitted  that
    the judge had not addressed the issue of family  life,  as  opposed  to
    simply private life.  In  respect  of  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    Appellant could have been supported by her adult children in Ghana,  Mr
    Wilcox posed the question as to what evidence this had been  based  on.
    In respect of the possibility of making an entry clearance application,
    it was submitted that no proper analysis had been carried out:  it  may
    well be that such an application would fail on financial grounds.

 8. Mr Bramble accepted that the judge should have dealt expressly with the
    issue of family life, but he submitted that any error was not  material
    and the judge was entitled to make the  findings  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's private life and was also  entitled  to  conclude  that  an
    entry clearance application could be made from Ghana.




Decision on error of law

 9. This is a somewhat unusual scenario in that a couple who are clearly in
    a genuine and  subsisting  marriage  of  more  than  thirty-five  years
    standing face the prospect of  being  separated  as  a  result  of  the
    judge's decision.  It is also the case that  the  judge  has,  somewhat
    oddly, failed to expressly deal with the family life aspect of  Article
    8 as opposed to simply the private life.

10. Beginning with the private life aspect of  the  Appellant's  case,  the
    simple fact that she had been resident in this country since  2003  was
    never, of itself, going to be sufficient for her to succeed outside the
    context of the Rules.  In my view the judge was entitled to  draw  what
    in my view was a perfectly reasonable inference  that  the  Appellant's
    adult children would financially support her if she returned to Ghana.

11. As far as I can see there was no evidence whatsoever from any of  these
    children and she expressly stated that they would refuse to help  their
    mother: frankly, it would be rather odd if this had been the case.  The
    judge was entitled to find that there were strong familial and cultural
    links with Ghana (given that the Appellant had resided  for  the  great
    majority of her life in  that  country  before  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom) and that a large number of close  family  members  resided  in
    that country.

12. The real issue here is the judge's  consideration  of  the  Appellant's
    relationship with her husband.  There is an error in the sense that the
    judge has failed to expressly address the question of family life.   It
    was clear that such life existed  as  between  the  Appellant  and  her
    husband  and  this  should  have  been  stated  and  then  dealt   with
    methodically.

13. Importantly, the  judge  relied  heavily  on  the  possibility  of  the
    Appellant returning to Ghana and making an entry clearance application,
    reasoning that any separation from the husband would  potentially  have
    been on a temporary nature only (see [48] and [51]).

14. In principle there is nothing objectionable about his reliance on  this
    point.  However, a conclusion  that  the  entry  clearance  option  was
    properly open to the  second  Appellant  had  to  be  grounded  on  the
    particular facts of the case.

15. The problem here is that is that the judge's conclusion  on  the  first
    Appellant's appeal had the effect of requiring the Respondent to  grant
    him a period of limited leave to remain: he would not be settled in the
    United Kingdom. That being so, there is, at least on the face of it, no
    way in which the second Appellant could have made an  application  with
    any prospect of success whatsoever.  The  judge  failed  to  have  this
    significant point in mind when relying on the entry clearance route.

16. Given the obvious importance  of  the  entry  clearance  issue  in  the
    judge's reasoning, the oversight of the first Appellant's status  as  a
    result of his successful appeal, discloses a clear error.

17. I consider that the errors identified in the preceding paragraph and in
    paragraph 13, above, are material. It is right that at [36]  the  judge
    suggests that the first Appellant could go and live with  his  wife  in
    Ghana,  thereby  rendering  the  entry  clearance   application   issue
    irrelevant. The consideration of this scenario is problematic,  though.
    There is virtually  no  reasoning  provided  as  to  why  it  would  be
    proportionate for the first Appellant to return, given  his  particular
    circumstances, including of course the fact that  the  judge  was  also
    concluding that it would not be proportionate for him to go.

18. In light of the above, I set the judge's decision aside.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does contain material errors of  law
and I set it aside.

I adjourn this appeal for a resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal.



No anonymity direction is made.



Direction to the parties

    1. The two core issues to be addressed at the resumed hearing are:

        i. Would  it  be  proportionate  to  separate  the  couple,  either
           permanently or temporarily?

       ii. Would it be proportionate for the  couple  to  return  to  Ghana
           together?

    2. Updated witness statements for the second Appellant and  her  husband
       shall be provided. These must address the tow  issues  identified  in
       direction 1;

    3. Oral evidence will be permitted at the resumed hearing, provided that
       direction 2 is complied with;

    4. Any further evidence relied on by either party shall be served on the
       other side and filed with the Tribunal no later than 10 working  days
       before the resumed hearing;



Signed   [pic]                  Date: 16 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
