
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
HU/14057/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 3 July 2017                           |  On 7 July 2017                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                          Jacqueline Tebogo Machola
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Cole, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Jacqueline Tebogo Machola, was born on 22 June 1967  and
    is a female citizen of Botswana.  She appealed against the decision  of
    the respondent dated 9 December 2015  refusing  the  appellant's  human
    rights claim.  The First-tier Tribunal (Judge Sullivan) in  a  decision
    promulgated on 3 November 2016, dismissed the  appeal.   The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the appeal should be allowed.  I have reached that decision
    for the following reasons.  The basis of  the  appellant's  application
    for further leave to remain rested upon her claimed relationship with a
    Mr Thurlow.  The judge at [10] noted that the Presenting Officer at the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing sought to challenge the genuineness of  the
    relationship between the appellant and Mr Thurlow.   The  judge  stated
    that, "I am satisfied the appellant has had  the  opportunity  to  deal
    with that issue as well as those raised in the refusal".  The appellant
    before the First-tier Tribunal had not been legally  represented.   The
    problem  with  the  judge's  analysis  is  that  the  question  of  the
    subsisting relationship  between  the  appellant  and  Mr  Thurlow  had
    (contrary to what the Presenting Officer seems to have  believed)  been
    dealt with in  the  refusal  letter  on  page  2  where  it  is  stated
    unequivocally that , "you [the appellant] have a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with your British partner".  Any reading of that  sentence
    can only admit the interpretation that the respondent accepted that the
    appellant's relationship with Mr Thurlow was  genuine  and  subsisting.
    The statement is not conditional nor is it suggested that  the  refusal
    letter was simply setting out the appellant's case only to  reject  it.
    I find that  the  sentence  which  I  have  quoted  is  an  unequivocal
    acceptance  by  the  respondent  that  the  relationship  between   the
    appellant and Mr Thurlow was genuine and subsisting as at the  date  of
    the refusal (9 December 2015).  It is clear from the  judge's  decision
    and from the submissions made by the  Presenting  Officer  recorded  in
    that decision that it was not being suggested that the relationship had
    broken down  since  the  date  of  the  refusal  letter.   Rather,  the
    Presenting Officer took the view that the relationship had  never  been
    genuine or, at the very least, as close as the appellant  had  claimed.
    I find that the appellant was effectively ambushed by  this  submission
    which had not been  made  at  all  prior  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing.

 3. Mr Diwnycz helpfully read part of  the  Presenting  Officer's  internal
    file record which indicated that he did not believe  that  the  refusal
    letter  had  touched  on  the  question  of  the  genuineness  of   the
    relationship.  I accept that the Presenting Officer had taken this case
    as a "float" and that he may have had very limited  time  to  read  the
    papers but it is unfortunate that he does not appear  to  have  noticed
    that the Secretary of State had  accepted  that  the  relationship  was
    genuine.  Because he did not notice that admission, he did not seek  to
    explain why the position of the Secretary of State had changed  by  the
    time the case reached the First-tier  Tribunal.  It  appears  that  the
    judge was also unaware of the contents of the refusal letter  since  he
    did not call upon the Presenting Officer to explain the change  in  the
    Secretary of State's position.

 4. There are other grounds of appeal but I do  not  intend  to  deal  with
    those.  I find that the appellant was not given a fair  hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and that the decision of that Tribunal must  be
    set aside and the matter remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  remake
    the decision.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 3 November  2016
    is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The appeal is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge  R  Sullivan)  for  that
    Tribunal to remake the decision.

 6. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 6 JULY 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
