
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14183/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2018                            |                              |
|                                              |On 5 April 2018               |
|                                              |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  NOMSA [N]
                             (aka: NATHALIE [D])
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms S Alban instructed by Fountain Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Secretary of State appeals, with the permission of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal granted on 20 July 2017, against the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge B Lloyd) allowing the  respondent's  appeal  under
    Art 8 of the ECHR.

 2. The basis of the Secretary of State's appeal is that Judge Lloyd  erred
    in law in applying Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 702  and  in  relying
    upon the findings of Judge Osborne,  when  the  appeal  was  previously
    before the First-tier Tribunal, and whose decision had been  set  aside
    by the Upper Tribunal and remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    rehearing.

 3. Before us, the Secretary of State was represented by Mr  Richards,  and
    the respondent by Ms Alban.

 4. At the heart of the appellant's Art 8 claim before Judge Lloyd was  her
    reliance upon her relationships with her children in the UK,  including
    "C", aged 11.  Judge Lloyd accepted that the respondent was the  mother
    of the children and that there was a subsisting  parental  relationship
    with them.  Having  done  so,  Judge  Lloyd  found  that,  despite  the
    respondent's conviction for assault and neglect of a child in  November
    2002 for which she was sentenced to two years' imprisonment,  the  best
    interests of her  children  were  that  they  should  remain  with  the
    respondent and that her deportation would have an "unduly harsh" impact
    upon the children and  that  the  public  interest  was  outweighed  by
    compelling circumstances.

 5. Before us, Mr Richards indicated that he  no  longer  relied  upon  the
    final paragraph in the Secretary of State's grounds that challenged the
    judge's finding that the respondent's deportation would have an "unduly
    harsh" impact upon the family unit.

 6. However, Mr Richards submitted that Judge Lloyd had been wrong to  rely
    upon the findings of Judge Osborne as the Upper Tribunal (Lord Boyd  of
    Duncansby) had, in remitting the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, set
    aside Judge Osborne's findings including that the  respondent  was  the
    parent of the three children and that she had a genuine and  subsisting
    parental relationship with them.

 7.  Nevertheless,  during  the  course  of  his  submissions  Mr  Richards
    acknowledged that although the grounds had put in issue the  biological
    relationship between the respondent and the children, that was  not  in
    fact in issue before Judge Lloyd.  He ultimately, therefore, restricted
    the Secretary of State's challenge to Judge Lloyd's  finding  that  the
    relationship (admittedly parental) between the respondent and her three
    children was genuine and subsisting.

Discussion

 8. We have no doubt that the effect of the decision of Lord  Boyd  in  the
    Upper Tribunal was to  set  aside  Judge  Osborne's  previous  decision
    including any findings of fact made by him.  It is clear from para 7 of
    his decision that Lord Boyd did not expressly  preserve  any  of  Judge
    Osborne's findings, including his finding that  the  respondent  had  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with her three children.

 9. It would, therefore, have been wrong in law for Judge  Lloyd  to  apply
    Devaseelan and take, at least as a "starting  point",  Judge  Osborne's
    finding on that issue.  It is certainly possible to  read  passages  in
    Judge Lloyd's determination as falling foul of that approach.  At  para
    13, having referred to Devaseelan, he continued:

         "I rely on the findings of Immigration Judge Osborne and  those  of
         Immigration Judge Hart in  his  determination  of  the  Appellant's
         asylum claim of 17th November 2006".

10. The reference to Judge Hart's decision is to an earlier  asylum  appeal
    and it was not suggested before us that that  had  any  impact  on  the
    issue that we had to decide.

11. Then, at para 14 Judge Lloyd stated as follows:

         "14. When the Appellant gave evidence before Judge  Hart,  [C]  was
             already 13 months old.  However, the  Appellant  had  made  no
             mention  whatsoever  of  [C]  in   those   proceedings.    She
             intentionally had hidden the fact that she had given birth  to
             a child some thirteen months earlier and Judge Hart  made  his
             findings in complete ignorance of the fact that [C]  had  been
             born.  Such circumstances led Judge Osborne at the last First-
             tier Tribunal appeal to find 'resoundingly' that the Appellant
             is a woman who cannot be believed.  Nevertheless, even with an
             acknowledgment of the Appellant's dishonesty Judge Osborne was
             able to find that not only is the Appellant the natural mother
             of [C], [A] and [Z] but the evidence suggested  that  she  was
             caring for two other elder daughters (the qualifying children)
             to a standard that at least met the threshold of  good  enough
             parenting.  All three children appear to be  fit  and  healthy
             and engaged with their mother.  It  was,  in  Judge  Osborne's
             conclusion, in  the  children's  best  interests  to  continue
             living with their mother".

12. However, we do not consider that Judge Lloyd did, in  fact,  rely  upon
    Judge  Osborne's  earlier  findings  in  reaching  his   own   findings
    favourable to the respondent.

13. Before Judge Lloyd, C gave oral  evidence.   It  was,  in  fact,  Judge
    Osborne's decision not to hear evidence from C that led to the  setting
    aside of his decision by the Upper Tribunal.

14. Judge Lloyd was clearly impressed by the evidence given by C.  At paras
    19-23, Judge Lloyd set out C's evidence as follows:

         "19. With great care, I took evidence from [C] who is now aged  11.
             Mr Arkless, for the respondent followed with his questions.  I
             invited the Appellant's representative, Mr Da Silva,  to  open
             the questioning and I then proceeded to engage with the  young
             child in a gentle and sympathetic manner.   [C]  presented  to
             this Tribunal as a very  polite,  well  spoken  and  evidently
             intelligent child, who was well dressed and looked as  if  she
             was cared for to a very high standard.   She  told  me,  using
             this precise word, that she would be 'devastated' if  she  had
             to leave this country with her mother and siblings and  go  to
             live in Zimbabwe.  It was all very frightening and  scary  for
             her.  She loved school in this country and she had a very wide
             circle of friends.  She did not  know  what  it  was  like  in
             Zimbabwe and  as  far  as  she  was  aware  it  was  only  her
             grandmother who was her family there.  She had never  met  her
             grandmother.  She was very good  at  her  schoolwork  and  was
             ambitious to become a writer or a singer.

         20.  She attended church regularly with her mother and  her  sister
             and brother.  She attended Bible classes and she sang  in  the
             church choir.

         21.  She remembered that about three years ago her aunty  took  her
             to see her father in Aberystwyth.  He has another  family  now
             and does not have anything to do with  her.   She  never  sees
             him, and never hears from him even by way of a birthday card.

         22.  There are lots of  things  that  she  wants  to  do,  lots  of
             ambitions she wants to achieve.  She  cannot  imagine  how  it
             would be if she had to leave this country  with  her  mum  and
             family and have to live in a country that  she  knows  nothing
             about.

         23.  I was very impressed with the  evidence  of  [C]  and  I  well
             understand  the  reasoning  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  when  it
             concluded that her evidence was important to the consideration
             of the issues now to be determined".

15. Then at paras 48-51 Judge Lloyd reached his conclusions on the basis of
    the evidence, including in particular that of C as follows:

         "48. When I took evidence from [C] at this appeal it was very clear
             emotion and uncertainty that she felt; in circumstances  where
             she thought she might be sent away  from  the  only  life  she
             knows.  She is  evidently  an  intelligent,  polite  and  well
             brought up young lady who places  great  importance  upon  her
             family and her circle of friends  here  in  the  UK.   She  is
             articulate and intelligent and has very clear views as to what
             she wants to do with her life  and  what  she  would  like  to
             achieve in her future life.  It would  in  my  view  be  truly
             devastating for her and  indeed  her  younger  sister  if  the
             family were to be torn away from the only life that they  know
             because of the wrongs that her mother  has  committed  in  the
             past.  I do not take issue with  the  Home  Office  Presenting
             Officer when he says that the Appellant's history in terms  of
             both her engagement with the immigration authorities  and  the
             criminal  justice   system   is   quite   appalling   and   is
             characterised by dishonesty  and  deceit  on  the  Appellant's
             part.  The Appellant expresses contrition to this Tribunal and
             says that she has put her life together and is  now  committed
             to the future lives and welfare of her three children.  I  can
             draw no clear conclusion as to the Appellant's state  of  mind
             in those respects.  What is clear, however, is  that  she  has
             been and continues to be a good and caring mother to her three
             children who are under consideration  in  this  appeal.   They
             should not be condemned by reason of their mother's  past  and
             to have their lives ruined as a consequence.  That is  what  I
             consider would be the consequence of tearing  them  away  from
             their lives here and returning them to Zimbabwe.

         49.  Of course, as Mr Arkless for the Secretary of  State  concedes
             there is no power under which the Secretary of State can expel
             the  Appellant's  daughters  [C]  and  [A].   However,  it  is
             inevitable that if the Appellant is deported to  Zimbabwe  the
             only possible conclusion that can be drawn in respect  of  the
             best interests of the children in those circumstances is  that
             they remain with their  mother.   But  to  remain  with  their
             mother there are  devastating  consequences  for  them.   They
             should not be  allowed  to  occur;  and  it  would  be  wholly
             disproportionate to allow such consequences.

         50.  I acknowledge the submission of the Appellant's representative
             that the Appellant's deportation will  indeed  constitute  the
             most drastic interference conceivable  with  [C's]  and  [A's]
             rights  to  enjoy  family  life  with  their  mother  and  the
             deportation would be seriously  adverse  to  those  two  young
             girls' interests.

         51.  The Appellant's deportation with  the  inevitable  and  direct
             consequence  of  the  removal  of  the  children   cannot   be
             proportionate in all the circumstances.  There are  compelling
             circumstances which outweigh the public interest in  deporting
             the Appellant".

16. We were referred to para 43 of Judge  Lloyd's  determination  where  he
    stated that:

         "There is no dispute before me that the Appellant is a  parent  who
         is in a subsisting relationship with a child under eighteen".

17. Whilst  the  maternal  relationships  were  accepted,  as  Mr  Richards
    acknowledged before us, the substance of the relationships was not.  We
    are not, however, persuaded that Judge Lloyd failed  to  make  his  own
    findings,  based  upon  the  evidence,  as  to  the   nature   of   the
    relationships, in particular with C.  As we pointed out at the hearing,
    Judge Lloyd would have had to reject all of C's evidence  in  substance
    to have reached a conclusion that there was not a genuine  relationship
    between her (and her siblings) and her mother.  As  the  passages  from
    his determination we have set out above make clear, Judge Lloyd did not
    reject any of C's evidence.  He  plainly  accepted  it.   Consequently,
    despite his reference to Devaseelan and to the absence of any "dispute"
    as to the nature of the relationships, Judge Lloyd went on to reach his
    own factual findings based upon the evidence before him, in  particular
    his acceptance of the evidence of C.  It is not  suggested  that  those
    findings were irrational in themselves or otherwise not  properly  open
    to him.

18. In our judgment, Judge Lloyd did not  err  in  law  in  reaching  those
    findings based upon the evidence before him.   For  those  reasons,  we
    reject the Secretary of State's grounds as relied upon by Mr Richards.

Decision

19. Accordingly, the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  allow  the
    respondent's appeal under Art 8 did not involve the making of an  error
    of law.  That decision stands.

20. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                               4, April 2018
