
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |                                     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |Appeal number: HU/14518/2017         |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|Heard at:|Field House               | |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On       |24 April 2019             |On 15 May 2019                       | |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|                                                                            |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |Davies Ngure Kamau                                |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|                                                                            |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |

Representation:

For the appellant:         (In person).
For the respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer.


                           Decision and Directions


 1. The appellant, a national of Kenya born on 13 April 1971,  was  granted
    permission to appeal the decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Kaler who, in a decision promulgated on  23  August  2018  following  a
    hearing on 13 August 2018, dismissed his appeal against a  decision  of
    the respondent of 24 October 2017 to refuse  leave  to  remain  as  the
    partner of a settled person and to refuse his human rights claim.

 2. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  heard  before  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan  on  12  November  2018.  In  a  decision
    promulgated on 4 December 2018, Judge Sheridan dismissed the appeal.

 3. The decision of Judge Sheridan was set aside by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Kopieczek in a decision signed on 28 February 2019.

 4. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal was re-listed  for  hearing  before
    me. The issue before me was whether Judge Kaler had materially erred in
    law.

 5.  At  the  hearing,  Mr  Whitwell  accepted   that   Judge   Kaler   had
    misapprehended  the  appellant's  immigration  history  and  background
    facts. As the grounds state, the facts are as follows:

         In June 1995, the appellant entered the United Kingdom. After  four
         days, he left the United Kingdom and returned to Kenya. In November
         1995, he re-entered  the  United  Kingdom  and  claimed  asylum  at
         Heathrow. He has remained in  the  United  Kingdom  since  November
         1995. He has never had leave as a visitor or otherwise.

 6. More importantly, Judge Kaler misapprehended the facts when she  stated
    that the appellant had received a sentence of 9 months' imprisonment in
    November 2001. In fact, he received a sentence of 9 days'  imprisonment
    on that occasion. The final paragraph on page 2 of the decision  letter
    refers to various periods of imprisonment/detention  but  there  is  no
    mention of a sentence of 9 months' imprisonment although the  paragraph
    does mention a sentence of 9 days' imprisonment.

 7. In view of the above and in light of the judgments of the Supreme Court
    in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 and the Court of Appeal in AB and
    AO v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 661, Mr Whitwell accepted that the judge  had
    materially erred in law and that her decision should be set  aside.  Mr
    Whitwell submitted that the appropriate course of action  was  for  the
    appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. The appellant  wished
    the Upper Tribunal to re-make the decision on his appeal.

 8. I agree with Mr Whitwell that the judge had materially erred in law. My
    reasons are as follows:

    (i)  A central issue before Judge Kaler was whether it  was  reasonable
         for the appellant's children,  who  were  qualifying  children,  to
         leave the United Kingdom.

    (ii) It is clear from paras 35 and 37 of her decision that, in reaching
         her decision whether it is reasonable for the children to leave the
         United Kingdom, Judge Kaler took into account  (at  para  37)  "the
         cumulative effect of this  appellant's  persistent  offending,  his
         deception in using false names to make an asylum application to the
         Home Office, his failure to disclose all of his convictions and his
         remaining in the UK without leave for so may [sic] years".

    (iii)    It is therefore plain not only that Judge Kaler had taken into
         account the appellant's  offending  in  reaching  her  decision  on
         whether it was reasonable for the appellant's children to leave the
         United Kingdom but also that she had in mind, inter alia, the  fact
         that he had been sentenced to a period of 9 months' imprisonment as
         opposed to 9 days' imprisonment.

    (iv) Judge Kaler did not  have  the  benefit  of  the  judgment  in  KO
         (Nigeria). Nonetheless, through no fault of her own, she materially
         erred in law by taking into account the matters referred to at (ii)
         and (iii) above in reaching her finding that it would be reasonable
         for the appellant's children to leave the United Kingdom.

 9. Accordingly, I set aside her decision.

10. I considered  whether  any  part  of  the  judge's  decision  could  be
    preserved. I concluded that it could not,  given  that  the  judge  had
    misapprehended the background facts as explained at para 5,  which  was
    relevant to her assessment of the appellant's case under para 276ADE of
    the Immigration Rules.

11. I considered whether the decision on the appeal should  be  re-made  in
    the Upper Tribunal or whether the appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal,  having  regard  to  para  7.2  of  the  Practice
    Statements for the Immigration and Asylum Chambers  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the  Upper  Tribunal  (the  "Practice  Statements")  which
    recognises that it may not  be  possible  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    proceed to re-make the decision when it is satisfied that:

         "(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
             tier Tribunal."

12. In my judgment, this case falls within para 7.2  (b)  of  the  Practice
    Statements for the following reasons:

    (i)  There was a lot of evidence on file, which was submitted when  the
         appellant was  represented.  Judge  Kaler  did  not  refer  to  the
         evidence in terms in her decision or, more  importantly,  make  any
         findings of fact on the evidence.

    (ii) Furthermore, and as I have stated, it was not possible to preserve
         any of her findings, whether in relation to  the  appellant's  case
         under para 276ADE of the Immigration Rules or his Article  8  claim
         outside the Immigration Rules, in view of the  errors  of  fact  in
         relation to the background facts, as explained at  paras  5  and  6
         above.

    (iii)    The  decision  letter  states  that  the  respondent  did  not
         consider that the appellant met the suitability requirement  in  S-
         LTR.1.6. At para 17 of her decision,  Judge  Kaler  said  that  the
         respondent is correct to say that the appellant does not  meet  the
         suitability requirement. However, this finding was based, at  least
         in part, on her view that he had received a sentence of  9  months'
         imprisonment. This finding therefore cannot stand.

    Accordingly, none of the judge's findings can stand.

13. I have therefore decided that the right course of action  is  to  remit
    the appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Kaler involved  the  making
of errors on points of law such that  the  decision  is  set  aside  in  its
entirety.

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  hearing  on  the
merits on all issues by a judge other than Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
Kaler.

[pic] Signed                                 Date: 6 May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
