
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/14559/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice     |Determination & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 December 2018                      |On 07 January 2019                 |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                                     KBA
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Kogulathas, of Counsel, instructed by Halliday
                    Reeves
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant challenges the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         Hodgkinson  promulgated  on  23   October   2018   dismissing   his
         deportation appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.


      2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria born on 6 January  1990.  He
         arrived in the UK in 2005, in order  to  work  and  using  a  false
         passport. There followed a string  of  criminal  convictions  which
         culminated in a deportation order being  made  against  him  on  23
         December 2014. On 4 July 2018 his human rights  claim  was  refused
         with an in country right of appeal.  The appeal was  heard  by  the
         First-tier Tribunal at Harmondsworth on 16 October 2018.

      3. Permission to appeal was  sought  and  was  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Bird on 5 November 2018. It was considered  arguable
         that the judge's assessment of whether it would be unduly harsh for
         his child to be left here without him was flawed.  The matter  then
         came before me.


      4. The appellant was not produced for the hearing. Mr Clarke conceded,
         at the outset, that he was unable to defend  the  decision  as  the
         judge had taken account of irrelevant matters in the "unduly harsh"
         assessment. He stated that following KO (Nigeria) [2018]  UKSC  53,
         the criminal record of the appellant should not have factored  into
         the assessment of the judge, but it clearly had along with  matters
         such as his immigration history, his rehabilitation  and  the  risk
         posed to the public. As such, the determination contained errors of
         law.  Ms Kogulathas was in agreement with Mr Clarke and had nothing
         to add, given the concession.


      5. At the conclusion of the hearing,  I  indicated  that  I  would  be
         remitting the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing
         and for the decision to be re-made.


      6.  Having  considered  the  judge's  determination  and   the   brief
         submissions properly  made  by  Mr  Clarke,  I  conclude  that  the
         decision is unsustainable. It is plain from the determination  that
         the  judge  took  account  that  factors  that,  following  the  KO
         guidance, should not  have  formed  part  of  his  assessment  when
         deciding whether it was unduly harsh for the appellant's  child  to
         remain in the UK without him. No findings are  preserved,  and  the
         matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision
         to be made.


         Decision


      7. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law and  I  set  aside  that
         decision.


         Anonymity


      8. I make an order for anonymity.

    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge
       Date: 17 December 2018
