


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/14552/2016
                                                               HU/14558/2016
                                                               HU/14561/2016
                                                               HU/14565/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 December 2017                            |On 4 April 2018              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                                     OR
                                     EGA
                                     EOA
                                     ERA
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Singh, Greater Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is an appeal against the decision  of  Judge  of  the  first-tier
    Tribunal NMK Lawrence dated 9 February 2017, dismissing the Appellant's
    appeal against the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  10  May  2016
    refusing her human rights claim.

2     The Appellant is  a  national  of  Nigeria,  and  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in January 2005, with entry clearance as a visitor valid  until
    20 March 2005. She does not appear to have had leave  to  remain  since
    that date. She has three dependent children, born in  2008,  2009,  and
    2011. The Appellant made her application for leave to  remain  as  long
    ago as 10 July 2012. The Appellant argued that  her  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom  would  be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  the
    private and family lives of the Appellant and her children.

3     It  is  necessary  in  this  appeal  to  consider  what  matters  were
    considered by the Respondent in the decision letter,  and  what  issues
    were raised by the Appellant in her subsequent notice of appeal to  the
    First-tier Tribunal dated 24 May 2016

4     There is a reference in the Respondent's decision of 10 May 2016 to  a
    decision dated 23 April 2013, although the refusal  letter  of  10  May
    2016 does not explain clearly the Appellant's immigration history  from
    2013 onwards, or what happened  to  result  in  the  present  decision.
    However, in the grounds of appeal accompanying the  Appellant's  notice
    of appeal against the Respondent's decision, t  he  Appellant  gives  a
    history of attempting to challenge the  decision  of  2013  by  way  of
    judicial review. The refusal letter of 10 May 2016 also refers  to  the
    Appellant's application being  'reconsidered'  by  the  Respondent.  It
    seems that the present decision  is  therefore  one  arising  from  the
    application on 10 July 2012.

5     The Respondent was of the view that the Appellants did  not  meet  any
    of the requirements for leave to remain under  the  immigration  rules,
    whether under Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE (1), and found that there
    were no exceptional circumstances to warrant leave  to  remain  outside
    the rules.

6     At page 10 of 14 of  the  decision,  the  Respondent  also  states  as
    follows:

         "It is noted that subsequent to  this  submission  of  your  FLR(o)
         application you raised further  information  with  regard  to  your
         circumstances. Our records show that this claim has been considered
         separately by the relevant department. This  reconsideration  deals
         with your application on the  basis  of  your  family  and  private
         life."

7     It is also to be noted what the Appellant states  in  her  grounds  of
    appeal dated 24 May 2016: (drafted in the third person):

         "Although her application was refused by the SOS on 23.04.2013, and
         later on  she  was  detained,  however,  she  submitted  pre-action
         protocol with the intention to submit her application for leave  to
         move for judicial review. The SOS, under the rules, was required to
         respond within 14 working days but her pre-action  protocol  remain
         pending for over a year, then there was no option for her except to
         submit a complaint on 29.10.2014  to  The  Home  Office  Complaints
         Allocation Hub, Croydon. Then, while responding on 26th of November
         2014, the SOS  accepted  the  seriousness  of  her  claim  being  a
         potential trafficking victim  and  sought  more  information  on  a
         questionnaire. The Appellant sent the completed NRM form along with
         her statement duly signed by her on 09.12.2014. Later  on  she  was
         interviewed on 13.07.2015 in relation to her trafficking claim. Her
         application for discretionary leave  under  human  rights  has  now
         finally been refused by the SOS with a right of appeal. However the
         conclusive decision of the competent authority on the matter of her
         trafficking is still awaited."

8     The decision letter also gives the Appellant notice under  s.120  NIAA
    2002 that she should state any further grounds on which she  sought  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

9     In her grounds of appeal, which, even if not served  directly  on  the
    Respondent, are clearly  in  the  possession  of  the  Respondent,  the
    Appellant sets out that she was trafficked to the United  Kingdom.  She
    states that she was orphaned in Nigeria at the age of  12,  and  forced
    into prostitution at the age of 14.  She states the after  some  years,
    she met a man who brought  her  to  the  United  Kingdom  (arriving  in
    January 2005, the Appellant would have been 26). In the United Kingdom,
    the  Appellant  states  that  she  was  again  obliged  to  work  as  a
    prostitute. At least two of her three children are said to have  arisen
    from pregnancies from clients.

10     On  appeal,  the  Appellant  was  represented  by  Mr   Mohammad   of
    International Immigration Advisory Services. At paragraph 7, the  Judge
    notes that Mr Mohammad wished to raise the issue of the Appellant being
    trafficked into the UK within the appeal proceedings. The Judge held:

         "Mr Mohammad wishes to pursue this point  at  appeal.  However,  he
         accepts that this  was  a  matter  which  was  (sic)  part  of  her
         application made on  10  July  2012.  Mr  Mohammed  was  unable  to
         demonstrate that a s.120 Notice had been served on the  Respondent.
         Therefore, the point about being trafficked is a 'new matter'  put,
         for the first time, to the Tribunal. However, since it  is  a  'new
         matter' not put before the Secretary of State either as part of the
         application or a s.120 Notice, I am unable to consider it  (see:  S
         85(5)(6) Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002) I could  only
         consider should Mr Townsend give his consent. Mr Townsend did  not.
         Therefore, the issue of trafficking is not before this Tribunal. It
         is entirely correct that Mr Townsend did not give his consent since
         there are special procedures put in place, by  the  Respondent,  to
         consider trafficking cases. The Appellant should avail  herself  of
         these."

11    The Judge considered the Appellant's position  under  the  immigration
    rules at [10], and the second third and  fourth  Appellants'   position
    under 276ADE(1) at paragraph [12], noting  that  at  the  date  of  the
    application, none of the children had been in United Kingdom for  seven
    years. From paragraph [13] onwards, the Judge gives a lengthy direction
    in  law  as  to  the  consideration  of  best  interests  of  children;
    considered  certain matters relevant to  the  assessment  of  the  best
    interests of children, and the proportionality of the removal,  as  set
    out in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  Amongst  those  findings,
    the Judge held at paragraph [18] that the children had not  lost  touch
    with their own culture since their parents (sic) still are involved 'in
    their cultural associations'.

12    The Judge also made the following findings:

         "I have considered the evidence relied upon by the Appellant. I  do
         not find that the best interests of the minor Appellants is  likely
         to be adversely affected by returning them to Nigeria." [20]


         "Appellant is an adult. She remained  in  the  UK,  without  leave,
         since 2005. She maintained herself and her children. If  she  could
         do this in a foreign country there is no reason to find she is  not
         able to do the same in her home country, where she lived from birth
         to 2005." [24]

    and

         "However, she has been able to maintain herself and her children in
         the UK, a foreign country to her, without any relatives  or  family
         support. There is no reason why she could not do the  same  in  her
         home country. It is not going to be difficult with  three  children
         (sic). However, none of the Appellants  is  infirmed,  mentally  or
         physically." [25]

13    The appeal was dismissed.

14    The Appellant was not represented  at  the  time  that  she  made  her
    application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  9
    February 2017. Her grounds argue that even if  her  children  were  not
    seven years old at the date  of  application,  the  Judge  should  have
    considered her case under Article 8 at the time of  the  decision.  She
    now had two children who were over the age of seven and had  been  born
    in the United Kingdom. She referred to a four-year  unreasonable  delay
    by the Home Office in considering an application.

15    In granting permission to appeal on  23  August  2017,  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Pullig was  of  the  view  the  Judge  should  have
    considered the potential application of Appendix FM Ex1 in relation  to
    the Appellant, and it was arguable  that  the  Judge  should  not  have
    treated the Appellant's trafficking  account  as  amounting  to  a  new
    matter, but rather, as being relevant to her human rights claim.

16    Before me, I heard submissions from the parties. It  is  safe  to  say
    that after discussion, Mr Harrison did not strongly  contend  that  the
    decision was sustainable


    Discussion.


17    I find that there are material errors of law in the  Judge's  decision
    for the following reasons.

18    I anticipate that there is a word  missing  from  the  third  line  of
    paragraph 7 of the Judge's decision, and that  the  Judge  intended  to
    state that Mr Mohammad accepted that the trafficking issue  was  not  a
    matter which was part of the Appellant's application made  on  10th  of
    July 2012. It is difficult to make sense of  the  paragraph  otherwise.
    However, even if Mr Mohammad purported to accept that  the  Appellant's
    trafficking  claim,   including   the   factual   assertions   of   her
    circumstances in Nigeria before departure,  and  her  circumstances  in
    United Kingdom after arrival, did not  form  part  of  the  application
    dated 10th of July 2012, it is clear that he was wrong to do so; in the
    Appellant's notice of appeal, the Appellant explains in some detail how
    those matters had  been  put  before  the  Secretary  of  State  whilst
    reconsidering that application,  which resulted in the present decision
    of 10 May 2016.  Simply because the Secretary of State is  considering,
    as  Competent  Authority,  whether  a  person  is  a  victim  of  human
    trafficking, and whether that person is owed any duty under the Council
    of European Convention on Action against Trafficking in  Human  Beings,
    this does not obviate the duty on the Respondent to  consider  evidence
    which has  been  given  to  her  in  the  context  of  a  human  rights
    application. It would appear that the Appellant  had  set  out  to  the
    Respondent, as per para 7 above, her circumstances in Nigeria and after
    arrival in the UK.

19    It would therefore  appear  that  the  Appellant's  account  of  being
    trafficked, and her circumstances in Nigeria prior to  departure,  were
    not, contrary to the Judge's suggestion at [7], raised in  the  grounds
    of appeal for the first time; they had been raised long before that.

20    Further, the Judge misdirects himself in law as to the application  of
    s.85(5) and (6) NIAA 2002. The jurisdiction to consider matters  relied
    upon by the Appellant is not determined by whether  the  Appellant  had
    served a statement of additional grounds in response  to  a  the  s.120
    Notice given in the decision letter (and in  any  event,  arguably  she
    had, in the form of the grounds of appeal, which has been served on the
    Respondent); the issue is whether or not any matter that the  Appellant
    seeks to rely open represents a 'new matter', ie one which:

         (a)      constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in section
         84, and


         (b)      the Secretary of State has not previously  considered  the
         matter in the context of


             (i) the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or


             (ii)      a statement made by the Appellant under section 120.

21    The Judge failed to ask himself these questions.  The  Appellant   was
    seeking to rely on the matters relating to her  previous  circumstances
    in Nigeria; being an orphan, and being forced  into  prostitution,  and
    later also being forced into prostitution in the UK. Quite  aside  from
    whether any duty may arise to her under Council of European  Convention
    on Action against Trafficking in  Human  Beings,  these  considerations
    were manifestly relevant to the assessment of the circumstances  likely
    to exist  upon  return  to  Nigeria,  and  therefore  relevant  to  the
    assessment of the best interests of the children.

22    Having incorrectly held  that  the  Appellant  had  not  raised  these
    matters prior to her  notice  of  appeal,  the  Judge  also  failed  to
    consider whether the factual matrix set out in the  grounds  of  appeal
    was distinct from the matters raised by  the  Appellant  prior  to  the
    decision,  and  further,  what  matters  the  Respondent  had  actually
    'considered'.

23    The consideration of these matters is  set  out  at  page  10  of  the
    refusal letter, as para 6 above. It can be  seen  that  the  Respondent
    declined to set out the detail of what 'further information with regard
    to (the Appellant's) circumstances' was actually before the Respondent.
    Further, the Respondent erroneously,  I  find,  failed  to  apply  that
    further information to her  human  rights  claim  -  stating  that  the
    information  had  been   considered   separately   by   the   'relevant
    department'.

24    Having failed to acknowledge  that  the  Appellant  had  set  out  the
    matters in her grounds of appeal prior to the decision of 10 May  2016,
    and having  misdirected  himself  in  law  as  to  the  application  of
    s.85(5)and (6) NIAA 2002 as above, I find that  the  Judge's  decision,
    seemingly to  leave  out  of  account  all  matters   relating  to  the
    Appellant's claim to have come to the UK following  a  life  of  forced
    prostitution in Nigeria, was unsustainable.

25    Further, and in any event, the Judge erred in law  in  his  assessment
    of the children's likely future position in Nigeria, in  purporting  to
    find at paragraph 18 that the children had not lost  touch  with  their
    own culture, since their parents were still involved in their 'cultural
    associations'. It is difficult to know  what  this  means,  and  it  is
    difficult to know why the Judge here refers to parents in the  pleural,
    as the Appellant's evidence was  that  she  had  no  contact  with  the
    fathers of her children, who were amongst her clients whilst forced  to
    be a prostitute in the United Kingdom.

26    At paragraph 24 and 25, the Judge refers to the Appellant having  been
    able to sustain herself in the United Kingdom, which  was  relevant  to
    her likely ability to support herself in Nigeria. However,  this  fails
    to take into account evidence which  was  filed  with  the  Appellant's
    notice of  appeal;  that  in  fact,  the  Appellants  were  financially
    supported in the United  Kingdom  by  Manchester  City  Council  Social
    Services, no doubt by Children's Services, under  section  17  Children
    Act 1989 to prevent the children becoming destitute. She had, of course
    also previously supported herself by being  forced  into  prostitution.
    Having failed to take those matters into account, the  Judge's  finding
    about  the  Appellant's  ability  to  support  herself  in  Nigeria  is
    unsustainable.

27    The Judge's finding at 20 that the children's best  interests  is  not
    likely  to  be  adversely   affected  by  returning  to   Nigeria,   is
    inadequately reasoned, and fails to set out any findings of fact as  to
    what their circumstances are likely to be in Nigeria.

28    Further, the Judge has not taken into  account  the  consideration  at
    s.117B(6) NIAA 2002 that in the case of a person who is not  liable  to
    deportation, the public interest does not require the person's  removal
    where-(a)the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
    with a qualifying child, and (b)it would not be  reasonable  to  expect
    the child to leave the United Kingdom.  This  consideration  arises  at
    date of hearing (and is not limited to the  circumstances  at  date  of
    application), at which point,  two  of  the  Appellant's  children  had
    resided in the UK for 7 years and were qualifying children.

29    Further, associated with that point, given that two  of  her  children
    had been in the United Kingdom for more than  seven  years,  the  Judge
    fails to direct himself in law that powerful reasons would need  to  be
    identified by way of public interest considerations,  to  outweigh  the
    interests of the children  in  remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom;  MA
    (Pakistan)  &  Ors,  R  (on  the  application  of)  v  Upper   Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ  705  (07  July
    2016), para 49.

30     Insofar  as  any  of  these  issues  is  not  raised  in  either  the
    Appellant's grounds of appeal, or in the grant of permission to appeal,
    I find they are Robinson obvious errors.

31    The Judge's decision is therefore unsustainable and will be  remitted.



32    I have held above that the Judge's  decision  making  in  relation  to
    whether the matters contained within the Appellant's grounds of  appeal
    regarding her circumstances in Nigeria  prior  to  departure  had  been
    considered by the Respondent in the decision of 10 May 2016, or whether
    they represented a new matter, was flawed. I do not attempt to  make  a
    decision of my own as to whether or not those matters were or were  not
    considered by the Sec date, or were or were not new matters,  requiring
    the consent of the Respondent for the First-tier Tribunal  to  consider
    them. I leave those matters for the First-tier  Tribunal  to  consider,
    when remaking the decision in the present appeal.

33    However, I make the following direction for the remitted appeal:

         "(1)     By 4.00 pm, 14 days prior to the  listing  of  the  appeal
         before the First-tier Tribunal, the Respondent is directed to  file
         and serve:


             (i) a bundle containing all relevant documentation relating to
             the Appellant's human  rights  claim  and  trafficking  claim,
             including copies of representations, complaints and interviews
             described at paragraph 3 of the Appellant's notice  of  appeal
             dated 24 May 2016, and including any  decisions  made  on  her
             trafficking  claim,  whether   on   reasonable   grounds,   or
             conclusive grounds; and


             (ii)      a letter setting out the  Respondent's  view  as  to
             whether, in  the  decision  letter  dated  10  May  2016,  the
             Respondent did consider the further  information  provided  by
             the Appellant with regard to her circumstances in Nigeria,  as
             set out in the Appellant's grounds  of  appeal  dated  24  May
             2016, or should be treated as  having  done  so;  further,  if
             expressing the view that the Respondent did not consider  that
             material, informing the  Appellant  and  the  Tribunal  as  to
             whether the Respondent intends to consider that material prior
             to hearing, and if not, why  not;  and  if  not,  whether  the
             Respondent consents to the matters set out in the  grounds  of
             appeal of 24 May 2016 being considered by the Tribunal, and if
             declining to give such consent, giving her  full  reasons  for
             adopting that position."

    Decision


34    I set the decision aside.

35    Due to the extent of the findings of fact that are  required  for  the
    remaking of this decision, I find  that  it  is  appropriate  that  the
    matter  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with  the   above
    direction.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellants  are
granted  anonymity  in  order  to  preserve  the  anonymity  of  the   minor
appellants. No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify them or any member of their family. This direction applies both  to
the appellants and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                            Date: 29.3.18

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan





