
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14884/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th February 2018                         |On 8th March 2018             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                              mr muhammad ishaq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, Counsel instructed by Ash Norton
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  22nd
    March 2016 to refuse his application for leave to remain in the  UK  on
    the basis of  his  private  life.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Frazer
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal in a decision promulgated on 2nd  June
    2017.  The Appellant now  appeals  to  this  Tribunal  with  permission
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer on 11th December 2017.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant was  granted  leave
    to enter the UK as a Tier 2 Migrant  on  6th  August  2011  until  16th
    February 2013.  He entered the UK to take up employment as a  chef  for
    the Kashmiri Karahi Restaurant in Slough on the basis that the employer
    had shown that it  was  necessary  to  recruit  a  Kashmiri  chef  from
    Pakistan as there were no such chefs  in  the  UK.  The  Appellant  was
    granted further leave to remain as a Tier 2 Migrant until 5th  February
    2016 on the same basis.  However, on 7th October 2015, the  Appellant's
    leave to remain was curtailed so as to expire on 12th December 2015  as
    his employer's sponsorship licence was revoked.

 3. The Appellant applied for further leave to remain outside the Rules  on
    10th December 2015.  That application is contained at section A of  the
    Home Office bundle and  was  sent  with  a  covering  letter  from  his
    solicitors dated 11th December 2015 asking that he be  granted  further
    leave to remain in order to find a  Sponsor  to  transfer  his  Tier  2
    general visa.  It is stated that he is an experienced chef and is  said
    to have exceptional skills.   The  application  form  states  that  the
    Appellant's wife and family remain in Pakistan. It is stated  that  the
    Appellant has been supporting himself and his family  without  recourse
    to public funds and wishes to be allowed to remain in the UK as he  had
    at that time been living in the UK for nearly five  years  and  it  was
    asserted that he would experience hardship if he is required to  return
    to his country.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the application under  paragraph  276ADE
    of the Rules and decided that there were no  exceptional  circumstances
    which would justify the grant of leave to remain.

 5. In considering the appeal the judge noted that the Appellant is a  chef
    of exceptional talent  and  has  contributed  to  the  success  of  the
    restaurant with  whom  he  was  employed.  The  judge  noted  that  the
    Appellant has been able to support his parents and his  family  on  the
    wages that he earns through the restaurant and has been  able  to  send
    his children to private school [11].  The judge said that the Secretary
    of State believed  that  three  individuals  on  the  premises  of  the
    restaurant on 11th March 2015 were working at  the  restaurant  and  it
    appears that the restaurant's sponsorship  licence  was  revoked.   The
    judge noted that in oral evidence the employer said  that  the  company
    are applying for a new sponsorship licence so that  the  Appellant  can
    work for them again [12].  The judge found that the Appellant  and  the
    restaurant  have  been  instrumental  in  providing  support  to  local
    charities and that the Appellant  has  cooked  food  for  a  number  of
    charity events and that the restaurant has  contributed  to  the  local
    community.  The judge took account  of  letters  of  commendation  from
    Khidma Community Trust, Slough Borough Council and Thames Valley Police
    [13].  The judge went on to conclude that  the  Appellant  had  clearly
    developed a private life in the UK by way of connections to  colleagues
    and to the local community.  The judge said:

         "However I attach little weight to this private life because it was
         formed at a time when the Appellant's status in the United  Kingdom
         was precarious, that is, when he had no reasonable expectation that
         he would remain in the United Kingdom  other  than  on  short  term
         visas (s.117B(5) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002).  He does not meet the long residence requirements under  the
         Immigration Rules under paragraph 276ADE in that he has  only  been
         in the United Kingdom for just under six years." [14]

 6. The judge went on to deal with  the  Appellant's  contention  that  his
    family would suffer severe hardship if he were  not  granted  leave  to
    remain but found that the Appellant had not made any effort to look for
    an  alternative  Sponsor  [15].   The  judge  considered  that  if  the
    Appellant wishes only to work for Kashmiri Karahi then it would be open
    to him to return to Pakistan and apply for a further Tier 2 visa if and
    when the restaurant obtains a further  licence.  The  judge  considered
    that alternatively the Appellant could  apply  for  employment  with  a
    different restaurant which already  had  a  sponsorship  licence.   The
    judge found that the Appellant was able to support his family before he
    came to the United Kingdom and should be able  to  do  so  again.   The
    judge considered that there were no compelling  circumstances  why  the
    Appellant should be granted leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    outside of the Immigration Rules and that the Respondent's decision was
    not a disproportionate breach of the Appellant's right to  private  and
    family life under Article 8.

Error of law

 7. In the application for permission to appeal and at the  hearing  before
    me Mr Malik outlined three Grounds of Appeal challenging  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. The Appellant contends in Ground 1 that the judge erred at [14] in  her
    approach to Section 117B(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002. Section 117B(5) states, "little weight should be given  to  a
    private life established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when  a  person's
    immigration status is precarious".

 9. Mr Malik relied on paragraph 44 of the decision of the Court of  Appeal
    in Rhuppiah v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 802 where Lord Justice Sales made the following remarks:

         "This discussion  is  sufficient  to  dispose  of  the  appellant's
         argument about whether her own immigration status was  "precarious"
         at the relevant time, i.e. between 1997 and late 2010. I would wish
         to reserve my opinion about the  submission  of  the  Secretary  of
         State that any grant of limited leave to enter or remain  short  of
         ILR qualifies as "precarious" for the purposes of section  117B(5).
         I have to say that I am doubtful that this is correct. If that  had
         been intended, the drafter of section 117B(5) could have  expressed
         the idea more clearly and precisely in other ways. There is a  very
         wide range of cases in which some form of leave to remain short  of
         ILR may have been granted, and the word "precarious" seems to me to
         convey a more evaluative concept, the opposite of the idea  that  a
         person could be  regarded  as  a  settled  migrant  for  Article  8
         purposes, which is to be  applied  having  regard  to  the  overall
         circumstances in which an  immigrant  finds  himself  in  the  host
         country. Some immigrants with leave to remain falling short of  ILR
         could be regarded as being very settled indeed  and  as  having  an
         immigration status  which  is  not  properly  to  be  described  as
         "precarious". The Article 8 context could be taken to support  this
         interpretation. However, it is not necessary to decide in this case
         whether the Secretary of State is correct in her submission or not,
         since whichever view is correct the appellant clearly loses on this
         point.

10. Mr Wilding referred to the decision in AM (Section 117B) Malawi  [2015]
    UKUT 260 (IAC) where the Upper Tribunal said:

         "24.  We  reject  the  suggestion  that  some  yardstick  for  the
             identification  of  whether  or  not  a   period   of   lawful
             immigration  status  is  "precarious",  might  be   found   by
             reference to its length. We can  see  no  basis  for  such  an
             approach,  not  least  because  that  would  impose  upon  the
             judiciary the burden of identifying where that  boundary  lay,
             which cannot have been Parliament's intention. If  the  answer
             was to be found in the length of the  period  then  Parliament
             would simply have said so. Nor does the statute oblige the FtT
             to descend  to  adopting  the  approach  of  affording  subtle
             gradations of "little weight" to the elements of private  life
             established during  different  periods  of  time.  Whether  an
             individual  was  present  unlawfully,  or  had  a   precarious
             immigration status, Parliament has required the  FtT  to  give
             little  weight  to  the  "private  life"  relied   upon.   The
             distinction in approach to the issue of weight is to be  found
             in s117B(4) so that little weight is also to  be  given  to  a
             relationship formed with a qualifying partner at a  time  when
             the claimant is present unlawfully. It is open to the  FtT  to
             give such weight as it sees fit to such a relationship  formed
             at  a  time  when  the  individual's  immigration  status  was
             precarious,  but  the  FtT  is  not  required  to  give   that
             relationship little weight any more than  it  is  required  to
             give it significant weight.


         25. Nor is there any merit in our judgement in the suggestion that
             the answer is to be found in an individual's subjective belief
             that they would in the future be able to extend the period  of
             leave that had been granted to  them.  The  test  must  be  an
             objective one.


         26. That approach is in our judgement entirely consistent with the
             approach of the ECtHR to those families with children who seek
             to resist removal on the basis of their "private life" from  a
             host state when none of them  is  a  citizen  of  their  host;
             Alidjah-Anyame v The United Kingdom App 39633/98 4  May  1999,
             and Sarumi v The United Kingdom App 43279/98 26 January 1999.


         27. In our judgement all  those  who  have  been  granted  by  the
             Respondent a defined period of leave to enter the UK,  or,  to
             remain in the UK (which includes both those with a  period  of
             limited  leave  to  remain,  and  those  with  a   period   of
             discretionary leave to remain), hold during  the  currency  of
             that leave, an  immigration  status  that  is  lawful,  albeit
             "precarious".  Even  if  the  individual  genuinely  holds   a
             legitimate expectation that their  leave  will  ultimately  be
             extended further by the  Respondent,  they  have  no  absolute
             right to insist that this will occur, whether or not they meet
             the requirements of the Immigration Rules at the date of their
             application; HSMP Forum UK Limited [2008] EWHC 664. Still less
             will those who merely hold a genuine, and well founded belief,
             that they will at  some  future  date  be  able  to  meet  the
             requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  thus  be  able  to
             obtain an extension; E-A (Article 8  -  best  interests  of  a
             child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC).


         28. In all such cases, in order to obtain the variation that  they
             seek (whether to gain  a  further  grant  of  leave  which  is
             limited in duration, or is  indefinite)  the  individual  will
             need to meet at some  future  date  the  requirements  of  the
             Immigration Rules that are then in force; Odelola v  Secretary
             of State for the Home Department [2009] 1WLR 1230. The ability
             of the individual to do so is not  capable  of  prediction  in
             advance - even if at any given moment during the  currency  of
             their existing leave the individual  genuinely  believes  that
             they are continuing to meet the requirements attached to their
             existing grant. Indeed the ability of those who have  not  yet
             been granted indefinite leave to remain, to obtain a variation
             of their leave in the future, will probably always  depend  in
             part upon matters that are outside  their  control  -  whether
             that be the actions of others, or  the  future  prosperity  of
             themselves or others.


         29. During the course of argument we were referred to  Chapter  13
             of the IDIs, version 5.0 published on 28 July  2014,  entitled
             "Criminality Guidance in Article 8 ECHR cases".  At  paragraph
             4.4.5 appears the following;


             "The Immigration Rules also require that a relationship not be
             formed at a time when  the  foreign  criminal  has  precarious
             immigration status because a claim to respect for family  life
             formed when there was no  guarantee  that  family  life  could
             continue  indefinitely  in  the  UK,  or  when  there  was  no
             guarantee that if the person was convicted of an offence while
             he had limited leave he would qualify for further leave,  will
             be less capable of outweighing the public  interest.  For  the
             purposes of this guidance, a person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious if he is in the UK with limited leave to  enter  or
             remain,  or  he  has  settled  status   which   was   obtained
             fraudulently, or he has committed a criminal offence which  he
             should have been aware would make him  liable  to  removal  or
             deportation".


        30. Again, whilst in no way binding upon any court,  one  can  see
             that the Respondent's view of what the term "precarious" meant
             where used in s117B is entirely consistent with our own.


        ...


        32. To put the matter shortly, it appears to us  that  a  person's
             immigration status is "precarious" if their continued presence
             in the UK will be dependent upon  their  obtaining  a  further
             grant of leave. It is precisely because such a person  has  no
             indefinite right to be in the country that  the  relationships
             they form ought to be considered in the light of the potential
             need to leave the country should that grant of  leave  not  be
             forthcoming.


        33. Of course in some circumstances it may be that even  a  person
             with indefinite leave to remain, or a person who has  obtained
             citizenship, enjoys  a  status  that  is  "precarious"  either
             because that status is revocable by the Secretary of State  as
             a result of their deception,  or  because  of  their  criminal
             conduct. That is a different set of  circumstances  to  these,
             but we can see no  answer  to  the  point  that,  vitiated  by
             dishonesty, a grant of indefinite leave  to  remain  would  be
             susceptible to curtailment on proper  grounds  with  immediate
             effect, with the consequent removal of the immigration  status
             previously enjoyed. The Appellant did not seek to persuade us,
             correctly in our judgement, that this was the sole basis  upon
             which  an  individual  would  hold  a  precarious  immigration
             status. If that had been Parliament's intention it would  have
             been a simple matter to spell it out. Equally, the decision by
             an individual with a grant of indefinite leave  to  remain  to
             embark upon a course of criminal conduct, (even  if  it  would
             not be sufficient from the outset to trigger a decision by the
             Respondent under the automatic deportation provisions  of  the
             2007 Act) would probably be sufficient to  render  his  status
             precarious. In these cases the person is well  aware  that  he
             has either initially, or subsequently, imperilled  the  status
             he had, and cannot viably claim thereafter that his status  is
             other than precarious."


11. Mr Malik submitted that, as it pre-dates AM (Malawi), Rhuppiah must  be
    preferred.  However I note that the remarks of  Sales  LJ  in  Rhuppiah
    were obiter and he considered that it was not necessary to decide  this
    matter.

12. In any event I note that the interpretation put forward by Sales LJ  is
    that there is a very wide range of cases in which some form of leave to
    remain short of indefinite leave to remain may have  been  granted  and
    that the word 'precarious' involves a more evaluative concept which  is
    to be applied having regard  to  the  overall  circumstances.   In  the
    instant case the judge clearly looked at all of  the  circumstances  of
    the Appellant's case.  At paragraphs 11, 12 and 13 the judge looked  at
    the Appellant's circumstances in the UK  in  terms  of  his  length  of
    residence and his involvement with the restaurant and  with  the  wider
    community.  At  paragraph  15  the  judge  gave  consideration  to  the
    Appellant's options as regards his ability  to  obtain  an  alternative
    Sponsor or to return home and re-apply if his current Sponsor  obtained
    a further licence.  The judge was aware that the Appellant came to  the
    UK in August 2011 and that he had a wife and children and  his  parents
    who he supported in Pakistan.

13. Mr Malik submitted that, as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant,  the  Appellant
    belongs to one of the settlement categories where  a  person  qualifies
    for indefinite  leave  to  remain  after  a  single  extension  and  on
    completion of five years in  the  UK.  However,  events  in  this  case
    demonstrate the precarious or the temporary nature of  the  Appellant's
    circumstances in the UK.  The Appellant  had  been  granted  a  further
    extension as a Tier 2 visa but, as his leave to  remain  was  dependent
    upon a Sponsor, when that sponsorship licence was lost, the Appellant's
    leave to remain was curtailed.  This demonstrates  the  uncertainty  of
    the Appellant's status.

14. The judge was clearly aware of all of these circumstances and  referred
    at paragraph 12 to the evidence from the Sponsor  in  relation  to  the
    events which led to the revocation of the licence.  It  is  clear  that
    the judge was aware of all of the circumstances in this  case.   In  my
    view this is not the type of case envisaged by Sales LJ at paragraph 44
    of the decision in Rhuppiah.  Accordingly the judge made  no  error  in
    her approach to section 117B (5).

15. Ground 2 contends that the judge  erred  in  failing  to  consider  and
    determine whether there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's  integration  on  return  to   Pakistan   under   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Paragraph   276ADE(1)(vi)
    provides that a person qualifies for leave to remain on the grounds  of
    his private life if he -

         "(vi)    is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in  the
             UK for less than  twenty  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) but there would be very significant obstacles to
             the applicant's integration into the country to which he would
             have to go if required to leave the UK."

16. Mr Malik contended that the judge failed to engage with this matter  at
    all.  Mr Wilding contended that this ground is without merit because it
    was not argued in the First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant would face
    very significant obstacles to his integration.   Mr  Wilding  submitted
    that 276ADE was not mentioned in the Grounds of Appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and that the only assertion in the Grounds was  that  the
    Appellant would suffer severe hardship if he was required to start over
    in Pakistan.  He submitted that the case was advanced in the First-tier
    Tribunal on the basis of compelling circumstances outside of the Rules.
     In any event he submitted that the Secretary of State  had  considered
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and  it  is  difficult  for  the  Appellant  to
    complain now that it was not considered by the judge  when  it  is  not
    clear that that is the case that was being advanced.

17. As highlighted above the basis of the application to  the  Home  Office
    was that the Appellant would experience hardship if required to  return
    to Pakistan (F1 of the Respondent's bundle).   The  Grounds  of  Appeal
    dated 4th April 2016 state:

         "The Appellant maintains he will suffer severe hardships if  he  is
         required to start over, as his skills and  experience  are  valued.
         His role is recognised under the shortage occupation  list  in  the
         United Kingdom.

         The Appellant maintains he will face insurmountable obstacles if he
         is required to return to Pakistan."

18. The Appellant's witness statement prepared for the appeal and contained
    in the Appellant's bundle at pages 6 to 8 states that he has been  able
    to provide for his elderly parents, his wife and his two  children  who
    all live in Pakistan since coming to the UK.  He states at paragraph  6
    that if he is required to return to Pakistan:

         "I will face severe difficulties to build any career  and  my  wife
         and children rely on me to provide for them.  My earnings from  the
         United Kingdom have helped with supporting my family.  I have  been
         able to provide a good education for my children.  ...I  have  been
         able to provide my young children and my family in Pakistan a  good
         lifestyle, education and a comfortable home."

    At paragraph 7 the Appellant said that if he was required to return  to
    Pakistan:

         "I will not be able  to  provide  for  my  family,  with  the  same
         standards as I have to date.  Since  I  have  been  in  the  United
         Kingdom for six years, my  family  has  become  accustomed  to  the
         security and stability that I provide, especially my children,  who
         are  progressing  well  in  their  studies,  in  Pakistan  at  good
         schools."

    At paragraph  8  the  Appellant  went  on  to  say  that  he  had  good
    opportunities in the UK and would find it hard to  start  all  over  in
    Pakistan.

19. At paragraph 3 of the decision the judge noted the Grounds  of  Appeal.
    However, I note that at paragraph 7 which  summarises  the  submissions
    made on behalf of the Appellant, it is clear that the case was  put  on
    the basis that the Appellant should be granted leave to remain  outside
    of the Immigration Rules.   I  also  note  that  the  judge  gave  full
    consideration to the allegation that the Appellant contends that he and
    his family would suffer severe hardship if he were not granted leave to
    remain but the judge found that the Appellant had not made  any  effort
    to look for an alternative Sponsor and that the Appellant  could  apply
    to return to the same Sponsor  or  another  Sponsor  [15].   The  judge
    considered that  the  Appellant  could  apply  for  employment  with  a
    different restaurant which already  had  a  sponsorship  licence.   The
    judge found that the Appellant "was able to support his  family  before
    he came to the United Kingdom and should  be  able  to  do  so  again".
    Whilst I  agree  that  the  judge  should  perhaps  have  given  active
    consideration to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) on the basis of  the  evidence
    before him, he could not have reached  a  conclusion  other  than  that
    reached at paragraph 15 in any event.

20. The third Ground  of  Appeal  contends  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's approach to the Appellant's Article  8  claim  is  inconsistent
    with the guidance given in UE (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 957.  There Sir David Keene said:
       "18. ... But by the same token a public interest in the retention in
       this country  of  someone  who  is  of  considerable  value  to  the
       community can properly be  seen  as  relevant  to  the  exercise  of
       immigration control. It goes to the weight to be  attached  to  that
       side of the scales in the proportionality exercise. The weight to be
       attached to the public interest in removal of the person in question
       is not some fixed immutable amount. It may vary from case  to  case,
       and where someone is  of  great  value  to  the  community  in  this
       country, there exists a  factor  which  reduces  the  importance  of
       maintaining firm immigration control in  his  individual  case.  The
       weight to be given to that aim is correspondingly less.
       19. None of this means that the individual  is  being  rewarded  for
       good behaviour. It goes  instead  to  the  strength  of  the  public
       interest in his removal and how much weight should  be  attached  to
       the need to maintain effective immigration control in his particular
       case. ..."

21. It is contended on the  Appellant's  behalf  that,  whilst  noting  the
    Appellant's role in the restaurant and contribution to local  charities
    at paragraphs 11 and 13, the judge failed to have regard  to  the  fact
    that the Appellant  was  of  value  to  the  community  when  assessing
    proportionality.  At the hearing Mr  Malik  submitted  that  these  are
    relevant matters in relation to the  proportionality  assessment  which
    the judge should have taken into account as positive factors in  making
    the proportionality assessment.  In his submissions Mr Wilding  pointed
    to the findings in paragraph 15 and noted that every part of this  case
    has been considered.  He  highlighted  the  fact  that  the  judge  had
    pointed out that the Appellant can apply again for a Tier 2  visa  when
    the employer obtains a further sponsorship licence and  that  this  too
    was a relevant factor in considering proportionality.

22. In relation to this aspect of the case I am satisfied  that  the  judge
    did take into account the contribution the Appellant had  made  to  the
    restaurant and the contribution he and the restaurant had made  to  the
    local community at paragraphs 11 and 13.   The  judge  also  took  into
    account Section 117B(5)  and  it  is  clear  that  the  judge  attached
    significant weight to that factor in assessing proportionality.

23. However the judge took into account the fact that the  Appellant  could
    obtain another Sponsor or could, after he left the UK, apply to  return
    to the UK when his last employer obtains a further sponsorship licence.
     These were legitimate factors to take into account  in  assessing  the
    proportionality of the decision to curtail  the  Appellant's  leave  to
    remain.  In my view Ground 3 discloses no material error of law.

Conclusions

24. Having considered the three grounds as set out  above  I  am  satisfied
    that none of the grounds disclose a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

25. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  does  not  contain  a
    material error of law.

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

27. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 7th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is dismissed there is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 7th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


