
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14953/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 23 February 2021                 |On: 5 March 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            muhammad omer rasheed
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Hasan instructed by Haider and Hasan Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has been no objection  from
   the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A face to
   face hearing was not held because it was not practicable, and all  issues
   could be determined in a remote hearing

2. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr  Rasheed's
   appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  to  refuse  his  human
   rights claim.

3. For the purposes of this decision,  I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
   Secretary of State as the respondent and Mr  Rasheed  as  the  appellant,
   reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

4. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  19  November  1981.  He
   first entered the United Kingdom on 6 October 2009 with  entry  clearance
   as a student, valid until 14 January 2011 and was granted  further  leave
   as a Tier  4  student  until  1  July  2011.  Following  an  unsuccessful
   application and appeal, the appellant was granted further leave as a Tier
   1 (post-study work) migrant on 8 October 2011, valid  until  22  November
   2013. His wife and two children joined him in the UK and on  20  December
   2013 the appellant submitted a family/ private life 10  year  application
   which was refused on 3 February 2014  without  a  right  of  appeal.   An
   application for reconsideration was refused  and  on  23  July  2015  the
   appellant was served with a removal notice as an overstayer. He then made
   further submissions on family and private life grounds on 6  August  2015
   which were refused  and  certified  as  clearly  unfounded,  followed  by
   submissions on 17 August 2015 and 21 September 2015, both of  which  were
   refused with no right of appeal.

5. The appellant then made a human rights claim on 10 May 2019 on the  basis
   of his private life in the UK. His claim was refused on 28 August 2019 on
   the grounds that he did not meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  or
   paragraph 276ADE(1) of the immigration  rules  and  that  there  were  no
   exceptional or compelling  circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of  leave
   outside the rules. The respondent noted that the appellant's wife was not
   British or settled in the UK and that the children had not lived  in  the
   UK for 7 years. It was accordingly considered that the family unit  could
   return to Pakistan.

6. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard  in
   the First-tier Tribunal on 15 January 2020 by Judge Herbert. There was no
   representative  for  the  respondent  at  the  hearing.  The  appellant's
   evidence before the judge was that he had spent over 10 years in  the  UK
   and had completed an MSc and been in regular employment until 2013,  that
   his children were aged almost 13 and 12 years  and  were  doing  well  in
   school and were well integrated into society in the  UK  and  that  there
   would be significant hardship for all the family if they had to return to
   Pakistan as he had no accommodation or means  of  employment  or  support
   there and the children would be devastated if forced to leave the UK.

7. The judge found that the appellant could not claim that his family  would
   face insurmountable circumstances on return  to  Pakistan  and  that  the
   immigration rules were not met as the children had not yet been in the UK
   for 7 years. However, he found that the children  had  spent  their  most
   important years of their education in the UK and had been in the UK for 6
   years and that taking all the factors together the balance lay in  favour
   of the appellant and against the maintenance of immigration  control.  He
   accordingly  allowed  the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds  outside   the
   immigration rules.

8. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   on the grounds that the judge's proportionality  assessment  was  flawed,
   unbalanced and contrary to the guidance in KO (Nigeria) & Ors v Secretary
   of State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53.

9. Permission to appeal was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on  28  April
   2020. The matter then came before me for a remote hearing by way of skype
   for business.

Error of Law

10. Both parties made submissions before me.

11. Mr McVeety relied and expanded upon the grounds of appeal. He  submitted
   that the judge had made several errors of law  in  his  decision.  Having
   found that there  were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  family
   reintegrating in Pakistan and  that  the  children  were  not  qualifying
   children for the purposes of Appendix FM, and thus that the  requirements
   of the immigration rules were not met, the judge failed to  identity  any
   compelling circumstances which would lead to a consideration outside  the
   immigration rules. The factors that  he  identified  in  the  appellant's
   favour applied equally to all cases with children living in  the  UK  and
   there were no factors identified by the judge which took the case further
   to show that it would be unreasonable for the children to leave  the  UK.
   The decision was contrary to the "real world" situation referred to in KO
   (Nigeria). The judge's reliance at  [40]  upon  the  appellant's  English
   language and possible financial independence as tipping  the  balance  in
   the proportionality  assessment  was  contrary  to  the  guidance  in  AM
   (S.117B) [2015] UKUT 260 which found those to be  neutral  factors.  The
   judge's findings were not open to him on the evidence  and  his  decision
   should be set aside.

12. Mr Hasan submitted that the judge had considered  all  of  the  family's
   circumstances, in particular those of the children who had been in the UK
   for over 6 years, that he had properly applied the five-stage approach in
   Razgar, R (on the Application of) v. Sectretary of  State  for  the  Home
   Department [2004] UKHL 27 and that he had made no errors of  law  in  his
   decision. Mr Hasan submitted that the appellant had not been permitted to
   work, but once he was able to he would be able to  get  leave  to  remain
   here as his children had now  been  in  the  UK  for  over  7  years.  He
   submitted that this case was different to KO (Nigeria) as the appellant's
   children were minors.

13. I have no hesitation in concluding  that  the  judge's  decision  cannot
   stand and must be set aside. As Mr McVeety properly identified, there are
   several errors of law in the decision. I am entirely in agreement with Mr
   McVeety's submission that, having properly found that the requirements of
   the immigration rules could not be met,  the  judge  failed  to  identify
   anything compelling about the family's circumstances which would  justify
   consideration outside the rules on wider Article 8 grounds or a grant  of
   leave outside the rules. Having properly directed himself at  [39],  that
   the children's rights were not  the  overriding  issue,  the  judge  then
   contradicted his own direction by  finding  that  the  interests  of  the
   children's outweighed the public interest in immigration control, without
   identifying  any,  or  any  compelling  factors  which  would   make   it
   unreasonable for the children to return to Pakistan. In  so  far  as  the
   judge, at [40], gave weight to the fact that the
appellant spoke English and was unlikely to be  dependent  upon  the  state,
not only did he speculate in regard to the latter, but he acted contrary  to
the guidance in AM (Malawi) as to such matters  being  neutral  factors.  Mr
Hasan's submissions were little more than a re-statement of the  appellant's
claim and did not provide a proper response  to  the  Secretary  of  State's
grounds of appeal. As for his  submission  that  the  appellant's  case  was
distinguishable to KO (Nigeria) because of the age  of  the  child  in  that
case, that is simply wrong.

14. Accordingly, it is undoubtedly the case that  Judge  Herbert  materially
   erred in law in his decision and I therefore set aside his decision.

Re-Making the Decision

15. I invited a response from both parties as to the disposal of the  appeal
   in the event that I found an error of  law.  Mr  Hasan  agreed  that  the
   decision could be re-made by myself on the basis of the evidence  already
   available and considering that the  children  were  qualifying  children,
   having by now resided in the UK for over 7 years. I asked  him  if  there
   were any further relevant factors to be considered other than the passage
   of time since the last decision. He told me that the appellant's wife and
   daughter had some medical issues involving  "ladies'  diseases",  but  he
   said that the evidence in that regard was before the First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge. Mr McVeety was content for me to re-make the  decision  without  a
   further hearing.

16. It seems to me that the appeal must fail, for  the  same  reasons  given
   above in relation to the error of law. There is  no  challenge  to  Judge
   Herbert's decision that the appellant and his family could not  meet  the
   requirements of the  immigration  rules.  Clearly  that  was  the  proper
   conclusion given that the children were not qualifying  children  at  the
   time of the application and that, as Judge Herbert found, there  were  no
   very significant obstacles to integration in Pakistan.

17. It is the case, when  considering  Article  8  outside  the  immigration
   rules, that the children have now spent more than 7 years in the  UK  and
   are therefore qualifying children for the purposes of section 117B(6)  of
   the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  However,  for  the
   reasons stated above, there is no evidence to suggest that  it  would  be
   unreasonable to expect the children to leave the UK. They came to the  UK
   aged 3 and 5 years and are currently aged 11 and 13  years  respectively.
   There is documentary evidence confirming that they are  progressing  well
   at school and the statements of the appellant and his wife refer  to  the
   children being integrated into society in the UK and considering  the  UK
   as their home. There is also a letter dated 4 June 2019  from  Manchester
   Royal Eye Hospital referring to the appellant's  daughter  having  eczema
   and to a previous problem of sore eyes in 2017. There is nothing in  that
   evidence, or any of the other  evidence  before  me,  to  show  that  the
   children could not resume  their  education  in  Pakistan  and  that  the
   appellant's daughter could  not  receive  treatment  for  her  eczema  in
   Pakistan. Neither is there any evidence to suggest that it would  not  be
   reasonable to expect the  children  to  return  to  Pakistan  with  their
   parents as a family unit, nor contrary to their best interests to do  so.
   None of the family has any lawful basis of stay in the UK, having had  no
   leave to remain for the past 7 years. The children and their mother  have
   spent only a matter of months  in  the  UK  with  leave  to  remain.  The
   approach to be taken is set out in KO (Nigeria) as follows:

      "18. On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it seems to
      me inevitably  relevant  in  both  contexts  to  consider  where  the
      parents, apart from the relevant provision, are expected to be, since
      it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them. To that
      extent the record of the parents may become indirectly  material,  if
      it leads to their ceasing to have a right to remain here, and  having
      to leave. It is only if, even on that hypothesis,  it  would  not  be
      reasonable for the child to leave that the  provision  may  give  the
      parents a right to remain. The point was well-expressed by Lord  Boyd
      in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State for the Home Department 2017
      SLT 1245, [2017] ScotCS CSOH_117:


            "22.     In my opinion before one embarks on  an  assessment  of
            whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK one
            has to address the question, 'Why would the child be expected to
            leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as this there can only
            be one answer: 'because the parents have no right to  remain  in
            the UK'. To approach the question in any other way  strips  away
            the context in which the assessment of reasonableness  is  being
            made ..."

    19. He noted (para 21) that Lewison LJ had  made  a  similar  point  in
    considering the "best interests" of children in the context of  section
    55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  in EV
    (Philippines) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA
    Civ 874, para 58:


             "58.     In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis  that  the
             facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no
             right to remain, but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against  which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?"

    To the extent  that  Elias  LJ  may  have  suggested  otherwise  in MA
    (Pakistan) para 40, I would respectfully disagree. There is nothing in
    the section to  suggest  that  "reasonableness"  is  to  be  considered
    otherwise  than  in  the  real  world  in  which  the   children   find
    themselves."

18.  For this family and these children, the real world situation  in  which
   they find themselves is such that it would clearly  not  be  unreasonable
   for them to be expected to  return  together  to  Pakistan.  Furthermore,
   little weight can be given to the private life they have  established  in
   the UK, pursuant to  section  117B(4)  of  the  2002  Act.  Although  the
   appellant has been in the UK for several years, the majority of his  time
   has been spent without leave. Whilst he has made several applications  to
   regularise his stay, those applications have all been unsuccessful and he
   has chosen to remain in the UK with his family unlawfully.

19. As for any other compelling  circumstances,  there  is,  as  Mr  McVeety
   said, nothing. The appellant referred, in his statement before the First-
   tier Tribunal, to being subjected to  serious  threats  in  Pakistan  and
   there are two FIRs in the appeal bundle, but he did not  make  an  asylum
   claim, despite being invited to  do  so  (as  confirmed  in  the  refusal
   decision) and gave very limited details of why he considered  himself  to
   be at risk. In any event, that evidence was before Judge Herbert  and  no
   challenge was made to his properly made decision that there were no  very
   significant obstacles to the family's integration in Pakistan.  Likewise,
   Judge Herbert did not give any  express  weight  to  the  medical  issues
   raised by the  appellant  in  regard  to  his  wife  and  daughter.   The
   appellant's wife, in her statement, stated that she  was  seriously  ill,
   but the evidence produced in the bundle did not bear that out and  simply
   confirmed that she had an ovarian cyst. There  is  no  further  and  more
   recent  evidence  in  that  regard  and  no  evidence  to  suggest   that
   appropriate  treatment would not be available in Pakistan.

20. Accordingly the evidence shows that it would be entirely reasonable  for
   the family to return to Pakistan, having had no lawful basis of  stay  in
   the UK for many years. There are no compelling circumstances justifying a
   grant of  leave  outside  the  immigration  rules  and  the  respondent's
   decision to refuse leave to remain is entirely proportionate. There is no
   breach of Article 8 and the appeal is therefore dismissed.

DECISION

21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error
   on a point of law. The Secretary of State's appeal is accordingly allowed
   and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. I  re-make  the
   decision by dismissing Mr Rasheed's appeal.





Signed:       S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated: 23 February
2021
