
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14671/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 February 2018                          |On 6 March 2018               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                 Naresh [M]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Afzal, A-R Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge NMK Lawrence) dismissing his appeal  against
    the decision of the respondent made on 25 May 2016 to refuse  to  grant
    him leave to remain on family or private life  grounds  because,  among
    other things, he  was  not  considered  to  meet  the  suitability  and
    eligibility requirements contained in Appendix FM.  Although the First-
    tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction, I do not consider  that  the
    appellant requires to be accorded anonymity for  these  proceedings  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Nepal, whose date of birth is [ ]  1987.
    He first entered the United Kingdom on 5  May  2011  with  valid  entry
    clearance as a student.  His leave in this capacity ran until 7 October
    2013.  He made an in-time application to extend his stay as a  student,
    but the application was refused on 5 June 2014, and on 6 June  2014  he
    was served with an IS151A notice informing  him  of  his  liability  to
    removal.  The reason for the refusal of further leave as a student  was
    that the appellant was considered to have used a proxy  in  an  English
    language test.

 3. The appellant remained in the UK  without  leave.   On  [  ]  2015  the
    appellant's partner, 'P', a national of the Philippines, gave birth  to
    a daughter by the appellant.  As P  had  indefinite  leave  to  remain,
    their daughter was a British national by birth.  On 25  November  2015,
    the appellant applied for leave to remain on the basis  of  his  Muslim
    marriage to P.

 4. On 25 May 2016, the  respondent  gave  her  reasons  for  refusing  the
    appellant's application.  His  application  was  considered  under  the
    partner route in Appendix FM.  He did not meet either  the  eligibility
    or suitability requirements.  He was not eligible for leave  to  remain
    as a partner, as he had remained in the UK  in  breach  of  Immigration
    laws.  While he had a qualifying relationship for the purposes of EX.1,
    there were not very significant obstacles under Rule 276ADE(1)(vi) - or
    (by implication) insurmountable obstacles under EX.1 - to him  carrying
    on the role of a father-figure in his daughter's life in Nepal, if that
    was his partner's wish.

 5. The application also fell to be refused under section  S-LTR.1.6  which
    stated that an application would be refused  if  the  presence  of  the
    applicant in the UK was not conducive to the  public  good  because  of
    their conduct, character, associations  or  other  reasons,  making  it
    undesirable to allow them to remain in  the  UK.   In  his  application
    dated 27 September 2013, he had submitted a TOEIC certificate from  the
    Educational Testing Service.  ETS had a record of  his  speaking  test.
    Using voice-verification software, ETS was able  to  detect  whether  a
    single person was undertaking multiple tests.   ETS  had  undertaken  a
    check of his test, and had confirmed to the  Secretary  of  State  that
    there was significant evidence to conclude  that  his  certificate  was
    fraudulently obtained by the use of a  proxy  test-taker.   His  scores
    from the test taken on 28 August  2013  at  Premier  Language  Training
    Centre had now been cancelled by ETS.  On the basis of the  information
    provided by ETS, the  SSHD  was  satisfied  that  his  certificate  was
    fraudulently obtained and that he had used deception in his application
    of 27 September 2013.  In fraudulently obtaining a  TOEIC  certificate,
    the appellant  had  willingly  participated  in  what  was  clearly  an
    organised and serious attempt to defraud the SSHD and others.   He  had
    thereby displayed a flagrant disregard for public  interest,  according
    to which migrants required a certain level of English language  ability
    in order to facilitate social integration and cohesion, as well  as  to
    reduce a likelihood of them being a burden on the taxpayer.



The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Lawrence.  The Judge
    received oral evidence from the appellant and his partner.

 7. In his subsequent decision, the Judge found that the appellant did  not
    meet  the  eligibility  requirements  of  Appendix  FM,  but  that  the
    respondent had not made out a case that the appellant had used a  proxy
    in his English Language test, and hence had not made out a case that he
    had obtained his TOEIC test result certificate by deception.

 8. The Judge then turned to address the best  interests  of  the  couple's
    daughter.  He found that there was no evidence that  the  couple  could
    not lawfully settle in either Nepal or the  Philippines.   He  bore  in
    mind that the child should not be denied the benefit of  being  brought
    up in the country of her nationality.  But he also said that he had  to
    bear  in  mind  that  being  parents  of  a  British  child  would  not
    automatically lead to settlement status in the UK.   He  had  not  been
    presented with  any  evidence  to  make  a  finding  that  it  was  not
    reasonable for the daughter to live in either Nepal or the Philippines.
     She was young  enough  to  adapt.   She  could  access  education  and
    healthcare needs in either of the two countries.

 9. The Judge noted that Mr Afzal had raised the issue of  the  appellant's
    conversion to Islam and had submitted that it might  be  difficult  for
    him to live in the Philippines.  The Judge said that there were Muslims
    living in the Philippines and in Nepal, and he did not  find  that  the
    appellant's conversion to Islam demanded  that  he  should  be  granted
    leave to remain in the UK.

10. The Judge held that it was open to the appellant to return to Nepal  to
    make the relevant entry clearance application.  His  wife  earned  more
    than �19,000 a year, and the appellant had passed the English  Language
    requirement.  It appeared that on an entry  clearance  application  the
    appellant was likely to meet  the  eligibility  requirements.   He  was
    mindful of the fact that there was a child, but the child  was  only  2
    years old, and the separation  from  her  father  was  unlikely  to  be
    lengthy one.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

11. On 24 November 2017,  designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy
    granted permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "(2) Although the grounds are somewhat rambling, they argue amongst
             other points that the Judge failed to have  proper  regard  to
             S.117B6 of the 2002 Act, the appellant having  a  genuine  and
             subsisting relationship with his British citizen daughter; and
             that the Judge erred in his application of the Supreme Court's
             judgment in Agyarko.

         (3)  I am satisfied these grounds are arguable.  As evidenced  from
             the Upper Tribunal's decision in SF and Others (Guidance, post-
             2014 Act) [2017] UKUT 120 that there is more to be  considered
             in relation to the rights of the appellant's  child.   In  the
             light of that case, it is arguable  that  the  Judge  has  not
             properly assessed the public  interest  factors  in  light  of
             S117B(6).

          4) I do not see the argument related to whether the Judge  should
             have considered paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM to  be  material
             because the Judge looked at [Rule 276ADE] which is in  similar
             terms.  I remind the parties that the appeal was not an appeal
             against the  Immigration  Rules  but  an  appeal  against  the
             refusal of a human rights claim; the grounds  of  appeal  were
             restricted.  For clarity, I do not exclude these arguments but
             find they add little to the primary arguments."

The Appeal Hearing

12. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, I drew the attention of the representatives to the fact  that  the
    Judge's reasoning on the suitability issue appeared  to  be  in  direct
    conflict with the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in SSHD  v  (1)
    Mohammed Shehzad and (2) MD Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615.

13. The Judge held that the  generic  evidence  of  Mr  Millington  and  Ms
    Collings, coupled with specific  evidence  supplied  by  ETS  that  the
    speaking and writing test taken by the appellant had  been  invalidated
    by ETS, failed to discharge the evidential burden.  However,  according
    to the Court of Appeal, this evidence should have been treated  by  the
    Judge as establishing a prima facie case, with the consequence that the
    onus shifted to the appellant to produce an  innocent  explanation  for
    his test result being declared invalid.

14. Mr Afzal did not dispute that the Judge had erred in law on this issue.
     But since the Judge had found  in  the  appellant's  favour  that  the
    allegation of unsuitability was not proven, he submitted that the Judge
    had failed to give adequate reasons as to why it was  proportionate  to
    require the appellant to return to Nepal to apply for entry  clearance.
    Mr Afzal relied on Agyarko for the  proposition  that,  "where  it  was
    certain that the appellant would be  granted  leave  to  enter  if  the
    application was made outside the United  Kingdom,  there  might  be  no
    public interest in his removal."

Discussion

15. I do not consider that the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  SF  and
    Others exposes a flaw in the Judge's reasoning  on  the  weight  to  be
    attached to the fact that the couple's child is a British citizen.

16. As noted by the Tribunal in SF at paragraph [7],  the  IDIs  on  family
    migration - Appendix FM, section  1.0(b),  headed  "Family  life  as  a
    partner or parent and private life, 10 year routes", and  dated  August
    2015, contain at paragraph 11.2.3 guidance on the  following  question:
    "Would it be unreasonable to expect a British citizen  child  to  leave
    the UK?"  The relevant parts of the guidance are as follows:

         'Save in cases involving criminality, the decision-maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British citizen to leave the EU, regardless of  the  age
         of that  child.   This  reflects  the  European  Court  of  Justice
         Judgment in Zambrano ...

         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.

         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight as to justify separation, if a child could otherwise
         stay with another parent or alternative primary carer in the UK  or
         in the EU.

         The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

         -    Criminality falling below the threshold set out  in  paragraph
         398 of the Immigration Rules;

         -    a very poor immigration history, such as whether a person  has
         repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

         In considering whether refusal may be  appropriate,  the  decision-
         maker must consider the impact on the child of any  separation  (my
         emphasis).   If  the  decision-maker  is  minded  to   refuse,   in
         circumstances where separation would be the result,  this  decision
         should normally be discussed with a senior  caseworker  and,  where
         appropriate, advice may be sought from the office of the children's
         champion on the implications for the welfare of the child, in order
         to inform the decision.'

17. The prohibition stipulated in the policy is against assessing a case on
    the basis that it would be reasonable to expect a British citizen child
    to leave the UK with the parent or primary carer who is facing removal.
    There is no express prohibition against assessing the case on the basis
    that it would be reasonable to expect a British citizen child to  leave
    the UK with both parents.  In  such  a  scenario,  there  would  be  no
    separation, no break-up of the family unit, and so the need to  justify
    separation would not arise. It  is  important  to  distinguish  between
    expectation  and  choice.  A  narrow  construction  of  the  policy  is
    consistent with Appendix FM, under which a person  in  the  appellant's
    position cannot take the benefit of EX.1(a) because he shares  parental
    responsibility for his British national child, rather than having  sole
    responsibility for the child.

18. The appellants in SF were a mother and her two young children.  Each of
    them had entered the United Kingdom unlawfully in 2012.  Prior to that,
    they had lived in Albania.  The first appellant's husband had  come  to
    the UK much earlier.  He had obtained ILR  and  subsequently  by  false
    representations, a grant of  British  citizenship.   He  was  currently
    serving a sentence of seven and a half years' imprisonment for offences
    connected with people-trafficking.  After the appellant arrived in  the
    UK, she gave birth to a further child.  The  youngest  child  was  born
    when the child's father had  indefinite  leave  to  remain,  and  as  a
    result, this youngest child was a British citizen.  On 29  April  2015,
    the appellants were served with notices refusing  their  asylum  claims
    and deciding that they  should  be  removed  from  the  UK  as  illegal
    entrants.

19. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeals on  all  grounds  raised.
    The issue that was pursued before the Upper Tribunal  was  an  argument
    that because of the nationality of the  youngest  child,  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect that child to leave the UK; and that this had an
    impact on the merits of the decision  that  the  appellants  should  be
    removed. Mr Wilding drew the attention of the  Upper  Tribunal  to  the
    policy.  He accepted that this was not a case in which the  conduct  of
    the mother of the other three children was such as to give rise  as  to
    considerations of such weight as to justify separation.   The  Tribunal
    also observed that it did not appear that consideration had been  given
    to the possibility of the British citizen child  staying  with  another
    parent or alternative primary carer in the EU.  The Tribunal  held,  at
    paragraph [9], that it appeared inevitable  that  if  the  guidance  to
    which Mr Wilding had drawn their attention  had  been  applied  to  the
    present family, at any time after  it  was  published,  the  conclusion
    would have been that the appellants should have been granted  a  period
    of leave to remain in order to enable  the  British  citizen  child  to
    remain in the UK with them.

20. The facts of SF are significantly  different  from  the  facts  of  the
    present case.  The effect of the decision under appeal  in  SF  was  to
    compel a British citizen child to leave the EU.  This was  because  his
    father was in prison, and his other parent and primary carer was facing
    removal.  So, the case plainly fell within the  scope  of  the  policy.
    There was no question of choice.  The parents did not have  the  choice
    of voluntarily relocating to Albania to continue family life there with
    their children, as one of them was in prison. Thus it was  unreasonable
    to expect the British citizen child to leave the EU with his mother, in
    circumstances where the conduct of the mother  did  not  give  rise  to
    considerations of such weight as to justify separation from the father;
    and in any event the child could not otherwise stay with his father  in
    the UK or elsewhere in the EU.

21. Here, as the Judge recognised, the parents had  a  choice.  They  could
    choose to relocate abroad with their child or the mother  could  remain
    in the UK  with  the  child,  and  support  an  application  for  entry
    clearance by the father.

22. However, having found that the appellant was likely to be successful in
    an application for entry clearance,  the  Judge  did  not  address  the
    Chikwamba line of authorities which are to  the  effect  that  in  such
    circumstances it will rarely be proportionate to  split  up  a  family,
    even on a temporary basis. The immigration history of the  parent  does
    not have to be as bad as that set out in the policy in order to  supply
    a sufficient reason for requiring the parent to go back and seek  entry
    clearance. But it is doubtful that  the  appellant's  relatively  short
    period of overstaying constituted a sufficient reason, and in any event
    the Judge did not adequately explain why it did.

23. If this had been the Judge's only error,  I  could  have  proceeded  to
    remake the decision.  However, the decision is fundamentally flawed  as
    the Judge proceeded on an erroneous premise.

24. The probative value of the generic evidence relied on by the  Secretary
    of State in the form of witness statements from  Rebecca  Collings  and
    Peter Millington has been considered by  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the
    Court of Appeal in, respectively, SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden of  Proof)  [2016]  UKUT
    00229 (IAC) and Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  and  (1)
    Muhammad Shehzad and (2) MD Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615.

25. The ratio decidendi of SM  and  Qadir  is  that,  despite  the  serious
    shortcomings in the evidence relied on by the Secretary  of  State,  it
    was sufficient to discharge the evidential burden of  raising  a  prima
    facie case, such that the evidential burden shifted to SM and Qadir  to
    produce  an  innocent  explanation  for  their   test   results   being
    invalidated by ETS.

26.  Of particular significance is the following passage in the decision:

         "68. As our analysis and conclusions in the  immediately  preceding
         section make clear, we  have  substantial  reservations  about  the
         strength and quality of the Secretary  of  State's  evidence.   Its
         shortcomings are manifest. On the other hand, while bearing in mind
         that the context is one of alleged deception, we must be mindful of
         the comparatively  modest  threshold  which  an  evidential  burden
         entails. This calls for an evaluative assessment on the part of the
         tribunal. By an admittedly narrow margin we are satisfied that  the
         Secretary of State has discharged this burden.  The effect of  this
         is that there  is  a  burden,  again  an  evidential  one,  on  the
         Appellants of raising an innocent explanation."

27. The significance of the Court of Appeal decision is that  this  crucial
    finding by the Presidential panel has been endorsed by higher and  thus
    binding authority.  Beatson LJ, giving  the  leading  judgment  of  the
    court, summarised the central issue which the court was  addressing  at
    paragraph [19]:

         "These appeals are only concerned with whether their evidence  (the
         generic evidence of Mr Millington and Ms Collings  regarding  ETS's
         analysis of the  spoken  English  component  of  the  TOEIC  test),
         together with evidence that  the  tests  of  the  individual  under
         consideration  has  been  assessed  as  'invalid'  rather  than  as
         'questionable' because of problems at the test centre, suffices  to
         satisfy the evidential burden of showing dishonesty  that  lies  on
         the Secretary of State and to impose an evidential  burden  on  the
         individual to raise an innocent explanation.  The  question  before
         us is thus not the ultimate reliability  of  the  evidence  or  the
         ultimate disposition of the appeals."

28. In Mr Chowdhury's case, discussed by Beatson LJ at paragraphs [24]  and
    [25], the first instance judge held there was no  evidence  identifying
    Mr Chowdhury as a person whose test was  invalid.   But  in  fact,  the
    evidence included a screenshot of the results which  stated  that  this
    was the position.  The same first instance judge held  there  could  be
    multiple reasons for invalidation, some  of  which  might  not  involve
    fraud or deception.  Beatson LJ went on to hold  that  both  the  first
    instance judge and the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge who dealt  with  the
    appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  had  misunderstood  the  nature  of  the
    evidence.  Beatson LJ continued in paragraph [26]:

         "The reason for the misunderstandings by the Tribunals may be  that
         the language used  by  Mr  Millington  and  Ms  Collings  in  their
         statements to explain a technical process is not altogether  clear.
         But, whatever the reason, in these circumstances,  in  my  judgment
         the in limine rejection of the Secretary  of  State's  evidence  as
         even sufficient to shift the evidential  burden  was  an  error  of
         law."

29. The same evidence that was  deployed  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    Chowdhury was deployed in this appeal.  This is the generic evidence of
    Mr Millington and Ms Collings coupled with specific  evidence  supplied
    by ETS that the speaking and writing test taken by  the  appellant  was
    designated by ETS as invalid.

30. Accordingly, applying the reasoning of Beatson LJ with  respect  to  Mr
    Chowdhury's case, the evidence in the Home Office bundle raised a prima
    facie case of fraud, so as  to  impose  an  evidential  burden  on  the
    appellant to raise an innocent explanation.

31. The Judge wrongly held that the evidence provided by the respondent did
    not raise a prima facie case of deception.  The Judge also did not take
    into account that the respondent's case was potentially  reinforced  by
    the expert evidence of Professor French.  As a result of rejecting  the
    respondent's case "in limine", the Judge  failed  to  engage  with  the
    evidence put forward by the appellant in rebuttal of the allegation  of
    deception.  Among other things, the appellant said that he  had  passed
    other English Language tests around the same time.

32. In conclusion, both parties were deprived of  a  fair  hearing  on  the
    suitability issue, and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    vitiated by a material error of law, such that it must be set aside  in
    its entirety and re-made.

Future Disposal

33. As discussed at the hearing,  this  is  not  an  appropriate  case  for
    disposal in the Upper Tribunal due  to  the  extent  of  further  fact-
    finding that is required.  Accordingly, for that reason, this appeal is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing, with  none  of
    the findings of fact made by the previous Judge being preserved.

34. In resolving the suitability issue, the First-tier Tribunal  is  likely
    to be assisted by the production of the  other  English  Language  test
    certificate results relied upon by the appellant, as well as a schedule
    setting out how each test result - including the disputed ETS result  -
    corresponds to the CEFR scale.  Without a common point  of  comparison,
    it will be virtually impossible to understand the full implications  of
    the various test results.  The Tribunal is also likely to  be  assisted
    by the appellant giving as detailed an explanation as  possible  as  to
    how he came to choose the Testing Centre for his ETS test, and what  he
    can recall of the process of taking the test.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law,  and  as
such the decision must be set aside and re-made.

Directions

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at  Hatton  Cross  for  a
fresh hearing before any Judge apart from Judge NMK Lawrence.

None of the findings of fact made by Judge Lawrence will be preserved.


Signed   Date 27 February 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

