
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14196/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 April 2018                        |On 24 April 2018                    |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                          mr Zahid Hossain Bhuiyan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Hossain, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh  born  on  20
    September 1955 who appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of the respondent Entry  Clearance  Officer,  of  10  November
    2015, to refuse the appellant's application for leave to  remain  as  a
    partner.  In a decision promulgated on 18 July 2017, Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Brewer dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission from the Upper  Tribunal  on  the
    following grounds (in summary):

         Ground 1

         The First-tier Tribunal failed to apply  the  case  law  of  Goudey
         (subsisting marriage - evidence) Sudan [2012] UKUT 00041 (IAC).

         Ground 2

         It was incorrect to conclude that there  was  no  medical  evidence
         about the sponsor's inability to travel.

         Ground 3

         The judge failed to place proper weight on the  evidence  including
         of the appellant's Bangladesh Government job.

         Ground 4

         The decision on Article 8 was inadequate.

Hearing

 3. Mr Hossain's primary submission was reliant on the case of  Goudey  and
    specifically paragraph 12 , which provides as follows:

         "... It may be that the ECO  and  the  judge  considered  that  the
         requirement  to  show  a   'subsisting   marriage'   imposes   some
         significant burden to produce evidence other than that showing that
         there was a genuine intention to live together as man and wife in a
         married relationship.  If so we conclude that that is an  error  of
         law. The authority of GA ("Subsisting"  marriage)  Ghana  *  [2006]
         UKAIT 00046; [2006] Imm AR 543 only requires that there is  a  real
         relationship as opposed to the merely  formal  one  of  a  marriage
         which has not been terminated. Where there is a legally  recognised
         marriage and the parties who are  living  apart  both  want  to  be
         together and live together as husband and wife, we cannot see  that
         more is required to demonstrate that the marriage is subsisting and
         thus qualifies under the Immigration Rules."

 4. Mr Hossain referred to [26] of the Decision and Reasons where the judge
    had referred to the appellant's "leave" to come to the UK  which  meant
    leave from Bangladeshi television which  Mr  Hossain  indicated  showed
    that the respondent was aware that the appellant was coming to  the  UK
    with three years "leave" from his job and that he had to go  back.   Mr
    Hossain  emphasised  that  it  was  a  condition  of  his  leave   from
    Bangladeshi television that he had to return.  He also emphasised  that
    a condition of his leave in the UK was  that  he  had  to  return.   Mr
    Hossain submitted that nothing more was required under Goudey  and  the
    Tribunal did not show that that had been applied.  The couple have been
    married since 1984 and have two children, one of whom  was  working  in
    the UK in the cabinet office and had attended the  First-tier  Tribunal
    appeal (on 8 June and not 23 June 2017 as erroneously recorded  by  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal).  The second daughter was married  in
    the UK and both the appellant and the sponsor attended  the  reception.
    Mr Hossain rehearsed the sponsor's immigration history  including  that
    her leave was curtailed in 2007 and then reinstated.

 5. In relation to the judge's findings at [27], Mr Hossain argued that  it
    had been the intention of the appellant to bring her husband to the  UK
    if she had obtained indefinite leave to remain  in  2010,  whereas  she
    only obtained discretionary leave, not obtaining  indefinite  leave  to
    remain until 2013.  The appellant  had  also  maintained  that  he  was
    waiting for his  money  on  retirement  and  that  it  was  always  his
    intention to come back to the UK.  When asked  to  identify  where  the
    judge had got it wrong, including in relation to the finding that there
    was no evidence that the sponsor could not  travel  to  Bangladesh  for
    medical reasons, Mr Hossain submitted that the Tribunal had  failed  to
    apply the correct standard of proof of a balance of  probabilities  and
    on balance the Tribunal should have accepted that she could not  travel
    given the evidence of her medical condition.  He further submitted that
    the judge got it factually wrong in stating that the appellant did  not
    apply for further leave in 2008.

 6. Mr Hossain also emphasised that there was  evidence  of  the  sponsor's
    three visits to Bangladesh, although he accepted that this was noted by
    the Tribunal at [38].  Mr Hossain submitted that the  judge  failed  to
    place appropriate weight on  this  evidence  and  he  again  relied  on
    Goudey.  He further submitted  that  the  decision  on  Article  8  was
    inadequate given that the couple had been married since 1984.

 7. Ms Everett submitted  that  Mr  Hossain  was  seeking  to  reargue  the
    original appeal and that Goudey was not authority for a  position  that
    if someone was still legally married their appeal must always  succeed.
    She submitted that the facts in this appeal were different  from  those
    in Goudey.  It was for the Tribunal to  assess  whether  there  was  an
    intention of the parties to live together in a subsisting  relationship
    and she submitted that in Goudey there were no countervailing  factors,
    whereas this case was more complicated.

 8. Ms Everett submitted that the judge was entitled to reach the  findings
    he did, that there was no medical reason why the sponsor was unable  to
    visit Bangladesh more often than she had.  Although Mr  Hossain  sought
    to persuade the Tribunal that the appellant's leave of absence from his
    job with Bangladesh television, as a Government department, was similar
    to the type of leave that would be given in a grant of leave to remain,
    Ms Everett submitted that there was no evidence before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that this was the case or that the appellant had to return  to
    permanently to Bangladesh or could  not  otherwise  have  visited.   Ms
    Everett submitted that the judge had provided adequate reasons for  not
    accepting the reasons given  by  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant  for
    spending the time that they had apart.  The fact that a different judge
    may not have reached the same decision did not vitiate the decision  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  given  the  cogent  reasons.  There  was  no
    perversity in the reasoning.

 9. In relation to Article 8, if the Upper Tribunal was persuaded that  the
    First-tier Tribunal was entitled to come to the decision it did,  there
    was no error in relation to the approach to Article 8  given  that  the
    outcome would have been necessarily the same.

10. In reply Mr Hossain submitted that he was not rearguing  the  case  and
    the grounds were arguable and submitted again that Goudey was clear and
    that there does not need to be anything  further.   He  submitted  that
    there were no adverse credibility  findings  against  the  sponsor  and
    relied on the medical evidence that her  situation  was  deteriorating.
    Mr Hossain also submitted  further  photographs  and  had  submitted  a
    further bundle in the event that the Tribunal found an error of law.

Error of Law Discussion

11. I am not satisfied that any error of  law  has  been  identified.   The
    facts of this case, as set out by the First-tier Tribunal Judge at  [7]
    are that the sponsor and appellant married in 1984 and have  two  adult
    children and that the sponsor is in receipt  of  Personal  Independence
    Payments and that the appellant states he wishes to come to the  UK  to
    help his wife.  The sponsor has  suffered  the  same  conditions  since
    2007.  The appellant left the UK in 2008, whereas the sponsor  remained
    in the UK with a dependent child (and indeed the sponsor at  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing stated that one of the reasons she had not returned to
    Bangladesh was because her daughter  had  tuberculosis  where  she  had
    restricted trips).  The sponsor  had  visited  Bangladesh  three  times
    since 2008, the last one at the  time  of  the  application  for  entry
    clearance and the respondent  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  not  been
    satisfied with the evidence of contact.  Although the respondent  Entry
    Clearance Officer  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  could  be
    adequately maintained this ground was not before me as  the  judge  was
    satisfied on the evidence on this basis at [36].  The Tribunal set  out
    the relevant law and case law including Goudey, including  specifically
    that where there are no countervailing factors generating suspicion  as
    to  the  intentions  of  the  parties  (my  emphasis),  such   evidence
    (referring to  evidence  of  telephone  cards)  may  be  sufficient  to
    discharge the burden of proof on the claimant.  The Tribunal also cited
    the reference in Goudey to the fact that the  matrimonial  relationship
    must continue at the relevant time rather than just the formality of  a
    marriage, but that this does not require the production  of  particular
    evidence of mutual devotion.

12. I do not accept therefore Mr Hossain's submission that  the  judge  did
    not properly apply Goudey.  The judge set out the  evidence.   Although
    Mr Hossain submitted that there were no negative credibility  findings,
    the judge did  not  accept  the  contention  of  the  sponsor  and  the
    appellant on  a  number  of  issues.   The  judge  noted  that  it  was
    significant that earlier phone records were provided despite it  having
    been said initially that it was not possible to  obtain  such  records.
    In addition, the judge noted, at  [26],  that  the  sponsor  could  not
    confirm that the appellant had ever asked for permission to  come  back
    to the UK on  holiday  to  visit  his  family,  from  his  employer  in
    Bangladesh (and Mr Hossain did not substantively address this) and that
    the appellant did not say in his  statement  that  he  did.   What  the
    appellant had said in his statement which the judge considered was that
    he was unable to visit the UK "due to my work", whereas, in the judge's
    findings, this contradicted the sponsor's evidence,  that  he  required
    leave to come to the UK implying, as it did, that he did not  get  such
    leave.  Whilst that might be said, in itself,  to  be  an  exercise  in
    semantics, there was no error in the Tribunal's  subsequent  conclusion
    that "At no time after  his  return  to  Bangladesh  in  2008  did  the
    appellant apply for holiday leave to come to visit his  family  in  the
    UK".  That was a finding properly open to the First-tier Tribunal.   It
    is clear that the Tribunal was also aware, from the appellant's witness
    statement, that the appellant had not been  in  breach  of  immigration
    law.

13. The Tribunal then went on logically to consider  the  position  of  the
    sponsor and her visits to Bangladesh.   The  Tribunal  noted  that  the
    appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain  in  2008,  which  had
    been refused, but in 2011 she had obtained discretionary leave and  she
    then went to visit her  husband.   On  return  she  applied  again  for
    indefinite leave to remain which was obtained in 2013, the sponsor then
    visiting Bangladesh in 2014 and  2015.   The  Tribunal  considered  the
    sponsor's evidence that inbetween visits she was unwell.  There  is  no
    error in the Tribunal's findings that there was no medical evidence  of
    the sponsor's inability  to  travel.   That  does  not  mean  that  the
    Tribunal did not take into consideration the medical evidence before it
    of the sponsor's medical conditions (and the judge notes, at [27]  that
    it is not disputed that the sponsor has medical problems).

14. The judge's findings were specifically  in  relation  to  the  lack  of
    medical evidence in relation to an inability to travel and  Mr  Hossain
    was unable to point to  any  evidence  to  the  contrary.   Whilst  the
    Tribunal does not require corroboration, there  was  no  error  in  the
    Tribunal's approach, that given that the sponsor has  medical  problems
    it was surprising that if she could  not  travel  for  medical  reasons
    there was no evidence of this fact (particularly  as  there  was  other
    medical evidence).  The sponsor's claim to be unable to travel is  also
    contradicted by the fact that she did travel to Bangladesh from time to
    time.  In considering whether the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  I
    can place no weight on the additional evidence produced nor on the oral
    comment, made by the sponsor before the Upper Tribunal,  that  she  was
    unable to travel due to her daughter's tuberculosis  as  that  evidence
    was not before the First-tier Tribunal.

15. The Tribunal then went on methodically  to  consider  the  evidence  of
    phone contact from [28] to [33] and concluded that there  was  evidence
    of regular contact during 2015 but no evidence of any contact prior  to
    this.  The Tribunal summarised the evidence at [34], including that the
    appellant voluntarily left the UK in  2008.   There  is  no  error,  as
    suggested by Mr Hossain, in the finding  that  the  appellant  did  not
    "seek leave to remain" in 2008.  The appellant in his witness statement
    confirmed that he had never lived in the UK in  breach  of  Immigration
    Rules and relied on his wife's statement that his  leave  was  extended
    between July 2008 and 5 January 2010, but that he  left  the  UK  on  3
    November  2008  whilst  his  leave  was  valid.   The  judge  was   not
    contradicting that evidence but found that the appellant did  not  seek
    to extend that leave.  The fact that it expired  in  2010  rather  than
    2008 is immaterial (and if anything begs the question  as  to  why  the
    appellant did not return for  a  visit  during  the  currency  of  that
    leave).  The Tribunal  went  on  to  find  that  the  appellant  was  a
    qualified professional who had already  worked  in  the  UK  for  three
    years.  The Tribunal found that the appellant had not sought  leave  to
    come to the UK for a holiday and that there  was  no  evidence  of  the
    appellant calling the sponsor, and whilst there  was  evidence  of  the
    sponsor calling the appellant, or at least calling a number  attributed
    to the appellant, this was only from 2015 and the Tribunal  notes  that
    at this time the appellant would have been contemplating his retirement
    plans.  The Tribunal took into consideration the visits in 2011,  2013,
    2014, and even accepting the limitations in travel between 2008,  2011,
    was entitled to reach the finding he did that it was  unclear  why  the
    contact was so sparse after 2011 given that the appellant  was  working
    and that there was no reason why he could not have paid for flights and
    there was no evidence medically that the sponsor could not travel.

16. The Tribunal demonstrated that evidence of contact, travel and  medical
    issues were all considered and the Tribunal's decision  was  adequately
    reasoned,  reaching  the  conclusion,  at  [35],  that   the   evidence
    demonstrated that the relationship was not genuine and subsisting.   It
    is clear therefore that the Tribunal was of the view that  ,  following
    Goudey, there was no more than the 'formality of a marriage'  and  that
    the Tribunal was not  satisfied  that  the  parties  intended  to  live
    together permanently  in  the  UK.   The  Tribunal  therefore  provided
    adequate reasons for reaching the decision  the  Tribunal  did,  having
    taken into consideration all the evidence before  it  and  applied  the
    correct standard of proof.  I bear in mind that such  reasons  must  be
    proper, intelligible and adequate and that it  is  'not  a  counsel  of
    perfection' (see MD (Turkey)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1958).  There  was  no
    misdirection in law or otherwise and it could not be suggested that the
    decision was perverse.

17. In relation to Article 8  the  Tribunal  was  not  satisfied,  for  the
    reasons given, that there was a genuine and subsisting marriage.  It is
    difficult to see how  any  different  Article  8  decision  could  have
    otherwise been reached.  At [37] the Tribunal found that there  was  no
    interference in family life given that it had not been established  for
    the  purposes  of  Article  8  and  that  there  were  no   exceptional
    circumstances, taking into account the length of time the  parties  had
    lived apart, the lack of  contact  and  the  fact  that  there  was  no
    evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  sponsor's  medical
    position had worsened.  Again, these reasons were adequate.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law therefore and shall stand.


Signed                                  Date: 23 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date:  23 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
