
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14111/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th July 2017                              |On 11th July 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr Derrick Yaw Yeboah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr V Aning, trading as Immigration Advisory Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and to avoid confusion I shall refer to him as  being,  "the
    claimant".  The respondent is a citizen of Ghana who was  born  on  5th
    May, 1962.

2.   The respondent appealed against a decision taken  by  the  claimant  on
    9th December, 2015, to refuse his application for leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom on human rights grounds and to give  directions  for
    his removal under Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999.
    In refusing the application, the claimant was not  satisfied  that  the
    respondent had shown that the requirements of Appendix FM or  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules had been met.

3.   The appeal was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sethi  at  Taylor
    House on 22nd March this year.  The judge found that the respondent and
    his partner had a genuine and subsisting relationship with  each  other
    and that on the evidence before her the respondent's relationship  with
    his partner's daughter was such that from  the  age  of  about  11  she
    looked  upon  him  as  her  father  figure.   She  concluded  that  the
    respondent had  parental  responsibility  in  applying  RK  (s.117B(6);
    "parental relationship" (IJR) [2016] UKUT 31 (IAC).

4.   She found that considering the  state  of  the  respondent's  partner's
    daughter's education, that it would not be reasonable to expect her  to
    relocate to Ghana.  She found that she was satisfied on the totality of
    the  evidence  that  there  were  insurmountable  obstacles   for   her
    continuing family life with the respondent outside the United  Kingdom.
    She allowed the respondent's appeal on human rights grounds.

5.   The claimant  challenged  the  determination  suggesting  that  it  was
    arguable that the judge had erred by failing to consider Section 117 of
    the 2002 Act and reliance was placed on Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT
    00090 (IAC).

6.   At the hearing before me today  the  respondent's  representatives  had
    supplied a written submission which the Presenting Officer had  earlier
    read.  He told me that having considered  the  matter  further  in  the
    light of those submissions he agreed that there was no  material  error
    of  law  in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision.  I therefore uphold it.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.   No fee is paid or  payable  and  therefore
there can be no fee award.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley          Date: 8 July 2017
