
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14471/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 11 March 2021                   |On : 19 March 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          abu shahdat md sayem gazi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Armstrong, instructed by Bindmans LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection
      from the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A
      face to face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and
      all issues could be determined in a remote hearing

   2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr  Gazi's
      appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse  his  human
      rights claim.

   3. For the purposes of this decision, I shall hereinafter  refer  to  the
      Secretary of State as the respondent and Mr  Gazi  as  the  appellant,
      reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the First-
      tier Tribunal.

   4. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh,  born  on  4  May  1981.  He
      entered the UK on 17 June 2007 with leave to enter as  a  student  and
      was granted further periods of leave as a  Tier  4  student  until  30
      October 2015. The respondent  considered  curtailing  the  appellant's
      leave and on 25 July 2014 issued a notice of  liability  for  removal,
      followed by a further removal notice on 19 January 2015 after  it  was
      decided not to pursue curtailment. On  10  April  2015  the  appellant
      submitted an Article 8  human  rights  claim  which  was  refused  and
      certified as clearly unfounded on 15 April 2015. A further  notice  of
      liability to removal was served on the appellant on 14 April 2015  and
      a judicial review claim challenging  that  decision  was  refused  and
      finally concluded on 4 June 2019.

   5. The appellant then made a further human rights claim on 28 June  2019,
      on Article 3 and 8 private life grounds. That was refused on 9  August
      2019. The respondent considered that the application fell for  refusal
      on  grounds of suitability under paragraph S-LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM of
      the immigration rules on the basis that the  appellant's  presence  in
      the UK was not conducive to the public good owing to his reliance,  in
      his previous  application  of  4  November  2013,  on  a  fraudulently
      obtained TOEIC English language certificate. The respondent considered
      that the appellant  did  not,  in  any  event,  meet  the  eligibility
      requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) and that there were no  compelling
      circumstances outside the rules. The respondent  also  considered  the
      appellant's medical and mental health  problems,  but  concluded  that
      there was appropriate medication and treatment available in Bangladesh
      and that he had his family in that country who could provide him  with
      support. It was not considered that there was a risk of suicide if the
      appellant ere returned to Bangladesh or that the Article  3  threshold
      would be met.

   6. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was  heard
      by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Shaerf on 29  September  2020.
      The appellant gave oral evidence before the judge, remotely. The judge
      also had before him  extensive  evidence  in  relation  to  the  TOEIC
      deception allegation, including six witness statements  which  covered
      the appellant's education in Bangladesh, his academic studies  in  the
      UK and his attendance at college for the ETS tests,  as  well  as  his
      medical and psychological issues and the birth of  his  child  by  his
      wife, a Bangladeshi national present in the UK with leave to enter  as
      a student.

   7. On behalf of the appellant it was submitted that the appeal turned  on
      a single issue, namely  whether  the  respondent  had  discharged  the
      burden of proving that  the  appellant  had  cheated  in  his  English
      language test. Reference was made to a Court Order of 4 June  2019  in
      the Court of Appeal settling the judicial review proceedings, in which
      it was accepted that if the appellant was found not to  have  cheated,
      he was to be treated as having had continuous leave since 17 June 2007
      when he arrived in the UK as a student. Judge  Shaerf  concluded  that
      the respondent had not discharged the initial burden of proof  or,  if
      she had, then the appellant had  provided  an  explanation  which  was
      sufficient to discharge the burden of proof  upon  him.  He  concluded
      that the appellant had not been shown to have exercised deception  and
      allowed the appeal under Article 8 on the  basis  of  the  appellant's
      private life.

   8. The Secretary of State sought  permission  to  appeal  Judge  Shaerf's
      decision on the basis that he had failed to give adequate reasons  for
      concluding that the respondent had not discharged the  initial  burden
      of proof or, alternatively, for  concluding  that  the  appellant  had
      provided an innocent explanation sufficient to discharge the burden of
      proof upon him. The grounds asserted further that  once  the  ETS  had
      withdrawn its certificate, the basis of the appellant's leave had been
      removed;  that  there  was  nothing  preventing  the  appellant   from
      returning to Bangladesh and applying for the correct entry  clearance;
      and that the judge had failed to have  regard  to  the  time  critical
      requirements of paragraph 276ADE and the requirements for a continuous
      period of ten years' lawful residence.

   9. Permission was refused  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  whereby  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Martin, sitting as a First-tier Tribunal Judge, said of
      the last ground:

"The second ground the judge erred in allowing the  appeal  under  the  long
residence provisions is misguided. It is clear that the Secretary  of  State
accepted that, if the appellant had not used  deceit,  he  was  entitled  to
succeed on long residence grounds."

  10.  The  Secretary  of  State,  however,  renewed  her  application   for
      permission to the Upper Tribunal  and  permission  was  granted  on  3
      December 2020, essentially on the last ground,  albeit  not  excluding
      the first part of the grounds. The matter then came before  me  for  a
      remote hearing conducted through Skype for Business.

  11. There was some discussion  at  the  hearing  about  the  Secretary  of
      State's position, in light of  the  written  submissions  made  by  Mr
      Armstrong dated 3 March 2021 and the Court  of  Appeal  judgement  and
      Consent Order annexed thereto. Ultimately, Mr Kandola's  main  concern
      was the issue of costs which he agreed could be dealt with by  way  of
      written submissions and he did not object to my preliminary view  that
      the appeal ought to be dismissed and the judge's decision upheld.

  12. In light of the agreement reached, I have kept my decision  brief,  as
      follows.

  13. The challenge to Judge Shaerf's findings on the  issue  of  fraud  and
      deception, although forming the largest part of the grounds,  was  not
      in fact the main basis for the  grant  of  permission,  and  indeed  I
      consider it to be little more than a disagreement by the Secretary  of
      State with the judge's  decision.  The  decision  is  a  detailed  and
      careful one based upon a  full  and  careful  assessment  of  all  the
      evidence. In so far as the grounds refer to the  case  of  MA  (ETS  -
      TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 450 to challenge the judge's reliance  upon
      the appellant's English language qualifications and ability, that case
      does not  preclude  any  weight  being  given  to  such  matters,  and
      certainly not in the face of the extensive evidence which  was  before
      the judge in that regard. The judge assessed the  evidence  with  care
      and provided detailed and  cogent  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
      appellant had provided an innocent  explanation  in  response  to  the
      respondent's concerns and for concluding that the respondent  had  not
      met the burden of proving deception and fraud. The judge was fully and
      properly entitled to conclude as he did.


  14. As for the issue upon which permission was eventually granted, I agree
      with the reasons provided by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin for  refusing
      permission on the grounds in the First-tier Tribunal. The respondent's
      grounds, and the grant of permission completely overlook the terms  of
      the Consent Order agreed by the Secretary of State  in  the  Court  of
      Appeal on 4 June 2019, whereby it was accepted that if  the  appellant
      was found by the First-tier Tribunal, in a human rights appeal, not to
      have cheated, the relevant removal decisions would  be  rescinded  and
      the appellant would be treated as having continuous  leave  to  remain
      since 25 July 2014 and the earlier period when he had leave, which was
      the date of his entry to the UK, 17 June 2007. The appellant therefore
      succeeded on the basis of 10 years' continuous  lawful  residence  and
      there was no  need  to  consider  his  private  life  under  paragraph
      276ADE(1) of the immigration rules. In suggesting that there was  such
      a need, the grounds of appeal,  and  the  grant  of  permission,  were
      misguided.

  15. In all of the  circumstances  it  seems  to  me  that  the  judge  was
      perfectly entitled to make the decision that he did. His decision  was
      based upon a full and careful assessment of the evidence and a  proper
      application of the relevant legal provisions and  caselaw.  I  do  not
      find any material errors of law  requiring  the  decision  to  be  set
      aside.

DECISION

  16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to allow the appeal  stands  and  the  Secretary  of  State's
      appeal is dismissed.

     Directions

     In the absence of agreement by the parties, the following shall apply:

    1. No later than 14 days from the date this decision is sent  out,  the
       appellant shall file and serve written submissions as to costs;


    2. No later  than  14  days  from  receipt  of  the  appellant's  costs
       submissions,  the  respondent  shall  file  and  serve   her   costs
       submissions in response;

    3. The submissions will then be put before an Upper Tribunal  Judge  to
       make a decision on costs.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  11 March 2021
