
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
                (Immigration and Asylum Chamber Appeal Number: HU/14119/2015
                                                               HU/14120/2015
                                                               HU/14121/2015
                                                               HU/14122/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 February 2018                   |On 13 February 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     KS
                                     VM
                                     PK
                                     AK
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    Mr R Wilcox, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. These are appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Kimnell (the judge), promulgated on 4 April 2017, in which
         he dismissed  the  appellants'  appeals  against  the  respondent's
         decision dated 11 December 2015 refusing their human rights claims.



Factual Background

      2. The appellants  are  nationals  of  Sri  Lanka.  The  1st  and  2nd
         appellants are husband and wife and were  born  in  June  1972  and
         August 1978. They are the parents of the 3rd  and  4th  appellants.
         The 3rd appellant, a boy, was born in the UK on 22  May  2008,  and
         the 4th appellant, a girl, was also born in the UK on  6  September
         2012. At the date of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  the  3rd
         appellant was 8 years old, although  he  was  due  to  turn  9  the
         following month.

      3. The 1st appellant entered the UK illegally on 8 December  2001  and
         made an asylum claim. This was refused on 23 November 2003 and  his
         appeal against the refusal was dismissed on 23  February  2004.  An
         application for an EEA residence card was refused on 30 April 2007.
         The 2nd appellant entered the UK illegally  on  14  July  2007  and
         claimed asylum. Her asylum claim was refused on 26  September  2007
         and an  appeal  dismissed  on  19  March  2008.  Following  earlier
         unsuccessful applications, the appellants made human rights  claims
         on 7 September 2015 seeking a grant of leave to remain under the 10-
         year route to settlement under Appendix-FM.

      4. In refusing the human rights claims the respondent  maintained,  in
         particular, that it was reasonable to expect the 3rd  appellant  to
         go to Sri Lanka given his  age  and  the  fact  that  he  would  be
         returned as part of his family unit.  The  respondent  additionally
         considered that there were no exceptional circumstances outside the
         immigration rules sufficient to warrant a grant of leave to  remain
         under article  8.  The  respondent  noted  that  Sri  Lanka  had  a
         functioning educational system, and there was no evidence that  the
         welfare and safety of the children would be put in jeopardy.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      5. The appellants provided a large bundle of documents  that  included
         witness statements. The judge was also provided with the  authority
         of MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705. The judge heard oral evidence
         from the 1st and 2nd appellants. The judge additionally heard  oral
         evidence from VM and RM, the 2nd appellant's two brothers living in
         the UK, as well as SBP, a family friend with  whom  the  appellants
         were living, and KS, another family friend.

      6. In the section  headed  "Decision  and  Reasons"  the  judge  first
         considered the best interests of the 3rd  and  4th  appellants.  He
         noted that the 3rd appellant in particular  was  in  education  and
         that the whole family were supported in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
         judge referred to the  3rd  and  4th  appellant's  extended  family
         members in the UK, and the submission  that  the  children  may  be
         affected by a deterioration in the 1st appellant's mental condition
         if  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  (there  was  a  psychological  report
         diagnosing the  1st  appellant  with  a  mild  depressive  disorder
         attributed to his immigration  issues  and  some  general  anxiety-
         related symptoms). The judge did not accept that there would be  no
         family support if the appellants were  removed  to  Sri  Lanka  and
         found that the reasons given by extended family and friends in  the
         UK for discontinuing  financial  support  if  the  appellants  were
         returned to Sri Lanka were very weak. The judge specifically  noted
         that the 3rd appellant was in year 4 at school but did  not  accept
         that the children could not speak or understand Tamil as it was the
         language spoken  by  their  parents  and  both  parents  needed  an
         interpreter at the hearing. The  judge  noted  that  education  was
         available in Sri Lanka and that, whilst it  would  be  advantageous
         for the 3rd appellant to continue her education in the UK, he could
         nevertheless access schooling in Sri Lanka. At [46] the judge noted
         that there was very little evidence  that  the  3rd  appellant  had
         established social ties and friendships outside his nuclear family,
         but accepted that he saw "quite a bit" of his cousins. Having noted
         that the most important aspect of the children's best interests was
         that  they  continue  to  reside  with  their  parents,  the  judge
         concluded, at [48], that,

             "It may be  marginally  in  the  best  interests  of  the  two
             children, particularly the third appellant, to be  allowed  to
             remain in the UK though that is not the determinative issue."

      7. Having identified the best interests of  the  children,  the  judge
         proceeded to consider whether it would be reasonable to expect  the
         children to leave the UK. In so doing he made specific reference to
         the reasonableness test as considered in MA (Pakistan).  The  judge
         engaged in a balancing exercise to determine whether the  need  for
         immigration control outweighed the best interests of  the  children
         [51]. The judge noted the strong weight that must be given  to  the
         need to  maintain  immigration  controls  and  the  fact  that  the
         applicants had no entitlement to remain, and reminded himself  that
         the children should not be held  responsible  for  the  conduct  of
         their parents. The judge noted that neither the  1st  nor  the  2nd
         appellant had lawful leave to remain, and neither  was  capable  of
         finding gainful employment, indicating that the family would always
         be a drain on others. The judge noted that the  1st  appellant  had
         received NHS treatment although that money was  being  repaid.  The
         judge referred to the psychological report confirming that the  1st
         appellant was suffering from mild depression which  was  likely  to
         deteriorate if he was removed. The judge noted however that the 1st
         appellant's  mental  state  related  to  concerns  in  respect   of
         immigration issues. The judge referred to an overdose taken by  the
         1st appellant in 2004 but noted that he was at low risk of suicide,
         that his asylum claim had been dismissed and  that  any  subjective
         fear held by the 1st appellant was  not  objectively  well-founded.
         The  judge  was  not  therefore  satisfied  that  there   was   any
         significant risk of further deterioration in his mental  health  if
         he were returned to Sri Lanka.

      8.  Having  found  that  the  appellants  would  continue  to  receive
         financial support if removed to Sri Lanka the judge concluded  that
         the lack of immediate accommodation in that country was  a  neutral
         factor. The judge  additionally  noted  that  the  2nd  appellant's
         parents lived in Sri Lanka. Whilst again noting that  the  children
         should  not  be  blamed  for  their  parent's  conduct,  the  judge
         considered that there was a strong public interest in removing  the
         1st and 2nd appellants given, inter alia, their lack of  status  in
         the UK and their  inability  to  speak  English  and  inability  to
         support themselves, and the cost to the NHS  of  treating  the  1st
         appellant. The judge considered that the  3rd  appellant  would  be
         able to speak  the  language  in  Sri  Lanka,  that  education  was
         available, that he would remain with his parents and would have the
         chance to meet his grandparents. The judge concluded that, in these
         circumstances, it was not unreasonable to require the  children  to
         leave the UK with their parents. The  judge  concluded  that  there
         were no insurmountable obstacles to reintegration in Sri  Lanka  in
         light  of  his  factual  findings,  and  that   a   proportionality
         assessment following the Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 principles would not
         yield a different conclusion.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

      9. The grounds contend that  the  judge  failed  to  take  account  of
         relevant evidence when concluding that it was only 'marginally'  in
         the 3rd appellant's best interests to remain in the UK.  The  judge
         failed to properly consider the evidence that the  extended  family
         members had lived with each other at various stages, that they  all
         lived close by and saw each  other  daily/weekly.  The  failure  to
         analyse the relationships between the appellants and their extended
         family members rendered the decision unsafe. There was said to be a
         fundamental misdirection in that the judge appeared to believe that
         one of the 2nd appellant's brothers lived in  Sri  Lanka,  and  the
         judge failed to appreciate that the  3rd  and  4th  appellants  had
         never seen their grandparents, who were not in  good  health.   The
         judge failed to consider  the  1st  and  2nd  appellants'  evidence
         relating  to  their  children's  proficiency   in   Tamil.   As   a
         consequence,  the  judge's  assessment  of  the   children's   best
         interests was flawed and he failed to follow the guidance issued in
         MA (Pakistan) that there would be a very  strong  expectation  that
         the best interests were to remain in the UK. This  meant  that  the
         overall proportionality assessment was flawed, more so because  the
         judge failed to consider the reasons why the 1st had to receive NHS
         treatment (arising from an assault while trying to report a crime).
         Issue was taken with the judge's conclusion that the  1st  and  2nd
         appellants were unable to find gainful  employment  given  that  he
         worked as a lorry driver in Sri Lanka and neither was permitted  to
         work in the UK. A second ground contended that the judge failed  to
         apply the policy guidance considered in MA (Pakistan) and  that  he
         should have allowed the appeal given that  the  Presenting  Officer
         was unable to  assist  in  identifying  the  "strong  reasons"  for
         refusing leave once a child  attained  7  years  continuous  lawful
         residence,  despite  the  Presenting   Officer   being   given   an
         opportunity to seek instructions on this point.

     10. The lengthy grant of permission commented that the judge  may  have
         set  out  an  insufficient  analysis  of  the  extent  of  the  3rd
         appellant's integration, that he failed to adequately consider  the
         relevance of the benchmark period of 7 years, as contemplated in MA
         (Pakistan), and that his assessment as to whether it was reasonable
         to require the children to leave the UK was affected.

     11. In his oral submissions Mr Wilcox submitted that the  judge  failed
         to assess the evidence relating to the children's integration,  and
         that in concluding  that  it  was  only  'marginally'  in  the  3rd
         appellant's  best  interests  to  remain  in  the  UK,  the   judge
         downplayed the significance of  the  child's  integration  and  the
         significance of the breakup of the unusually close family  members.
         It was submitted that the judge was not entitled to  conclude  that
         neither parent was incapable of finding gainful employment as  they
         could look for work if leave was  granted.  I  was  referred  to  a
         letter from the 3rd appellant's headteacher. Mr Wilcox repeated the
         grounds of  appeal  relating  to  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
         children's proficiency  in  Tamil  and  the  reasons  why  the  1st
         appellant taught NHS treatment. Having heard  submissions  from  Ms
         Fijiwala I reserved my decision.

Discussion

     12. I find, for the following  reasons,  that  the  decision  does  not
         contain any material legal error.

     13. The grounds of appeal, as expanded by Mr  Wilcox,  argue  that  the
         judge's assessment of the best interests of the children was flawed
         because he failed to appreciate or consider  the  strength  of  the
         appellants' relationships with their extended family  members.  Had
         the judge  fully  considered  the  evidence  of  the  relationships
         between the appellants and their extended family members, he  would
         not have been entitled to conclude that the  3rd  appellant's  best
         interests were only 'marginally' to remain in the UK. This  finding
         infected the judge's subsequent analysis of the proportionality  of
         removing the children.

     14. The judge however considered written and oral evidence from RM  and
         VM, the 2nd appellant's two brothers ([21] to [28]). The judge  was
         clearly aware from this evidence that the 3rd  and  4th  appellants
         had close relationships with their extended family members  in  the
         UK (see also [42]), that they saw quite  a  bit  of  their  cousins
         [46], and that they would see far less of their family  members  in
         the UK if they returned to Sri Lanka [47]. There is nothing in  the
         judge's assessment to suggest that he did not take full and  proper
         account of the nature of the extended family relationships. In  any
         event, other than by way of financial support the written and  oral
         evidence  from  the  2nd  appellant's  brothers  did  not  disclose
         anything more than the normal  love  and  affection  between  adult
         siblings (or indeed between the 3rd and 4th appellants on  the  one
         hand and their aunts, uncles  and  cousins  on  the  other)  (Singh
         [2015] EWCA iv 630; Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ  31),  and  there  was
         little independent  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  3rd  and  4th
         appellants were dependent on their extended family members or  that
         the impact of being separated from their  extended  family  members
         would have any significant  adverse  effect  on  their  welfare  or
         emotional well-being. In reaching this  conclusion  the  judge  was
         clearly aware that the 2nd appellant's two brothers resided in  the
         UK and not in Sri Lanka. It is not  apparent  from  [12]  that  the
         judge believed the 2nd appellant had a brother in  Sri  Lanka,  and
         there is nothing in the rest of the decision to  suggest  that  the
         judge acted under any misapprehension as to  the  identity  of  the
         relatives who remain living in Sri Lanka (e.g. at  [47]  the  judge
         only refers  to  the  2nd  appellant's  parents  residing  in  that
         country).

     15. The judge was, moreover, entitled to his conclusion  at  [46]  that
         there was very little evidence of the 3rd appellant's  social  ties
         and friendships established outside the nuclear family. The various
         school reports established  that  both  children  were  doing  well
         school but there was little  evidence  describing  the  nature  and
         extent of the friendships they had established. This is not at  all
         surprising given that the 3rd appellant was only 8 years old. While
         I accept that the judge did not  make  specific  reference  to  the
         letter from the headteacher of Kenmore Park Junior School, there is
         no requirement for a judge to specifically deal with each and every
         item of evidence. The head teacher's letter, dated 2 February 2017,
         confirmed that the 3rd appellant  had  been  attending  the  school
         since 3 September 2015, was a valued member of the  community,  had
         settled into school life and was progressing well in  his  studies.
         The school believed any change in the 3rd appellant's status  would
         have a negative impact on his academic  and  emotional  development
         and that his educational needs were best served at the school.  The
         letter does not significantly enhance the  3rd  appellant's  claim.
         There is no explanation as to how  the  3rd  appellant's  emotional
         development would be affected or why his educational needs are best
         served at that particular school. It is readily apparent  that  any
         child would be adversely affected if they had  to  leave  a  school
         they had attended for one and  a  half  years.  The  head  teachers
         letter does not identify any particular vulnerability on  the  part
         of the 3rd appellant. The judge makes  the  point,  at  [45],  that
         school friendships are transient and likely to change on any change
         of school. I am not persuaded that the failure by the judge to make
         specific reference to the head teacher's letter indicates  that  it
         wasn't taken into account, or that it could, in any event, make any
         material difference to the judge's ultimate findings.

     16. Nor am I satisfied that there was any arguable legal error  in  the
         judge's  conclusion  that  the  3rd   and   4th   appellants   were
         sufficiently proficient  in  Tamil.  The  judge  indicated  in  his
         decision that he took into account the statements from the 1st  and
         2nd appellant and recorded their evidence that the children did not
         answer their parents in Tamil but in English and only understood  a
         little Tamil. At [44] the judge observed that both  parents  needed
         an interpreter at the hearing. In these circumstances the judge was
         rationally entitled to conclude that the children did indeed  speak
         and understand Tamil as it was the language spoken by their parents
         and that they were bilingual.

     17. The judge was demonstrably aware of the principles enunciated in MA
         (Pakistan) and the respondent's policy guidance ([37],  [49]).  The
         judge specifically indicated that he accorded significant weight to
         the fact that the 3rd appellant had resided in the UK for more than
         7 years and to the policy guidance  relating  to  "strong  reasons"
         [49]. The judge was  mindful  that,  during  a  lengthy  period  of
         residence, a child will have put  down  roots  and  developed  some
         social, cultural and educational links to the UK  such  that  their
         removal might be highly disruptive, but noted that this may be less
         so where the children are very young because  the  focus  of  their
         lives will be on their families [49]. The 3rd  and  4th  appellants
         were still very young at the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         decision and the focus of their  lives  were  unarguably  on  their
         immediate family. This is entirely consistent with the decision  in
         Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
         appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 where the Upper Tribunal observed that 7
         years residence from the age four is likely to be more  significant
         to a child that the first seven years of life.

     18. It is apparent from a holistic assessment of the determination that
         the judge considered and applied the respondent's guidance relating
         to "strong reasons". At [51] the judge indicated that strong weight
         must be given to the need to maintain immigration controls  and  to
         the fact that the appellants had no entitlement to  remain  in  the
         UK. In so doing the judge specifically noted that the children must
         not be blamed  for  matters  in  respect  of  which  they  are  not
         responsible such as the conduct of their parents (see  also  [55]).
         The judge, at [52] was rationally entitled to  take  into  account,
         when determining the reasonableness of requiring  the  children  to
         leave the UK, the fact that both parents entered the  UK  illegally
         and remained without leave. Although it is not clear why the  judge
         believed neither parent was capable of finding  gainful  employment
         if given permission to work, this,  at  best,  is  only  a  neutral
         factor (Rhuppiah v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2016] EWCA Civ 803). The judge was  also  entitled  to  take  into
         account the fact that the 1st appellant was receiving NHS treatment
         and he specifically acknowledged that the money was  being  repaid.
         The reasons that caused the 1st appellant to seek NHS treatment  do
         not detract from the fact that treatment was  sought.  The  judge's
         conclusion, at [55], that there was a  strong  public  interest  in
         removing the 1st and 2nd appellants was one open  to  him  all  the
         evidence and for the reasons given. In concluding that it  was  not
         unreasonable to require the children to leave the UK the judge  was
         entitled to consider his finding that it was only marginally in the
         3rd appellant's best interests to remain in the UK,  that  the  3rd
         appellant would be able to speak the language if  returned  to  Sri
         Lanka, that education was available to him,  that  there  would  be
         some third-party support, and that he  would  remain  part  of  the
         immediate family unit.

     19. The fact that the Presenting Officer was unable to provide  further
         assistance in respect of the respondent's IDI guidance on the  need
         for "strong reasons" for refusing leave to a child who has achieved
         7 years residence, despite  being  given  an  opportunity  to  take
         instructions, did not compel judge to  accept  that  there  are  no
         "strong reasons". It is for the judge to determine  whether  it  is
         reasonable  for  children  who  have  attained  at  least  7  years
         continuous residence in the UK to be removed, and in so  doing  the
         judge will have regard to all relevant circumstances, including the
         guidance issued by the respondent. But the fact that  a  Presenting
         Officer did not articulate "strong  reasons"  in  oral  submissions
         does not mean that "strong reasons" did not exist, still less, that
         the respondent was conceding that there were no  "strong  reasons".
         Nor was the judge privy to any discussion that  may  have  occurred
         between the Presenting Officer and the person from whom she may  or
         may not have sought instructions.

     20.  For  the  reasons  given  above  I  am  not  persuaded  that   the
         determination contains any material legal error.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision did not contain a material error of  law.
The appeals are dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellants  in
this appeal are granted anonymity. No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellants and to the Respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                               9 February 2018

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
