
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14880/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd October 2018                           |On 26th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             MS MUSSARAT NAVEED
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Hussain (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge E.M.M. Smith, promulgated on 2nd July 2018, following  a  hearing
    at Birmingham Priory Court on 19th June 2018.   In  the  determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.





The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, was born on 5th September 1986,
    and is a female.  She appeals against the decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 1st November 2017, refusing her application to remain in  the  UK
    on the basis of her Article 8 rights.  The applicable Immigration Rules
    are Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that in 2008, she married a  Mr
    Muhammad Tahir Mahmood, in an arranged marriage in  Pakistan.   He  had
    subsequently then gone on to arrive in the UK as  a  student  "but  for
    reasons unknown to the Appellant his visa was cancelled" (see paragraph
    7 of the determination).  The Appellant now claims that if she were  to
    be returned back to Pakistan, she would face difficulty.   This  is  on
    account of the fact that she has two  children.   The  eldest,  it  was
    wrongly stated in the determination, was born on  10th  November  2011.
    The youngest, it was stated in the determination was born on 27th April
    2013.  The judge concluded that neither  child  is  a  British  citizen
    (paragraph 10).

 4. Another issue raised on behalf of the Appellant  was  that  she  feared
    that if she were to be returned back to Pakistan "I would be subject to
    honour killing as I married without consent" (see paragraph 25).   When
    she raised this particular issue, she was asked if she wished to make a
    protection claim.  She said that she did.  She was then invited for  an
    asylum interview.  She failed to attend.  That claim  then  effectively
    petered out after her failure to attend for an asylum interview on 19th
    September 2017.

 5. However, in what was yet another aspect of the claim, this was a matter
    where the Appellant had sat a TOEIC test in  2012  and  the  issue  was
    whether  she  had  fraudulently  obtained  this  certificate.   It  was
    concluded that, through the use of an ETS  TOEIC  test  centre  look-up
    tool, that the documents supported the fact that  the  tests  taken  on
    18th July 2012 by the Appellant, were invalid.  It  was  asserted  that
    the Appellant made  use  of  a  proxy  who  undertook  the  tests  (see
    paragraph 26).

The Judge's Determination

 6. At the hearing before Judge Smith  on  19th  June  2018,  there  was  a
    renewed application for an adjournment.  A previous one had  been  made
    on the papers, determined by Assistant Resident Judge Chohan,  who  had
    refused the adjournment request.  At the hearing, the  judge  expressly
    states that,

         "I explained to the Appellant the background and read  to  her  the
         reasons why Judge  Chohan  refused  to  adjourn  the  appeal.   The
         Appellant simply relied upon the unavailability of a lawyer to seek
         another adjournment.  I asked the Appellant whether she knew if her
         solicitors had tried to seek another member of  staff,  Counsel  or
         engaged an agent to represent her, but she did not know" (paragraph
         16).

 7. The Appellant,  accordingly,  was  unrepresented  on  the  day  of  the
    hearing.  She gave evidence in English, without the  assistance  of  an
    interpreter, and without a lawyer on her behalf.  It would appear  that
    the lawyer who was instructed to attend on that day, had an examination
    to sit, and had sent instructions with the Appellant, to  say  that  he
    would be willing to attend at some other point in time but not on  this
    particular day.

 8. The judge then went on to consider the substance  of  the  appeal.   He
    considered the case law in relation to the ETS TOEIC test centre  look-
    up tool's conclusions that the Appellant had put forward  a  test  such
    that was invalid, by the judge relying upon cases such as Nawaz  [2017]
    UKUT 00288 and Abbas [2017] EWHC 78, as well as the older case of Flynn
    [2008] EWCA Crim 98.

 9. The judge concluded that the Appellant asserted in a witness  statement
    that she took the test over two days, and sets out in some detail  what
    occurred.  The judge  observes  that  "within  the  documents  she  has
    produced are details of her own studies in Pakistan" and the judge  set
    these  out.   The  judge  considered  whether,   in   accordance   with
    established practice, the Appellant was  able  to  raise  "an  innocent
    explanation for the allegation of fraud" (paragraph 32).   He  observed
    the Appellant's account that the husband of the Appellant had travelled
    to the test centre and paid a fee (AB at page 1, paragraph 4),  and  on
    the first test she travelled  with  her  husband  to  the  centre  "but
    panicked because she did not know how far  from  the  bus  station  the
    centre was and she only had half an hour before the test".   The  judge
    said that her husband knew where the  test  centre  was  and  therefore
    there would have been no need to panic.  This appears to have  been  an
    additional piece of information that was used "to bolster  her  account
    of events that day" (paragraph 32).

10. However, in concluding that the Appellant had not  raised  an  innocent
    explanation to discharge the burden that then full upon  her,  after  a
    prima facie claim had been raised by the Respondent Secretary of State,
    the judge concluded that,

         "... taking together the Appellant's history and the lie  she  told
         in her application form and  in  particular  her  evidence  of  the
         events surrounding her tests, including the fact that  it  was  her
         husband who  made  all  the  arrangements,  I  do  not  accept  the
         Appellant has raised an innocent  explanation  that  is  plausible"
         (paragraph 32).

11. Thereafter, the judge went on to consider the position in  relation  to
    whether it was the case that there were exceptional circumstances which
    justified a consideration of the Appellant's situation outside  Article
    8, and bearing in mind the Section 55 BCIA 2009 requirement to look  at
    the "best interests" of the children as a primary  consideration.   The
    judge referred to Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.

12. However, the judge wrongly then stated that "the children  now  aged  7
    and 5" (paragraph 36).  This is because at the time  the  eldest  child
    was not aged 7.  At the time the eldest child  was  aged  just  over  6
    years.  His date of birth was not, in fact, on 10th November 2011  but
    in October.  The judge then analysed the position (at paragraphs 36 and
    37) citing case law, and referring to the facts, before concluding  (at
    paragraph 38) that there  was  no  basis  for  saying  that  there  are
    exceptional circumstances such  as  would  justify  a  grant  of  leave
    outside the Immigration Rules.

13. The appeal was dismissed.



Grounds of Application

14. The grounds of application state that the judge  erred  in  law  for  a
    number of reasons.  First, that an adjournment had been sought and  had
    been wrongly refused, in the absence of the Appellant not being able to
    get legal assistance on the day in question.  Second, the judge  failed
    to look at the explanations given by the Appellant about her taking the
    test in question, and given that she was unrepresented, if  there  were
    any ambiguities in the evidence, they ought to have been expressly  put
    to the Appellant.   In  particular,  it  was  not  clear  why,  if  the
    Appellant said that she had panicked on the day of  the  test,  because
    there was only half an hour to go before the test  started,  that  this
    would not be believed by the judge.  It was difficult to see  why  this
    should be taken as something to have bolstered her  claim.   Third,  it
    was said that the Appellant had two children and one was aged  7  years
    and the other was 5 and the elder child "was  a  qualified  child"  and
    that it was a matter of settled  law  that  one  had  to  look  at  the
    position on this basis (see paragraph 10 of the grounds).

15. On 5th September 2018, permission to appeal was granted the Tribunal on
    the basis that it was arguable that the judge  failed  to  give  proper
    account of all the evidence, and "did not consider all relevant factors
    in assessing the qualifying child's best interests and whether  it  was
    reasonable for the qualifying child to leave the UK" (see paragraph 3).
     Moreover, there had been a letter explaining why there  could  not  be
    attendance by the Appellant's lawyer and the judge failed to heed  this
    on the day in question.

16. Further, it was said that  the  judge  wrongly  did  not  consider  the
    guidance in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705,  which  deals  with  the
    position that where there is a qualifying child, there have to be  very
    strong reasons for why removal should follow of a parent.

Submissions

17. At the hearing before me on 2nd October 2018, Mr  Hussain  relied  upon
    the grounds of application.  He stated that more should have been  done
    given that the eldest child was 7 years old.  The children  were  going
    to school.  They have friends  here.   It  was  necessary  to  consider
    whether it was  "reasonable"  for  the  children  to  relocate  now  to
    Pakistan.   He  submitted  that  the  "reasonableness"  test  must   be
    considered in the context of the public interest, and the Home Office's
    own guidance stated that there have to be "strong reasons" for why  the
    removal  should  follow.   The  judge,   instead,   appears   to   have
    concentrated on the false certificate, in relation to determining where
    the public interest lay.  That was a focus in the  determination  which
    was difficult to justify.

18. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that  it  was  not  correct  that  the
    eldest of the two children was 7 years of age.   This  is  because  the
    eldest child was born later.  Indeed, the refusal letter (at page 3  of
    8) recognises that "your children are not British and have not  resided
    in the UK continuously  for  seven  years".   Therefore,  submitted  Mr
    Mills, the requirement to view the matter in the context of whether  it
    was "reasonable" or "unreasonable" to expect the children  to  relocate
    to Pakistan, did  not  apply.   The  eldest  child  was  simply  not  a
    qualifying child.  The grounds of application were incorrect, and  this
    lack of accuracy had then led to the grant of  the  permission  by  the
    judge.  This was nothing more than an "outside  the  Rules"  Article  8
    case.  That being so, the following matters fell to be considered.

19. First, as far as the adjournment request was concerned (see paragraph 6
    of the grounds), this was simply an attempt to re-argue the application
    before the judge, after it had been refused by Assistant Resident Judge
    Chohan.  The judge was, in fact,  concerned  to  know  what  additional
    reasons there were, after expressly reading the reasons of Judge Chohan
    out to the Appellant, for why an adjournment  should  now  be  granted.
    All that the Appellant did then was simply to say that her  lawyer  was
    unavailable, which is precisely the issue that Judge Chohan had already
    considered.  The judge wanted to know why the Appellant would not  have
    sought another member of staff from the same firm,  or  have  an  agent
    instructed, and there was no adequate explanation given  to  this.   As
    against this, the Respondent was  not  prepared  to  proceed  with  the
    adjournment request and the Presenting Officer on the day had said that
    there was no additional information since Judge Chohan had refused  the
    adjournment request, to justify the grant of adjournment now.

20. Second, insofar as the ETS test was concerned, for which the judge gave
    reasons (at paragraph 32), the case  law  had  moved  on  significantly
    since the earlier cases of SM and Qadir, and the judge  sets  out  this
    case law (at paragraph 27 to 28), before concluding that the  Appellant
    had failed to raise an innocent explanation which satisfies the minimum
    level of plausibility (at paragraph 31).  In fact there had been a more
    recent case of Ahsan [2017] EWCA Civ 209, where Underhill LJ had  taken
    a consolidated view of the case law that had  developed  to  date,  and
    concluded that it was simply not enough to turn up  and  say  that  one
    spoke English and that one had attended a building where the tests took
    place, and to say that this was an "innocent explanation", because much
    more had to be shown.  It was this failure to show much more  that  the
    judge was concerned about, at paragraph 32, and when he had  considered
    all of the evidence as a whole, he had concluded that the Appellant had
    failed to provide an innocent explanation  for  this  test.   This  was
    particularly given that the judge observed that the entire arrangements
    for the test had been made by her husband.

21. Ultimately, submitted Mr Mills, what this boiled down to  was  that  it
    was difficult to see how the public interest in favour  of  immigration
    control, would be displaced by the  Appellant,  given  the  finding  of
    deceit and fraudulent behaviour on her part, on the basis of a child in
    the UK who had been here for only six and a half  years.   The  judge's
    conclusion was absolutely correct, in the  light  of  his  findings  of
    fact, and the citation of the case law (at paragraph 34 to 37).   There
    was no error of law.

22. In his reply, Mr Hussain submitted that the latest  decision  of  Ahsan
    [2017] EWCA Civ 2009, was actually won in favour of the Appellant.   It
    was by no means the case that a person accused of fraud cannot come  to
    court and offer an innocent explanation.  The judge had failed to  show
    why the  Appellant's  explanation  should  be  rejected  as  not  being
    innocent.  He made findings of fact (at paragraphs 25 to 32)  that  did
    not put his concerns directly to the Appellant.  If the Appellant  said
    that she had panicked, it was difficult to see why this should be  held
    against the Appellant.  The judge  had  found  a  lack  of  consistency
    without putting this to the Appellant.

No Error of Law

23. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First, there is  the  background
    to this appeal.  It involves a case where the Appellant's  own  husband
    had previously arrived in the UK as a student, but for reasons  unknown
    to the Appellant it was now said  that  his  visa  was  cancelled  (see
    paragraph 7 of the determination).  There was  then  in  the  light  of
    that, a claim that the Appellant feared ill-treatment  in  Pakistan  by
    being subjected to  an  honour  killing  because,  "I  married  without
    consent", only to then relent from that claim.

24. What was significant in terms of  the  findings  to  be  made  by  this
    particular judge,  was  the  Appellant's  TOEIC  test.   The  judge  is
    absolutely correct in recording that the burden initially fell upon the
    Respondent, and in this case there was an ETS TOEIC test  look-up  tool
    that was deployed to show that the tests taken on 18th July 2012, which
    was the date that the Appellant took her own test,  are  invalid.   The
    judge then not only set out the case law (at paragraphs 27 to 28),  but
    referred to the expert report of Professor Peter French. Not only this,
    the judge appeared to give the Appellant the benefit of the  doubt,  by
    saying that, "the point remains that whilst voice analysis is a tool to
    be used, it is to be used with caution" (paragraph 30).

25. What the Appellant has quibbled with, however, is the way in which  the
    findings of fact have been made.  Reliance was placed upon the  judge's
    conclusions at paragraph 32, and his statement that there was no reason
    for the Appellant to have panicked if on arrival, having  been  dropped
    off at the bus station, she did not know exactly where the test  centre
    was, and with half an hour to go,  she  panicked.   There  is  in  fact
    nothing to this point.   It  does  not  matter  whether  the  Appellant
    panicked or did not.

26. The plain fact is that the judge considered it to  be  the  case  that,
    given that it  was  the  Appellant's  husband  who  had  made  all  the
    arrangements, the innocent explanation provided was not sufficient.  It
    was the Appellant's husband who  had  previously  driven  to  the  test
    centre and paid the fee (see the Appellant's bundle at page 1).  It was
    the Appellant's husband who had then taken the Appellant  to  the  test
    centre himself.  Her husband actually knew where the test  centre  was.
    The Appellant presumably did not.

27. Insofar as the judge makes a finding that "this extra information about
    panic is to bolster her account of events that day", it  is  a  finding
    that was open to the judge.  However, this  was  not  the  end  of  the
    judge's analysis.  This is because the judge actually states that,

         "... taking together the Appellant's history and the lie  she  told
         in her application form and  in  particular  her  evidence  of  the
         events surrounding her test, including the fact it was her  husband
         who made all the arrangements, I do not accept  the  Appellant  has
         raised an innocent explanation that is plausible" (paragraph 32).

    That was a finding that was open to the judge.

28.  Second,  there  is  a  question  of  the  judge  having  refused   the
    adjournment.  It is not the case, contrary  to  what  is  said  in  the
    grounds  of  application,  that  the  judge's  failure  to  grant   the
    adjournment offended the principle in Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 418.  This is  because  that  case  is  authority  for  the
    proposition that the question is not whether the decision is one  which
    could reasonably have been arrived at.  Rather, the test to be  applied
    is that of fairness.  The question is whether there was any deprivation
    of the affected party's rights to a fair hearing.   Put  in  this  way,
    this was a case where there had already been a previous adjournment for
    a previous hearing on the basis of the Appellant  having  sustained  an
    injury exactly on the day when the hearing  was  to  take  place,  with
    medical evidence then being furnished,  and  adjournment  then  applied
    for, and been granted.  On  this  particular  day  also,  before  Judge
    Smith, there was an adjournment request, but this time on the basis of,
    not the unavailability of the Appellant as previously, but on the basis
    of the Appellant's lawyer not being available, because he had to sit an
    exam.

29. That application went to Assistant Resident Judge  Chohan  only  a  few
    days previously.  It was made in writing.   Judge  Chohan  refused  the
    application.  The reasons are on the court file.  Judge Smith read  out
    the reasons that Judge Chohan gave to  the  Appellant.   All  that  the
    Appellant  did  was  to  simply  to  repeat   that   because   of   the
    unavailability of a lawyer there had to be an  adjournment.   When  the
    judge asked whether another  member  of  staff  could  not  attend  the
    Appellant was unable to say.  As Mr Mills quite properly stated, if the
    claim on behalf of the Appellant, put forward by her lawyers  is  this,
    that having been paid by the Appellant to attend on the  first  hearing
    on 24th May 2016, when the matter was listed as a float case,  and  the
    Appellant sustained the injury and did  not  come,  they  had  decided,
    having attended themselves in person, to make the  application  for  an
    adjournment,  to  undertake  representation  for  the  Appellant  as  a
    "gesture of goodwill".

30. However, what this is tantamount to  saying,  is  simply  that  if  the
    Appellant is unable to pay for legal representation, then there has  to
    be an adjournment.  Mr Mills had submitted that if that  was  the  case
    some thirty percent of appeals arising in this jurisdiction would  have
    to be adjourned.  I accept that the Appellant had  to  demonstrate  far
    more than simply repeat the lack  of  a  legal  representative,  if  an
    adjournment were to be secured.  It has to be borne in  mind  that  the
    overriding objective has to be taken into account.

31. Legal proceedings are expensive and involve considerable public expense
    and administrative effort, and if there had been a listing of the  case
    on 19th June 2018, it is entirely right for the judge to have concluded
    that,

         "...  her  solicitors  had  ample  time  to  arrange  for   another
         representative to attend but failed to do so.  I am satisfied  that
         there are no new facts that have arisen after the decision of Judge
         Chohan and justice would properly be done to  the  issues  in  this
         case and to both the Appellant and the Respondent" (paragraph 17).

32. Finally, there is the issue of the children.   The  fact  that  neither
    child had been in the UK for seven years at the date  of  the  decision
    dramatically alters the manner in which the position has to be  valued.
    Some confusion was caused  by  the  judge  himself  stating  that  "the
    children are now aged 7 and 5" (paragraph 36).  It is  clear  that  the
    eldest child was not aged 7.  However, this error aside, I have to  say
    that there is no material error by  the  judge  in  the  way  that  the
    position of the children is then  considered.   Considerable  care  and
    sensitivity is shown.  The judge observes that the Appellant had stated
    that both the children speak Urdu and English.  The judge is clear that
    he had "considered the evidence of schooling in regard to  both  and  I
    have noted from the photographs each appears to have integrated well in
    their education and with friends".

33. There was also no evidence of any illness  "which  would  prevent  them
    living in Pakistan" (paragraph 36).  The judge then considered the case
    law (at paragraph 37), including EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA  Civ  874
    and Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 197, before observing that, "as  a  family
    they could return to Pakistan".  The judge  observed  that  the  public
    interest in the makings of immigration control was  not  outweighed  by
    the presence of the children.  It was observed how seven years from the
    age of 4 is likely to be more significant to a  child  than  the  first
    seven years of life (paragraph 37).  The judge then went on to consider
    to reject outright the Appellant's fear of her husband or her husband's
    family.  It was noted that "the Appellant has chosen not to pursue  her
    asylum claim and it is therefore reasonable to assume that she  has  no
    fear of return" so that "there is no reason why as a  family  unit  the
    Appellant and her two children cannot return  to  Pakistan"  (paragraph
    38).

34. The judge was clear that "having carried out a  balancing  exercise  of
    the facts in favour of the Appellant with reference to the children the
    Appellant has remained illegally in the UK  for  seven  years  and  has
    shown no inclination to return to Pakistan" (paragraph 38).   In  fact,
    the judge was concerned that there had been a response  to  a  question
    from the Presenting Officer that the Appellant  had  "no  intention  of
    returning" come what may (see paragraph 38).  In  those  circumstances,
    the judge's conclusion that there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances
    which justified a grant of leave to remain on the basis of  Article  8,
    applying the Razgar and Huang principles, was one that was open to  him
    (paragraph 39).

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd October 2018

