
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/14619/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 May 2020                       |On 29 May 2020                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                  Between:

                                  Enock [A]
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

      1. The Appellant is a national of Ghana born on the 29th January 1980.
         He appeals with permission against the decision of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal (Judge MA Khan) to dismiss his human rights appeal.

      2. This appeal was due to be listed for an oral hearing at Field House
         but due to the Covid-19 pandemic, emergency  measures  necessitated
         suspension of all such hearings. By my directions of the 3rd  April
         2020 (sent to the  parties  on  the  29th  April  2020)  I  invited
         submissions on a) whether the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
         contained material error of law and b) whether the  Upper  Tribunal
         could dispose of the proceedings before it on the papers. To date I
         have received a response only from  the  Secretary  of  State,  who
         answers both my questions in the affirmative. I  have  received  no
         response from the Appellant or his  representatives.  The  deadline
         for submissions passed on  the  20th  May  and  I  now  proceed  to
         determine the appeal.

      3. The background to this appeal is that the Secretary of State  seeks
         to deport the Appellant on the grounds that  his  presence  in  the
         United Kingdom is not conducive to the public good.  The  Appellant
         sought to appeal on human rights grounds, submitting in  particular
         that he had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  British
         born son that would render his deportation disproportionate.

      4. The First-tier Tribunal proceeded  to  determine  the  appeal  with
         reference to paragraphs 398-399A of the Immigration Rules.  Finding
         that  the  Appellant  failed  to  demonstrate  that  any   of   the
         'exceptions' at 399 or  399A  applied  to  him,  it  dismissed  the
         appeal.  By her  letter  dated  1st  May  2020  (signed  by  Senior
         Presenting Officer Mr C. Avery) the Secretary of State accepts that
         in doing so the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  its  approach.   The
         error was in its apparent assumption that the Appellant was  liable
         to the 'automatic' deportation process at all.  The  Appellant  has
         never received a sentence of 12 months or more and so did not  meet
         the definition of 'foreign criminal' contained  at  s32(2)  of  the
         United Kingdom Borders Act 2007.   The question remained whether he
         met  the  definition  of  a  'foreign  criminal'  at   s32(3),   or
         alternatively  whether  the  Secretary  of  State  had  shown,   by
         reference to the criteria at paragraph 398(c) of  the  Rules,  that
         the Appellant's deportation was conducive to  the  public  good  in
         accordance with s3(5) of the Immigration Act 1971.  Whether he  had
         committed an offence "specified by order of the Secretary of  State
         under section 72(4)(a) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
         Act 2002 (c. 41) (serious criminal)" [s32(3) BA 2007]   or  whether
         his offending had "caused serious harm or  [he  is]   a  persistent
         offender who shows a particular disregard for the  law"  [paragraph
         398(c)] were matters in relation to which the  Secretary  of  State
         bore  the  burden  of  proof.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
         contains no clear reasoning on whether the offence committed by the
         Appellant - possessing or controlling identity documents, for which
         he received a six-month sentence - would engage  either  provision.
         That being the  case  the  Secretary  of  State  accepts  that  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed for material error of
         law.

      5. By the letter from Mr Avery the Secretary of State further  invites
         the Tribunal to remit the matter to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
         hearing de novo. I accept that in light of the fundamental  failing
         in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  this  is  the  appropriate
         disposal. The Appellant has indicated that he has further  evidence
         to submit about his relationship with his son, including orders  of
         the family court. He has leave to submit  any  such  evidence  upon
         which he wishes to rely but he must do so in  accordance  with  the
         Protocol between the Family Courts and the IAC[1] -  in  particular
         the Appellant must  not  disclose  any  document  relating  to  the
         proceedings in the Family Court without the consent of that  court.
         If the Appellant considers it appropriate to do so he  should  seek
         directions from the First-tier  Tribunal  in  accordance  with  the
         Protocol.  Given this evidential issue I will remit this matter  to
         the First-tier Tribunal with directions that it  be  listed  for  a
         'Case Management Review' prior to hearing.

      6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. The matter is
         remitted for hearing de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.

      7. Neither party sought an order for anonymity and no  such  order  is
         made.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               26th May 2020
                                                     -----------------------
[1] https://www.judiciary.uk/wp-content/uploads/JCO/Documents/Protocols/spt-
pfd-joint-protocol-comms-judges-0713.pdf



