
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14183/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 October 2016                           |On 19 December 2016           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)


                                   Between

                                NOMSA NDLOVU
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Doerfel, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born on 18 January  1975.   For
    reasons set out in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated
    on 15 February 2016 the Secretary of State has made  a  deportation  in
    respect of the appellant.

2.   The issue before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether  or  not  the
    deportation of the appellant would result in  consequences  which  were
    unduly harsh for two qualifying children, born 24 October 2005  and  13
    August 2007 respectively.  The appellant also has another child born 21
    May 2014, but in terms of Section 117D of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act  2002  (as  amended)  subparagraph  (i)  she  is  not  a
    qualifying child.

3.   Before the First-tier Tribunal evidence was  heard  from  a  number  of
    witnesses. The appellant was unrepresented but she made an  application
    to the Immigration Judge for the eldest child to give evidence  on  her
    own behalf as she apparently wished.   The  Immigration  Judge  decided
    that given her age, 10 at the time, it was not  necessary  for  her  to
    give evidence.  He did, however, make a finding that it would be unduly
    harsh for the three children to remain in the  United  Kingdom  without
    the appellant as he accepted on the balance of the  evidence  that  the
    father of the two older children was no longer a feature in their lives
    and that he no longer had any contact with them.

4.   Accordingly the issue for him was whether it would be unduly  harsh  on
    the two qualifying children to return to Zimbabwe  with  their  mother.
    If it was unduly harsh then Exception 2 to Section 117C(5) would  apply
    and the deportation of the appellant could not occur.

5.   The views of both of the  qualifying  children  were  clearly  material
    considerations for  the  Immigration  Judge.  However,  there  were  no
    reports from any social services recording the views  of  the  children
    and nothing that focussed on the issue of whether  return  to  Zimbabwe
    might cause consequences for them which might be seen as unduly harsh.

6.   At the very least it  seems  to  me  that  it  was  important  for  the
    Immigration Judge to hear the views of the oldest child. In my  opinion
    in failing to hear her views he failed to take into account a  material
    consideration. That amounts to an error of law. While it has  not  been
    raised in the grounds of appeal it seems to me that there  is  also  an
    issue in relation to the other qualifying  child.   She  did  not  give
    evidence either but there was no other material before the  Immigration
    Judge from which he could assess her views or make a judgement  on  the
    impact on her of a move to Zimbabwe.

Notice of Decision

7.   Accordingly I have decided that there has been an error of law and  the
    appeal must be allowed. Both parties were agreed that the  case  should
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.  I  agree  that
    that is the appropriate course of action and in due course I shall make
    directions providing for a remit to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.





                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                                                                       Date:




