
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14694/2019 (P)
                                                           HU/14696/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34 (P)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 September 2020                 |On 28 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                  KUMAR [B]
                                  MONJU [B]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation    (by way of written submissions)
For the appellant:     Mr M West, of Counsel, instructed by City Heights
Solicitors
For the respondent:    No submissions received


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   This appeal comes before  me  following  the  grant  of  permission  to
appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy  on  13  April  2020  against  the
determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Rae-Reeves,  promulgated  on  28
November 2019 following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 14 November 2019.

2.   The appellants are a married couple  born  respectively  on  1  January
1983 and 4 June 1989. The first appellant entered the UK  as  a  student  in
October 2009 and the second appellant arrived in September 2012 with Tier  1
post study leave. They have a  daughter  born  on  13  May  2019.  They  are
Bangladeshi nationals. The  appellants  are  preachers  at  a  Hindu  temple
although the first appellant's application for  leave  under  Tier  2  as  a
Minister of Religion was refused in 2016. Their last period of  leave  ended
in October 2015. They appeal against the decision of  the  respondent  dated
13 August 2019 to refuse their out of time application for indefinite  leave
to remain on long residency grounds and their article 8 claim.

3.    The  appellants  claim  that  as  Hindu  preachers  they  would   face
discrimination in Bangladesh, that  they  would  be  destitute  because  the
first appellant would be unable to work because  the  second  appellant  was
unable to care for their child due to back problems. The  applications  were
refused because the respondent considered  that  the  appellants  could  not
meet the requirements of paragraphs  276B  or  276ADE  and  considered  that
there were no exceptional circumstances  which  would  warrant  a  grant  of
leave outside the rules.

4.    The  appellants  lodged  appeals  and  these  came  before  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Rae-Reeves at Hatton Cross. He heard oral evidence  from  the
first appellant and two friends. He found that  due  to  long  gaps  in  the
first appellant's period of leave, he could  not  meet  the  long  residence
requirements. He concluded that although Muslims faced  some  discrimination
in Bangladesh, there were areas with large Hindu communities  and  that  the
appellants could relocate there. He had regard  to  the  second  appellant's
health issues and found that she would be able to  access  medical  care  in
Bangladesh where she would also have help from her family with  child  care.
He found that the first appellant would be able to find employment and  that
the  child's  best  interests  would  be  to  remain   with   her   parents.
Accordingly, he dismissed the appeal.

5.   The appellants sought permission to appeal on four  grounds:  (i)  that
the judge did  not  have  regard  to  the  appellants'  subjective  fear  of
returning to their home area and how that would impact  upon  their  ability
to relocate and that as this part of their evidence  was  unchallenged,  the
judge should have allowed the appeals; (ii) that the judge erred in  finding
that that the appellants could obtain help with childcare when  their  claim
was that they had no one to help and that it was fanciful  to  expect  their
families would be able to help if the  appellants  had  to  relocate;  (iii)
that the first appellant would be unable  to  work  because  of  his  wife's
condition as she could not physically look after the child  for  any  length
of time and that the judge had been  pedantic  in  rejecting  the  assertion
that the second appellant had had major spinal  cord  surgery  because  this
was not mentioned in the hospital letters; (iv) that  the  appellants  would
be destitute because the first appellant would be unable to work  given  his
wife's condition and this was a very  significant  obstacle;  (v)  that  the
findings were confused and unclear; and (vi) that the judge's  finding  that
they could join family who had relocated to India added to the confusion  of
the determination as this was not an issue before him.

6.   Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  on  the  basis
that the judge had arguably erred when finding that there  was  no  evidence
of the claim of the second appellant undergoing spinal  surgery  because  he
had oral evidence to that effect.

Covid-19 crisis

7.   Normally, the matter would have  been  listed  for  hearing  after  the
grant of permission, but due to the  Covid-19  pandemic  and  need  to  take
precautions against its spread, this did  not  happen.  Instead,  directions
were sent to the parties by Upper Tribunal Judge  Kamara  on  26  May  2020.
They were asked to present any objections to the matter being dealt with  on
the papers and to make any further submissions on the  error  of  law  issue
within certain time limits.

8.   Mr West's submissions for the appellant were received on  9  June  2020
but no reply has been forthcoming from  the  respondent.  I  note  that  the
directions were properly served on the respondent and that  the  appellant's
submissions were also forwarded to the respondent by email. In  the  absence
of any reply, I proceed to consider the matter.

9.   In doing so I have regard to the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn v The Parole Board  [2013]
UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 2020: Arrangements  during  the
Covid-19 pandemic (PGN) and the Senior President's Pilot Practice  Direction
(PPD). I have regard to the overriding objective which is defined in rule  2
of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as  being  "to  enable
the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and  justly".  To  this  end  I
have considered that  dealing  with  a  case  fairly  and  justly  includes:
dealing with it in ways that are proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the
case, the complexity of the issues, etc; avoiding unnecessary formality  and
seeking flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring,  so  far  as  practicable,
that the parties are able to participate fully  in  the  proceedings;  using
any special expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  effectively;  and  avoiding
delay, so far as compatible with proper consideration of  the  issues  (Rule
2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

10.  The appellants have not raised  any  objections  to  the  matter  being
determined on the  papers  and  I  am  satisfied  that  they  would  not  be
disadvantaged by the Tribunal dealing with  the  matter  in  that  way.  The
arguments for the appellants are clearly made by  way  of  the  grounds  for
permission and  in  the  submissions  made  in  compliance  with  the  Upper
Tribunal's directions.  I am satisfied that I am able to fairly  and  justly
deal with this matter on the papers before me and I now proceed to do so.

Submissions

11.  The appellants' submissions confirm that  the  grounds  for  permission
are relied upon in full and these are amplified by Mr West. With respect  to
the first ground, he submits that the evidence that the appellants would  be
destitute on return to Bangladesh was unchallenged. Reliance  is  placed  on
MS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ 1548  where  it  was  held  that  "the  Upper
Tribunal's judgment is fundamentally flawed because it does not address  the
appellant's evidence on the airport issue and it ignores the fact  that  the
Secretary of State elected not to challenge  that  evidence"  (at  19).  The
unchallenged factors are said to be that the appellant would not be able  to
obtain work because of his wife's condition, that many Hindus had  to  leave
the appellants' village because they were targeted by extremists,  that  the
appellant's uncle was attacked with a hammer  and  that  the  appellants  as
preachers would be at greater risk. It  is  submitted  that  greater  weight
should have been attached to this evidence when assessing the issue of  very
significant obstacles. It  is  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
adequate sufficient reasons for not doing so.

12.  With respect to ground two, it is argued  that  the  determination  was
perverse and that findings were made which were not  within  the  reasonable
range of responses open to the judge. It  is  submitted  that  having  found
that there may well be intimidation and violence from the  extreme  elements
of the Muslim majority towards Hindus in Muslim dominated areas,  the  judge
then found that the appellants could return to a more Hindu  dominated  part
of the country. It is  submitted  that  this  however,  conflicts  with  the
judge's finding (at 25) that the appellants could rely upon their family  in
Bangladesh in order to help them with childcare. It is submitted that it  is
perverse to state that the appellants could relocate yet continue to  obtain
childcare from their families. It is submitted  that  the  appellants'  case
was that they would not be able to look after their child due to the  second
appellant's physical issues and that without help they would be destitute.

13.  The third ground  argues  that  the  judge  erred  in  respect  of  the
evidence of the second appellant's medical issues. It is submitted that  the
judge accepted that the she suffered from a  prolapsed  disc,  causing  back
pain and sciatica and that she had a follow-up appointment  in  April  2020.
It is submitted that the judge erred in  not  accepting  that  she  had  had
spinal cord surgery as claimed in the first  appellant's  witness  statement
because he had not been provided with any evidence of it.  It  is  submitted
that, as pointed out in  the  appellant's  grounds,  an  appointment  letter
(AB:164) for a trauma and orthopaedic operation  supported  the  appellant's
oral evidence on this issue. It is submitted that  it  was,  therefore,  not
open to the judge to reject that evidence. It is submitted  that  the  issue
was highly relevant to the  assessment  of  very  significant  obstacles  on
return under paragraph 276 ADE.

14.  The fourth ground argues that the second appellant's condition was  not
properly considered when assessing whether the family would be destitute  on
return. It is submitted that the judge erred in considering  this  issue  by
reference to  article  3  and  article  8  which  was  not  pleaded  by  the
appellants and that he, therefore, erred by applying the wrong tests. It  is
submitted that the judge's reasoning is difficult  to  follow  and  that  he
conflates consideration of paragraph 276 ADE with  articles  3  and  8.  The
findings are said to lack coherence. It is considered that  the  appellants'
standing in the community in this country was not considered with  reference
to a private life within the rules.

15.  With respect to ground five, issue is taken with  the  judge's  finding
that the appellants could return to their  village.  It  is  submitted  that
this is perverse given the earlier finding that there  were  some  risks  to
Hindus on return. It is submitted that  there  was  no  finding  as  to  the
effect that the appellants' position as preachers would have on them.

16.  With respect to ground six, it is submitted that  the  judge's  finding
that the appellants could  go  to  India  (where  the  first  appellant  has
parents and siblings) was a misdirection. It is submitted that  it  was  not
open to the judge to make such a suggestion as it was  not  suggested  as  a
possibility by the respondent.  Further,  the  issue  was  not  put  to  the
appellants.

17.  It is submitted that if errors of law were  to  be  found,  the  appeal
could be re-decided within the Upper Tribunal.

Discussion and conclusions

18.  It is not disputed that the appellants cannot meet the requirements  of
paragraph 276B. As set out in the decision  letter,  neither  appellant  has
not completed ten years of continuous lawful residence in  the  UK  and  the
point was not pursued at the hearing (at 22).

19.  Nor can the appellants succeed under  the  family  life  provisions  of
Appendix FM because neither has settled status. Although their daughter  was
born prior to the date of the decision, they do not appear to have  notified
the respondent of her birth but in any event she is not a qualifying  child.


20.  The two grounds on which the application and appeal were put were  that
there would be very significant  obstacles  to  the  appellants'  return  to
Bangladesh and that there were  exceptional  circumstances  which  warranted
the grant of leave outside the rules.

21.  As now put, the appellants' case is essentially that  they  would  face
discrimination from  Muslims  and  be  destitute  on  return  to  Bangladesh
because they would be unable to have family support and  because  the  first
appellant would be unable to work because the second appellant  cannot  care
for their child due to issues with  her  back.  The  complaint  against  the
judge is that he did not take these factors into account  even  though  some
were unchallenged by way of cross examination and that he  perversely  found
that  the  appellants  would  be  able  to  seek   family   support   whilst
simultaneously finding that they would be able to relocate to an  area  with
a large Hindu community. The grounds for  permission  overlap  when  setting
out the appellants' objections.

22.  The heavy reliance on a fear of discrimination/harm in Bangladesh is  a
matter which was not put to the respondent as part of  the  application  nor
did it even feature in the lengthy grounds of  appeal  that  were  submitted
(reproduced in the AB:3-17).  It is noteworthy  that  no  asylum  claim  has
been  made  and  the  issue  of  discrimination  and  threats  from   Muslim
extremists is raised as an obstacle to re-integration on return rather  than
as a claim that serious harm would befall the family on return.

23.  Various appointment letters of the second  appellant's  problems  as  a
result of a prolapsed disc were  submitted  with  the  application  and  the
respondent   considered   this   as    part    of    her    assessment    of
exceptional/compassionate circumstances, noting that there was  no  evidence
the second appellant continued to require treatment or that treatment  would
be unavailable in Bangladesh.

24.  The first complaint is that the judge  did  not  take  account  of  the
appellants' subjective fears of return when assessing the  very  significant
obstacles to re-integration on return  and  whether  they  had  an  internal
flight option. Of course, as this is not an asylum claim, the judge was  not
required to consider the issue of internal relocation as a  separate  matter
and the grounds do not clarify how a subjective fear could translate into  a
very significant obstacle on the ground  when  the  appellants  return.  The
judge  took  account  of  the  documentary  evidence  and  the   appellant's
testimony and concluded, as it was open to  him  to  do,  that  intimidation
from extreme elements did not amount to such an obstacle (at 23-24). He  had
regard to the sizeable Hindu minority of some 10%,  the  presence  of  Hindu
belts in some areas and the fact that despite some land grabs  and  targeted
attacks, there was  generally  peaceful  co-existence  between  Muslims  and
Hindus. His finding that the appellants had the option  to  relocate  to  an
area with a larger Hindu  population  was  made  after  he  found  that  the
religious difference would not be a very significant obstacles and so  there
was no contradiction in his subsequent finding  that  the  second  appellant
could seek help with childcare from her family.

25.   It  is  also  argued  that  because  the  appellants'   evidence   was
unchallenged as to their subjective  fear,  the  appeals  should  have  been
allowed. Reliance is placed on MS (Sri  Lanka)   [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1548  in
which the Upper Tribunal's determination  was  found  to  be  "fundamentally
flawed because it does not address the appellant's evidence on  the  airport
issue and it ignores the fact that the Secretary of  State  elected  not  to
challenge that evidence" (at 16). In the present case, the  judge  did  not,
however, fail to address the issues raised by the appellants.  Moreover,  he
was clearly aware of the contention that as preachers they  would  be  at  a
higher risk (at 12  and  20)  although  there  was  no  country  information
adduced to support this assertion. The issue  of  returning  to  their  home
area was addressed and the cases are thus distinguishable.

26.  Much is made over the issue  of  childcare.  This  covers  the  second,
third and fourth grounds. It is argued  that  the  second  appellant  is  so
badly affected by back pain and sciatica that  she  cannot  look  after  her
child for more than half an hour and that, therefore,  the  first  appellant
will be needed for childcare and so will be unable to work and  support  the
family which would result in them being destitute. It is of note that  there
is no reference in the appellant's lengthy grounds of appeal  of  any  issue
with  the  second  appellant's  health  and  the  need   for   child   care.
Nevertheless, this was a matter the judge had regard to. As  the  judge  had
already found that the issue of religious discrimination did not  constitute
a very significant obstacle to return (see above), it was  open  to  him  to
find that the appellants could turn to the  second  appellant's  family  for
help with childcare. The possibility of relocation was  just  an  option  he
found that would be available to them and it was entirely sensible  for  him
to consider the situation were they to remain in their home village.

27.  The reasons given in the grounds of appeal for the first appellant  not
being able to find work were that he was  too  old  at  36  to  find  public
sector employment and because he would be  able  to  find  work  in  the  UK
(AB:9). There is no independent evidence to support the contention that  the
appellant  was  too  old  to  find  work  and  given  his   UK   educational
qualification, experience of employment here and alleged ability  to  easily
find work in the UK, it is difficult to see why he would be unable  to  find
employment in Bangladesh; indeed his evidence  to  the  judge  was  that  he
probably would be able to find a job but that he would be unable to take  it
due to his wife's condition. The appellants have not  addressed  the  option
of obtaining paid child care if the second appellant is indisposed. That  is
an option open to them. The claim that the family would be destitute is  not
made out.

28.   The  judge  is  also  criticized  for  "pedantically"  rejecting   the
appellant's claim in his witness statement  that  his  wife  has  had  major
spinal surgery. It is maintained that the appellant's assertion amounted  to
evidence and that this was discounted. The judge's findings have to be  read
as a whole. It is plain that  he  considered  all  the  evidence,  including
witness statements and oral evidence (at 10, 11  and  26)  when  making  his
findings. He refers to the documentary evidence, the oral testimony  and  to
witness statements in his determination and it must  therefore  be  accepted
that he had regard to all the evidence. The judge did take account  of  what
the appellant said in his witness statement about surgery. As that  was  the
same as his oral evidence, there has been no error in  the  judge's  failure
to specifically refer to the oral testimony. He was not satisfied that  such
surgery had taken place as there was no  reference  to  it  in  any  of  the
hospital letters. Given that various appointment  letters  and  a  discharge
summary (showing no procedures had been undertaken)  were  adduced,  it  was
open to the judge to expect documentary evidence of a major  procedure  such
as spinal surgery. Reference is  made  in  the  grounds  to  an  appointment
letter at AB:164 which it is said confirms the surgery. This  letter  refers
to an appointment  for  a  procedure/surgery;  it  is  not  confirmed  which
applies to the second appellant (and a procedure would cover  the  injection
the judge accepted that she had  received).  Moreover,  the  appointment  of
that date was cancelled as can be seen by a  further  hospital  letter.  The
judge accepted the  appellant's  evidence  that  the  second  appellant  had
received a nerve root  injection  but  properly  noted  that  there  was  no
evidence of a diagnosis or prognosis and no evidence  that  treatment  (such
as the injection she has received) would not  be  available  in  Bangladesh.
Even if the judge erred in not accepting the appellant's  oral  evidence  on
the issue of surgery in February 2018, there is no evidence  that  some  two
years on she requires any further major treatment or  that  if  she  did  it
would be unavailable in Bangladesh. As found in GM (Sri Lanka)  v  Secretary
of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1630  there  is  a
requirement for proper evidence and an assertion by an appellant as  to  his
personal circumstances and as  to  the  evidence  will  not  necessarily  be
adequate. The evidence could easily have been  adduced  and  no  reason  has
been offered even at this stage as to why it was not forthcoming.

29.  There is also a complaint that the  judge  had  no  right  to  consider
whether the appellants could join the  first  appellant's  family  in  India
because this was not an issue they had ever raised  themselves  and  it  had
not been suggested as a  possibility  by  the  respondent.  The  appellants'
grounds of appeal do, however, refer to India but argue that  they  have  no
"meaningful ties" there. It was, therefore, open to the  judge  to  consider
whether this would be an option for the future.

30.  It is argued that the judge made findings on the medical  issues  under
articles 3 and 8 which had not been part of the appellants' case but  failed
to make findings on the argument that was made. Whilst  the  latter  is  not
identified,  it  would  appear  to  be  the  issue  of  whether  the  second
appellant's ill health amounted to a very significant obstacle. To  maintain
that the judge did not make a finding on that is  misleading  as  the  judge
did address this issue (at 27). As the appellants argued article  8  applied
to them, the judge was also required to consider that matter as  part  of  a
proportionality exercise. An additional consideration of whether  article  3
would be breached, does not infect the findings on the issues  of  paragraph
296ADE or article 8.

31.  The argument about private life argued at paragraph 41 of  the  written
submissions is not  a  point  that  was  put  forward  in  the  grounds  for
permission and in the absence of any application to  amend  the  grounds,  I
decline to take it into account.

32.  For all these reasons, therefore, I conclude that the judge's  decision
making did not contain any errors of law and his  decision  to  dismiss  the
appellants' appeals is upheld.



Decision

33.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain errors of  law.
The appellants' appeals are dismissed.

Anonymity

34.  No request for an anonymity order has been made at any stage and I  see
no reason to make one.



Signed

R. Keki?
Upper Tribunal Judge

Date: 23 September 2020


