
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/14361/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision Under Rule 34 Without a     |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Hearing                              |                                     |
|On 1st October 2020                  |     On 6th October 2020             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                               ADRIAN GERANGCO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The appellant is a national of the Philippines. On 5th January  2018  a
    decision was made to make  a  deportation  order  under  s5(1)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 and on 19th June  2018  a  decision  was  made  to
    refuse the appellant's human  rights  claims.  The  appellant's  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed by Designated Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, McCarthy for reasons set out in a  decision  promulgated
    on 3rd October 2018.


 2. Because of the delay that has followed, it is appropriate for me to say
    a little about what has  happened  since.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Woodcraft on 7th November 2018 and
    following renewal of the application, by Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Roberts on 21st January 2019.


 3. The appellant challenged the  decision  to  refuse  permission  in  the
    Administrative Court  and  permission  to  claim  Judicial  Review  was
    refused.  The appellant was granted permission to appeal to  the  Court
    of  Appeal  by  Lord  Justice  Richards  on  4th  December   2019   and
    subsequently, the refusal of permission was quashed.  As set out in the
    decision of the Vice President of the Upper Tribunal dated 3rd February
    2020, permission to appeal was granted in the  light  of  the  comments
    made by Lord Justice Richards.


 4. The hearing of the appeal was listed before a panel of  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge's on 10th March 2020, but the hearing could not proceed  on  that
    occasion. The parties agreed directions for  further  case  management.
    There were then delays caused by the need to take  precautions  against
    the spread of Covid-19.  The respondent filed  and  served  a  Rule  24
    response to the grounds of appeal on 9th April  2020.   The  respondent
    also made an application to withdraw a concession  said  to  have  been
    made at the hearing of the appeal before Judge McCarthy on 2nd  October
    2018 by the Presenting Officer.   The  appellant  filed  and  served  a
    response  dated  29th  April  2020  to  the  submissions  made  by  the
    respondent, supported by a number of attachments.


 5. On 5th May 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt reviewed the matter and made
    directions extending time for compliance  with  the  previously  agreed
    directions.  Unbeknown to her when she reviewed the matter, the parties
    had sent their written submissions to the Tribunal, and they  had  been
    received by the Tribunal.  By email sent to the Upper Tribunal  on  6th
    May 2020, Mr Deller, a Senior Home Office Presenting Office within  the
    Specialist Appeals Team, reminded the Tribunal  that  the  parties  had
    served initial responses as previously directed.  He also informed  the
    Tribunal that it had subsequently come to his attention that there is a
    decision of the Upper Tribunal that had been promulgated  but  not  yet
    reported, that may be relevant to the outcome of this appeal.  He  also
    drew attention to 3 appeals listed before the Court of  Appeal  in  May
    2020 that may be relevant to the outcome of this appeal.


 6. The appeal was reviewed by Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley and  she  made
    further directions that were sent to the parties on 2nd July 2020.  She
    directed that the parties may file any further submissions setting  out
    the impact of the cases that had been drawn to  the  attention  of  the
    Upper Tribunal, on this appeal, and inviting the parties  views  as  to
    how the issue of whether the FtT erred in law, and if  so,  whether  it
    should be set aside, should be determined  in  light  of  the  Covid-19
    pandemic.


 7. On 16th July 2020, the  appellant  provided  the  Upper  Tribunal  with
    submissions relied upon in support of  his  appeal  and  regarding  the
    progress of this appeal.  In reply, Mr Deller for  the  respondent  now
    agrees that the FtT determination is flawed by error of law and  should
    be set aside.


 8. Rule 34 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  provides
    that the Upper Tribunal may make any decision without  a  hearing,  and
    the Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed  by  a  party  when
    deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider any matter, and the form
    of any such hearing. The directions issued by Upper  Tribunal  Lindsley
    provided the parties with an opportunity to set out their  view  as  to
    whether a hearing is necessary, and for that party  to  submit  reasons
    for that view. In the appellant's submissions dated 16th July 2020, the
    appellant submits, at paragraph [16], that it would be appropriate  for
    this appeal to be listed for physical, face-to-face hearing because  of
    the nature of the issues raised.   The  respondent's  position  on  the
    future conduct of the appeal is neutral.  Neither the appellant nor the
    respondent has expressed a view as to whether a hearing is necessary in
    order for the Tribunal to determine whether the decision of  Designated
    First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy is infected by a material  error  of
    law.


 9. However, in light of the sensible and pragmatic course proposed by  the
    appellant and the position adopted by the respondent, and  the  view  I
    have taken on the error of law, I am satisfied that it is in accordance
    with the overriding objective and the interests of justice for there to
    be a timely determination of the question whether there is an error  of
    law in the decision of the  FtT.   Taking  into  account  the  position
    adopted by the respondent, it is entirely appropriate for the error  of
    law decision to be determined on  the  papers,  to  secure  the  proper
    administration of justice.  There is in my judgement, no  prejudice  to
    the appellant in my proceeding in this way.


10. It is common ground between the parties that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is flawed by error of law and should be set aside, in
    light of the clarification regarding the test to be applied to such a
    case, as now set out in the authorities.  It is also agreed that there
    should be a de novo hearing of the appeal, and the appellant has
    indicated a preference for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal.   I am satisfied that there is a material error of law in the
    decision of Designated Judge McCarthy and the decision must be set
    aside.  In the circumstances I need say nothing more about the grounds
    of appeal.


11. As to the concession previously made by the respondent before the FtT,
    the respondent accepts that it would be disingenuous to now suggest
    there was no concession at all, but the Tribunal is asked to consider
    the overall context in which the question arose.  The appellant has
    provided a witness statement from counsel that appeared on behalf of
    the appellant at the hearing on 2nd October 2018 and a copy of the
    record of proceedings that record the concession.  In the appellant's
    further submissions dated 16th July 2020, the appellant submits the
    fact of that concession should be known to the Tribunal that the matter
    is remitted to, but its existence will not preclude further
    consideration of whether the appellant satisfied the "serious harm"
    definition in light of the guidance given in the recent case law.  At
    paragraph [15] of the appellant's written submissions, the appellant
    submits:


         "... In simple terms, the appellant does not seek to bind the next
         Tribunal or the SSHD to the concession made because of the
         clarification given by the Court of Appeal to the approach to be
         taken to consideration of the definition and which none of the
         parties previously had the benefit of."


12. In order to ensure there is no ambiguity and for the avoidance of any
    doubt, this is an appeal in which it is appropriate for the Upper
    Tribunal to exercise its discretion to allow any concession that had
    been made before the FtT, to be withdrawn.   First, there is in my
    judgement nothing to be gained by the fact of the concession being made
    known to the Tribunal that the matter is remitted to, where the
    appellant does not seek to bind the Tribunal or the SSHD to the
    concession.   Second, I accept that the context in which the question
    arose is relevant and there is no evidence that particular
    consideration was given to the legal question as to whether the
    appellant is a "foreign criminal" before the concession was made at the
    hearing of the appeal in October 2018.  It is clear from the way in
    which the authorities have since developed that the question whether an
    individual is a "foreign criminal" within the relevant legal framework
    can sometimes be a difficult one.  Third, there is no evidence before
    me to suggest that it would be unjust to allow the concession to be
    withdrawn because of any reliance by the appellant upon the concession,
    to his detriment.  Finally, the point in question is a pure point of
    law as to the definition of 'foreign criminal', and it is entirely
    proper where the decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 3rd
    October 2018 is to be set aside, that when the appeal is heard de novo,
    the decision of the Tribunal is made upon a correct legal footing so
    that the law is properly applied.


13. As to disposal, there is now a clearer legal framework against which
    the appeal must be considered.  Given the lengthy passage of time since
    the decision of Judge McCarthy, and the evidence that the Tribunal will
    have to consider, I am satisfied that the nature and extent of any
    judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive, and in my judgment,
    the appropriate course is for the appeal to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for hearing de novo.


14. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
    hearing in due course.





Notice of Decision


15. The appeal is allowed and the decision of Designated Judge McCarthy
    promulgated on 3rd October 2018 is set aside.


16. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing of the appeal
    with no findings preserved.


Signed   V. Mandalia                             Date:         1st October
2020
             Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


