
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/14345/2018
                                                                         (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely from Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 July 2021                              |On 13 August 2021             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 labh Singh
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Winter, Counsel, instructed by Maguire
                    Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    MacKenzie ("the judge"), promulgated on  18  September  2018.  By  that
    decision, the  judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision, dated 27 June 2018, refusing  his  human  rights
    claim.

 2.  The  appellant's  case  has  been  predicated  on  Article   8   ECHR,
    specifically  that  he  has  established  a  private  life,  and,  more
    importantly, a family life with his wife, Mrs S, a British citizen.



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The judge first considered whether the appellant could satisfy  any  of
    the relevant Immigration Rules  ("the  Rules"),  specifically  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM and/or paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). In respect of  the  latter,
    the judge concluded that there were no very  significant  obstacles  to
    the appellant re-integrating into Indian society, given his  particular
    circumstances. This conclusion has not been challenged on appeal.

 4. As to the former, the judge took account of Mrs S' history and  current
    circumstances,  including  mental  health  problems   and   her   close
    relationship  with  her  family.  The  judge  concluded   that   whilst
    relocation with the appellant would be difficult, it would  not  amount
    to insurmountable obstacles,  as  that  term  is  defined  in  EX.2  of
    Appendix FM.

 5. The judge went on to consider Article 8 on a wider basis. He took  into
    account his conclusions in respect of the relevant Rules, the impact on
    other relevant individuals,  and  the  mandatory  considerations  under
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  as
    amended ("the 2002 Act"). Ultimately,  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    respondent's decision was proportionate and  he  accordingly  dismissed
    the appeal.



The appellant's initial challenge to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The grounds of appeal (which are, as seems to  me  customary  in  cases
    originating in Scotland, admirably clear and concise) assert  that  the
    judge failed to take relevant  country  information  into  account,  or
    failed to provide adequate reasons in respect of it.  This  information
    related to the difficult situation faced by women in India. It is  also
    asserted that the judge failed to approach the proportionality exercise
    correctly. It is said that he effectively treated his conclusion  under
    the Rules as being  determinative  of  the  wider  balancing  exercise.
    Further, it is said that the judge was wrong  to  have  concluded  that
    only little weight could be placed on the appellant's private life  and
    that he failed to provide reasons why the appellant was deemed to be  a
    burden on the public purse.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted and the  appeal  was  heard  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Macleman. He concluded that there were no errors of  law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. He therefore dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.

 8. An application for permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Session  was
    made. A Joint Minute of Agreement  was  filed  with  the  Court.  As  a
    result, the appellant's appeal was allowed and the  decision  of  Judge
    Macleman set aside.

 9. In this way, the appeal came before me for a determination  of  whether
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law and, if it  had,  whether  its
    decision should be set aside.



The hearing

10. Mr Winter and Ms Isherwood appeared remotely. There were  no  technical
    difficulties.

11. Mr Winter relied on grounds of appeal and made additional concise  oral
    submissions which followed those grounds.

12. Ms Isherwood opposed the appeal, submitting  that  there  had  been  no
    misdirection in law and that the judge had dealt  adequately  with  the
    evidence.

13. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision.



Conclusions on error of law

14. Whilst the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  not  a  model  of
    clarity in certain respects, I have concluded that it is  not  vitiated
    by errors of law such  that  I  should  exercise  my  discretion  under
    section 12(2)(b) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007.
    Addressing the pertinent points  raised  by  the  parties,  and  having
    considered the judge's decision  holistically,  I  give  the  following
    reasons for my overall conclusion.

15. The judge correctly directed himself to the relevant Rule, namely  EX.1
    of Appendix FM. When considered in light of EX.2, it  is  clear  to  me
    that he applied the  appropriate  test  to  the  evidence,  that  being
    whether there  were  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  the  family  life
    continuing in India.

16. The judge did take account of the country information on  the  position
    of women in India (as contained in the respondent's CPIN of July 2018).
    Whilst I accept that the evidence contained in that document  indicates
    difficulties for certain classes of women in certain  circumstances,  I
    am satisfied that the judge considered it in its proper context, namely
    that Mrs S would be relocating with the appellant.  She  would  not  be
    going there as a single woman  or  a  person  without  the  support  of
    someone who did not have a knowledge of that country and/or the ability
    to re-establish themselves.

17. Although it did not feature expressly in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  Mr
    Winter submitted orally that the judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons in respect of the medical evidence, in particular reports  from
    Doctors Livingstone and Taylor. I am satisfied that the judge did  take
    this evidence into account and did  adequately  factor  it  in  to  his
    overall reasoning.  For  example,  at  [37]  the  judge  made  specific
    reference to the relevant conclusions of the  two  Doctors.  He  placed
    this evidence in the context of the case  as  a  whole,  including  the
    accepted availability of  suitable  medical  treatment  in  India,  the
    support of the appellant, the fact that Mrs S had  been  discharged  by
    another psychologist in 2017, and that she would be  able  to  keep  in
    contact with her family in  this  country  through  familiar  forms  of
    communication and/or visits.

18. All-told, I am satisfied that the judge did not commit  any  errors  of
    law in respect of his assessment under the Rules.

19. Although not a decisive point in my overall conclusions,  I  note  that
    there is no challenge to the judge's briefly-expressed finding that Mrs
    S could remain in the United Kingdom and support an application made by
    the appellant for entry clearance. Whilst  such  an  application  might
    face obstacles (not least in  respect  of  the  financial  requirements
    under the Rules), it cannot be said that this would have been bound  to
    fail: certain public funds can be taken into account and, in any event,
    Article 8 would have to be considered by an Entry Clearance Officer.

20. I turn to the judge's assessment outside of the context of the Rules.

21. I accept Mr Winter's submission that a conclusion under  the  Rules  is
    not the end-point of an Article  8  claim.  There  must  be  a  general
    proportionality exercise, taking into  account  all  relevant  matters,
    which would normally include those considered under the Rules.

22. I also accept the  submission  that  the  proportionality  exercise  is
    conceptually different  from  a  consideration  of  a  particular  Rule
    relating to Article 8. In respect of the latter, the task is simply  to
    discern whether the individual satisfies the stated criteria.  If  they
    do, that will in effect be determinative of their appeal. In respect of
    the former, there must be a balancing of the competing factors  in  any
    given case and an arrival at  a  conclusion  that  the  decision  under
    appeal is or is not disproportionate (see, for example, Lal [2019] EWCA
    Civ 1925; [2020] 1 WLR 858, at paragraph 68).

23. In the present case, the judge has not perhaps expressed  his  task  as
    clearly as he otherwise might have. He did not, for example,  state  in
    terms at the outset that he  was  moving  on  to  conduct  a  balancing
    exercise, having found that the appellant could not satisfy any of  the
    relevant Rules. Having said that, he did refer to the  "making  of  the
    proportionality balancing exercise" later at [53].

24. The judge did direct himself to Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11; [2017]  Imm  AR
    764, which specifically considers, amongst other matters, the need  for
    an individual to  show  exceptional  circumstances  (as  that  term  is
    properly understood) if they are unable  to  satisfy  a  relevant  Rule
    (see, for example, paragraphs 54-60). This provides an indication  that
    the judge did, as a matter of substance, approach his task on a correct
    footing.

25. It is also the case  that  an  inability  to  satisfy  the  Rules  will
    normally be given considerable weight in  the  overall  proportionality
    exercise. This position supported by Agyarko itself  and  AQ  (Nigeria)
    [2015] ECWA Civ 250, which the judge expressly referred to at [53]. The
    judge was not only entitled to  have  attached  at  least  considerable
    weight on the appellant's inability to satisfy EX.1 of Appendix FM.

26. At [49], the judge took account of  the  rights  of  other  individuals
    affected by the appellant's proposed removal, including Mrs S'  mother.
    Thus, he took account of another relevant factor.

27. The judge was bound to  consider  the  mandatory  considerations  under
    section 117B of the 2002 Act and this he did at [51] and [52]. He  took
    account  of  the  strong  public  interest  in  maintaining   effective
    immigration control, the absence of evidence to  show  the  appellant's
    English language ability, and the lack of  financial  independence.  In
    respect of the last factor, the grounds of appeal  have  proved  to  be
    misconceived. Although the judge did not provide specific  reasons  for
    his finding, Mr Winter rightly acknowledged the fact that the appellant
    was not working and that Mrs S was reliant on public  funds.  It  would
    follow that the appellant was not financially independent. This  factor
    counted against him in the overall balancing exercise.

28. The judge was  entitled  to  conclude  that  little  weight  should  be
    attached to the appellant's private life in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    appellant had been in this country unlawfully throughout and there were
    clearly no particularly strong features of the private life which would
    have remotely suggested any other conclusion.

29. The judge was also entitled to take account of the fact that the
    appellant's relationship with Mrs S had been established and continued
    at a time when the former's status was unlawful.

30. Mr Winter made clear in his submissions that an important aspect of the
    judge's alleged errors was that he had  not  expressly  considered  the
    same factors relevant to EX.1 of Appendix FM when undertaking the wider
    proportionality exercise. On the premise  that  those  factors  related
    almost exclusively to Mrs S' circumstances, it may be said  that  there
    is some merit tot his argument. The judge did  not  in  fact  state  in
    terms that he was re-assessing all of those factors once again.


31. However, I am considering the judge's decision holistically  and  on  a
    sensible basis. He was plainly entitled  to  incorporate  his  findings
    under the Rules into the balancing exercise. Those findings were not in
    the appellant's favour. In the first  instance,  I  conclude  that  the
    judge did, as a matter  of  substance,  place  those  findings  in  the
    balancing exercise (see, for example, [47], [52], [54] and [55].  Those
    findings, in the combination with the  other  factors  discussed  above
    (and in respect of which there are no errors of law), go to  show  that
    the judge's overall conclusion on proportionality is free of error  and
    was open to him.


32. Even if the judge had not specifically placed those  factors  into  the
    balancing exercise, if I were then to do so, and having regard  to  all
    the other matters discussed above, the outcome would plainly have  been
    the same. In other words, it cannot be said that any error by the judge
    might have made a difference to the outcome. The difficulties which Mrs
    S would experience by relocating the appellant  were,  on  the  judge's
    findings of  fact,  not  so  significant  as  to  have  outweighed  the
    cumulative effect of all other factors  weighing  on  the  respondent's
    side of the balance sheet.


33. Therefore, the  appellant's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  must  be
    dismissed and the judge's decision shall stand.


34. I do want to make clear to the appellant and Mrs S  that  I  appreciate
    that another judge might have reached the opposite  conclusion  on  the
    same evidence presented. My task at  this  stage  has  been  to  assess
    whether or not the judge made errors  of  law  and,  even  if  he  did,
    whether his decision should be set aside.


Anonymity

35. The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity direction  and  there  is  no
    reason why I should. I make no such direction.



Notice of Decision

36. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


37. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

38. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.






Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date:  27 July 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



