
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: hu/14947/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12 December 2018                |On 15 March 2019                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                  FELIX [E]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Collins, Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Y. Vanderman, Counsel instructed by the GLD


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. We have both contributed to the  drafting  of  this  decision  and  are
    grateful to Counsel for their helpful submissions.


Issues arising

 2. The first issue that arises is whether, following his conviction of two
    offences for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  six  months'  imprisonment
    respectively, the appellant is to be  treated  as  a  foreign  criminal
    within  the  statutory  definition  of  a  foreign  criminal  found  in
    s.117D(2) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as
    inserted by s.19 of the Immigration Act 2014 ('the 2002 Act').

 3. If the appellant is a foreign criminal, then it is  accepted  that  the
    unduly harsh test to be found  in  s.117C  of  the  2002  Act  must  be
    applied.  If the appellant is  not  a  foreign  criminal,  then  it  is
    submitted on his behalf  that  the  reasonableness  test  contained  in
    s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act must be applied.  By contrast,  Mr  Vanderman
    submitted on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,  that  even  if  the
    appellant is not a foreign criminal, the appellant  remains  liable  to
    deportation and for that reason  s.117B(6)  does  not  apply,  and  the
    correct course  is  to  consider  whether  the  decision  under  appeal
    breaches Article 8 of the ECHR.

Background

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria. He was born on 15 January  1969.
    He is now 50 years old.

 5. The appellant entered the United Kingdom ('UK') illegally in June 2006,
    aged 36 in order to be with his partner ('K') and their daughter S.   K
    has dual citizenship: she is a Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  ('DRC')
    national and a British national.  The appellant met K  in  the  DRC  in
    2003 when he was working there trading in second-hand cars.  They began
    a relationship, but the appellant had to travel to Nigeria for a  short
    while on business.  When he returned to the DRC, K had fled the country
    because of a fear of persecution.

 6. K arrived in the UK on 26 September 2003 and claimed asylum immediately
    on arrival.  On 15 December 2004 she was granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain ('ILR') as a recognised refugee.  When on  a  business  trip  in
    Denmark in 2006, the appellant resumed contact with  K  and  discovered
    that she had given birth to their child, S, in 2004.

 7. Having resided in the UK illegally for many years, on 15  October  2010
    the appellant applied to remain on the basis of his human  rights,  but
    this was refused on 13 November 2010.

 8. On 9 May 2011, the appellant was convicted of attempting to open a bank
    account using a false passport and sentenced to six months imprisonment
    at Blackfriars Crown Court. Efforts  to  remove  him  resulted  in  his
    appeal being allowed on article 8 grounds by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Elvidge.  This was followed by the grant of discretionary leave  ('DL')
    for  three  years  until  9  May  2015.   He  made  a  further  in-time
    application for leave to remain on the basis of his private and  family
    life. This application was outstanding on 19 January 2016 when  he  was
    convicted at Wood Green Crown Court of employing an impersonator to sit
    his driving theory test. The offence was classified as a conspiracy  to
    make a false representation for which  he  was  later  sentenced  to  a
    period of six months imprisonment.

 9. K was naturalised as a British citizen in 2009.   DNA  evidence  before
    Judge Elvidge established that the appellant is the father of S.      S
    is now aged 14 but will turn 15 soon.  She was born in Belfast and is a
    British national.  She  has  always  resided  in  the  UK.   Since  the
    appellant's arrival in the UK in  June  2006,  the  family  have  lived
    together  as  a  unit,  save  for  the  periods  of   the   appellant's
    imprisonment in 2011 and 2016, until his removal from  the  UK  in  May
    2016.

10. Proceedings were initiated to deport the appellant and on 13  May  2016
    the Secretary of State certified his claim under s.94B of the 2002 Act,
    after which his deportation to Nigeria followed later on in  May  2016.
    We have not been told the exact date this took place.

11. K and S remained in the UK, as they  are  entitled  to  do  as  British
    citizens, when the appellant was deported in 2016.  They have not lived
    as a family unit since  then.   K  has  explained  in  a  supplementary
    witness statement that the family is unable to afford for her and/or  S
    to visit the appellant in Nigeria and  their  circumstances  have  been
    very difficult financially and emotionally, without him in the  UK.   K
    works as a care assistant on a 'zero-hours' contract and  has  to  rely
    upon public funds when her income is very low.  The  appellant  appears
    to have not settled into life in Nigeria and will be unable to  provide
    a stable home for K and S.  He has been unable to  afford  to  pay  for
    them to visit him and struggles at times to buy credit for  his  phone.
    This is consistent with K's evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  at
    a hearing on 19 April 2017: she said that the appellant  has  not  been
    working and relies upon  his  sister  to  accommodate  and  financially
    support him.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ross  did  not  consider  the
    principal facts in the case to  be  disputed  and  concluded  that  the
    appellant has a family life with K and S, and played a significant role
    in  S's  upbringing.   Judge  Ross  however  drew  attention  to  Judge
    Elvidge's decision allowing the  appellant's  human  rights  appeal  in
    October 2011.   Judge  Elvidge  did  not  accept  the  history  of  the
    development of  the  relationship  between  K  and  the  appellant  but
    nevertheless found that the family unit was genuine, and it  would  not
    be in S's best interests to return to  Nigeria,  where  she  had  never
    lived and where there was no evidence as how the family  could  support
    themselves.  Judge Ross found that the appellant's offending had caused
    serious harm and as such he had to consider whether it would be  unduly
    harsh to expect S and K to live in Nigeria with the  appellant.   Judge
    Ross drew attention to the fact that Judge Elvidge was obliged to apply
    the reasonableness test at the relevant time, but he had to  apply  the
    different unduly harsh test.  Judge Ross did not accept that  the  high
    threshold required by the unduly harsh test was met.

12. For the reasons he gave in a decision sent on 23 February  2018,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Jordan set aside Judge Ross's decision as disclosing  an
    error of law. It is in this way that the appeal comes before the  Upper
    Tribunal.

13. Before us, both parties  agreed  that  this  became  an  out-of-country
    appeal which the Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and determine.   The
    parties also agreed that the legal issues to be  determined  are  those
    summarised above and the facts are no longer in dispute.

The decision letter

14. The decision letter of the Secretary of State, upon the basis of  which
    this appeal proceeds, was made on 13 May  2016.  In  dealing  with  the
    appellant's human rights claim, the  decision-maker  expressly  limited
    his reasoning to a consideration of  whether  the  appellant  had  been
    convicted of an  offence  which  caused  serious  harm  (page  4).   He
    accepted that the appellant had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with S and K.  The decision-maker went on  to  assert  that  it  was  a
    matter of choice as to whether S and her mother relocated to Nigeria in
    order to maintain family life. It was said that S, then aged 12, having
    been born in the UK, was at an age when she was young enough  to  adapt
    to life in Nigeria. Although  it  was  accepted  that  the  appellant's
    deportation was likely to result in "some negative emotional impact on"
    on S, she would continue to live with her mother without the  necessity
    for face-to-face contact with her father. In any event, other forms  of
    contact could be maintained. Accordingly, the  decision-maker  rejected
    the appellant's contention that the consequences of his  removal  would
    violate his human rights or those of K and S.

15. The decision-maker did not assert that the appellant was  a  persistent
    offender. However, in paragraph 20 of  the  determination,  Judge  Ross
    found that the appellant was a persistent offender (although it is  not
    clear whether this claim was advanced by the Presenting  Officer).  The
    skeleton argument submitted by the Secretary of State in support of the
    appeal before us also relies upon  the  appellant  being  a  persistent
    offender. However, at the hearing before us, Mr Vanderman on behalf  of
    the Secretary of State, correctly in our view, confirmed  that  it  was
    not the Secretary of State's case that the appellant was  a  persistent
    offender. He submitted that Judge Ross seemed to have  dealt  with  the
    issue "on his own motion".

The sentencing remarks

16. The sentencing remarks of the Judge who dealt with the 2016 offence  at
    Wood Green Crown Court include the following:

         "These offences are very serious.  The purpose of the  theory  test
         is to ensure that everyone who ends up with a  driving  licence  is
         fit to do so and I quote Lady Justice Hallett who, in turn,  quotes
         a probation officer that:

             'A proliferation of persons unfit to drive  but  empowered  by
             virtue  of  fraudulently  obtained  licences  can  only  spell
             disaster for the road using public and society'.

         We simply cannot have unlicensed and uninsured drivers let loose on
         the public in London and so these  offences  all  call  out  for  a
         strong element of deterrence."

17. In paragraph 20 of his decision, (apart from his erroneous finding that
    the  appellant  was  a  persistent  offender),  Judge  Ross  found  the
    appellant's offending has caused serious harm and did  so  in  reliance
    upon the sentencing judge's remark that the offence was  very  serious.



Legal framework

2002 Act

18. The introduction of Part 5A into the 2002 Act imposes a statutory  duty
    upon a court or tribunal to pay regard to the considerations listed  in
    s.117B.   They  include  in  summary,  the  public  interest  in   "the
    maintenance of effective immigration controls"  (subsection  (1));  the
    public interest in those seeking to enter being able to  speak  English
    (subsection (2)), and  in  being  financially  independent  (subsection
    (3)); the little weight to be accorded to private life or relationships
    established when a person was in  the  country  unlawfully  (subsection
    (4)), or when immigration status was precarious (subsection (5)); and:

         "(6)     In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
         the public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

19. However, in cases concerning the deportation of  foreign  criminals,  a
    heightened burden is placed upon those seeking to avoid removal in  the
    form of additional considerations set out in s.117C. The effect of  the
    additional criteria in s.117C is to add additional weight to the public
    interest question and thereby to reduce the relative weight that is  to
    be attached to any private  or  family  life  that  the  appellant  has
    acquired.  Section 117C states as follows:

         "(1)     The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)      The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
         criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of  the
         criminal.

         (3)      In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)      Exception 1 applies where -

             (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,

             (b) C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5)      Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)      In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
         interest requires deportation  unless  there  are  very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7)      The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
         taken into account where a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
         decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that  the
         reason for the decision was the offence or offences for  which  the
         criminal has been convicted."

20. Section 117D(2) provides as follows (our emphasis):

         "(2)     In this Part, "foreign criminal" means a person-

             (a) who is not a British citizen,

             (b) who has  been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
             offence, and

             (c) who-

                  (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
                  least 12 months,

                  (ii) has been convicted of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                  serious harm, or

                  (iii)      is a persistent offender."

21. By virtue of s.117D(4)(b), the definition of a period  of  imprisonment
    excludes a person who has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of
    12 months  by  virtue  of  being  sentenced  to  consecutive  sentences
    amounting in aggregate  to  that  length  of  time.   Accordingly,  the
    process by which the appellant has found himself to have fallen foul of
    ss.117A-D is because the Secretary of State considered him to have been
    convicted of an offence  that  has  caused  serious  harm  pursuant  to
    s.117D(2)(c)(ii).

Immigration Rules

22. The Immigration Rules, applicable to both courts and tribunals but also
    applicable to the Secretary of State, reflect the contents of the  2002
    Act but in somewhat different form.  The statute and the Rules  are  to
    be interpreted in a manner consistent with each other -  see  paragraph
    17 of Chege ("is a persistent offender") [2016] UKUT 187 (IAC) (Andrews
    J and Southern UTJ), a decision to which we  will  return  later.   The
    Rules deal with "Deportation and Article 8" in the following manner:

         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention, and

              (a)      the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
              conducive to the public  good  and  in  the  public  interest
              because they have been convicted of an offence for which they
              have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4
              years;

              (b)      the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
              conducive to the public  good  and  in  the  public  interest
              because they have been convicted of an offence for which they
              have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less  than
              4 years but at least 12 months; or

              (c)      the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
              conducive to the public  good  and  in  the  public  interest
              because, in  the  view  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  their
              offending has caused serious harm or they  are  a  persistent
              offender who shows a particular disregard for  the  law,  the
              Secretary of State in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
              whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if  it  does  not,
              the public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by
              other factors where there are very  compelling  circumstances
              over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399.     This paragraph applies where  paragraph  398  (b)  or  (c)
         applies if -

              (a)      the person has a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
              relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is in
              the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)   it would be unduly harsh for the child to  live
                      in the country to which the person is to be deported;
                      and

                      (b)   it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  child  to
                      remain in the UK without the  person  who  is  to  be
                      deported; or..."

23. It is to be noted  that  the  question  whether  "the  effect"  of  C's
    deportation would be "unduly harsh"  on  a  qualifying  child  (section
    117C(5)) is broken down into two parts in  paragraph  399(ii).   It  is
    also noteworthy that the phrase "in the view of the Secretary of State"
    in paragraph 398(c) of the Rules is omitted from s.117D(2)(c)(ii).

24. In KO (Nigeria) and others v  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] UKSC 53 (24 October 2018) the Supreme Court concluded
    that the statutory consideration of  reasonableness  in  s.117B(6)  and
    unduly harsh in s.117C was confined to focussing on the position of the
    child, which did not  involve  a  wider  consideration  of  the  public
    interest in removing foreign offenders and others.

The Secretary of State's policy guidance and views

25. Serious harm is defined in the Policy Statement known  as  Criminality,
    Article 8 ECHR Cases,  published  on  22  February  2017  ('the  policy
    guidance').  Serious harm is "at the discretion  of  the  Secretary  of
    State" and defined in these terms:

         "An offence that has caused serious harm means an offence that  has
         caused serious physical  or  psychological  harm  to  a  victim  or
         victims or that has contributed to a widespread problem that causes
         serious harm to a community or to society in general."

26. The composite nature of serious harm in  this  definition  is  evident.
    There is no suggestion in  the  present  appeal  that  the  appellant's
    offence has caused serious physical or psychological harm to a  victim.
    Hence, the Secretary of State's focus has been upon the second limb, in
    relation to which he accepts there are three aspects, all of which must
    be met. Firstly, there has to be a  widespread  problem.   Second,  the
    offending must have contributed to this.  Third, the problem must cause
    serious harm to society or a part of it.

27. The policy goes on to state that "where a person has been convicted  of
    one or more violent, drugs  or  sex  offences,  they  will  usually  be
    considered to have been convicted of an offence that has caused serious
    harm".  It is  undisputed  that  this  appellant's  offending  has  not
    involved any violence, drugs or sex.

28. In SC (Zimbabwe) v the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2018] 1 WLR 4474; [2018] EWCA  Civ  929,  the  Court  of  Appeal  gave
    consideration  to  the  nature  of  the  discretion  exercised  by  the
    Secretary of State. In doing so, it disagreed with its own decision  in
    LT (Kosovo)  and  another  v  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 1246 in which Laws LJ had suggested that the
    tribunal should afford significant weight to the Secretary  of  State's
    view of serious harm and this remained unaffected by  Part  5A  of  the
    2002 Act.  In SC (Zimbabwe) McCombe LJ (with whom Lindblom and  Leggett
    LJJ agreed) said this at paragraph 19:

         "The LT case was concerned solely with the application of 398(c) of
         the Rules.  With respect to the short obiter  dictum  in  the  last
         sentence of the passage quoted, I do not agree.  It seems to me  to
         be quite clear that once the matter comes before a  tribunal  or  a
         court, what has to be applied is section 117D (C) of the  Act.  The
         words of that provision are the words which Parliament  has  chosen
         to enact, without more. The three elements of that paragraph of the
         subsection are in clear terms and do not require any  gloss  to  be
         put upon them by the reference  to  the  Rules.  The  view  of  the
         Secretary of State or indeed of a judge in sentencing  remarks  may
         be of assistance to a tribunal or  court  in  deciding  whether  an
         offence has caused  serious  harm  or  whether  an  offender  is  a
         persistent offender, but I do not  see  that  the  statutory  words
         compel any particular weight  to  be  given  to  the  Secretary  of
         State's view on either in the assessment."

Submissions

29. Mr Vanderman submitted that significant weight should be given  to  the
    Secretary of State's view that the appellant's offending caused serious
    harm.  He invited us to prefer the reasoning contained in  LT  (Kosovo)
    over SC (Zimbabwe) on the basis that the former  addressed  a  'serious
    harm' case similar to the instant case,  and  the  latter  addressed  a
    'persistent offender' case.  He argued that it followed from this  that
    we should only depart from the Secretary of State's view if we consider
    it to be irrational.

30. Mr Vanderman accepted that the appellant's  offending  has  not  caused
    serious physical or psychological harm but that it has contributed to a
    widespread problem that causes serious harm to society.   He  submitted
    that it was not necessary for the Secretary of State to rely  upon  any
    evidence to support that proposition because it was merely a "matter of
    social and moral judgment".

31. Mr Collins  submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  support  the
    submission that the appellant's offending contributed to  a  widespread
    problem and that we should find that the appellant  is  not  a  foreign
    criminal for the purposes of s.117D.

32. After hearing submissions from both  Counsel,  we  indicated  that  the
    appellant does not meet the definition of a foreign criminal in  s.117D
    of the 2002 Act and we invited the parties to address us on the correct
    legal test to be applied in those circumstances.

33. Although initially Mr Vanderman agreed with Mr Collins' submission that
    the correct test is that of reasonableness as  set  out  at  s.117B(6),
    after a short break and having taken instructions,  he  submitted  that
    s.117B(6) is not applicable because notwithstanding our  decision  that
    the  appellant  is  not  a  foreign  criminal,  he  remains  liable  to
    deportation.

34. As we have indicated above Mr Vanderman did  not  dispute  the  factual
    framework advanced on behalf of the appellant.  He submitted  that  the
    appellant's immigration history and criminal offending must be balanced
    against the impact upon K and S, and that a more traditional  balancing
    exercise under Article 8 should be  taken  in  this  case  because  the
    matter falls outwith s.117B(6).

35. We reserved our decision on this issue, and now provide our reasoning.

Discussion

Foreign criminal

36. We must first resolve the dispute between  the  parties  regarding  the
    role of the Secretary of State's view  on  whether  the  offending  has
    caused serious harm.

37. We entirely agree with McCombe LJ's reasoning  in  SC  (Zimbabwe)  that
    once the matter comes before the Tribunal, what has to  be  applied  is
    s.117D of the 2002  Act.   We  acknowledge  that  the  question  in  SC
    (Zimbabwe) was whether that appellant "is a  persistent  offender"  for
    the purposes of s.117(2)(c)(iii) and not whether (as here) he "has been
    convicted of an offence that has caused serious harm" for the  purposes
    of s.117D(2)(c)(ii).  In our view, McCombe LJ's reasoning at  paragraph
    19 (as set out above) applies with  equal  force  to  both  provisions.
    Indeed, he made specific reference to applying  the  wording  found  at
    s.117(2)(c), without more.  He went  on  to  make  it  clear  that  the
    Secretary of State's view and the sentencing judge's remarks may be  of
    assistance but in deciding "whether an offence has caused serious  harm
    or whether an offender is a persistent offender" he "could not see that
    the statutory words compel any particular weight to  be  given  to  the
    Secretary of State's view on either in the assessment".   It  would  be
    very surprising if  there  were  to  be  different  approaches  to  the
    Secretary of State's views on whether a person is a  foreign  national,
    dependent upon whether ss.(ii) or (iii) of s.117D(2)(c) is relied upon.
     If, as McCombe LJ decided, and we accept, the Tribunal must decide ss.
    (iii) for itself, it must also decide  ss.  (ii)  for  itself.   In  KO
    (Nigeria) at [22], the Supreme Court adopted this parity of approach to
    its analysis of exceptions 1 and 2 in s.117C of the 2002 Act.

38. Mr Vanderman relied upon the  different  approach  was  adopted  in  LT
    (Kosovo).  This was described by Laws LJ as a "paragraph 398(c)  case".
    That involved a consideration of the regime in place under the umbrella
    of the Immigration Rules alone, and prior to the insertion of  Part  5A
    in the 2002 Act.  Laws LJ concluded that in a paragraph 398(c) case the
    Tribunal should accord significant weight to the Secretary  of  State's
    view of serious harm.  He observed that he  could  not  see  that  this
    approach was undermined by the provisions in ss.117C and D.  McCombe LJ
    made it clear that he did not agree with this  "short  obiter  dictum".
    We add that not only was Laws LJ dealing with a case with  a  different
    legal framework, he does not appear to have heard any argument  on  the
    difference  in  approach  the  new  statutory  regime  supported.    In
    particular, his attention does not appear to have  been  drawn  to  the
    omission of the phrase "in the view of the  Secretary  of  State"  from
    s.117(2)(c)(ii), when that appears in the Rules (as highlighted by Laws
    LJ at [19] of LT (Kosovo)).

39. The statutory definition and the words Parliament has chosen to  enact,
    must be applied.  We must decide for ourselves  whether  the  appellant
    has been convicted of an offence that  has  caused  serious  harm.   We
    entirely accept that the views of the Secretary of State including  his
    policy guidance and the judge's sentencing remarks are likely to be  of
    assistance and should be taken into account when  we  conduct  our  own
    assessment.

40. We turn firstly  to  the  judge's  sentencing  remarks.   There  is  no
    definition of serious harm within the 2002 Act.   That  may  trigger  a
    tempting  reliance  upon  the  definition  of  serious  harm  in  other
    statutory and non-statutory contexts.  However, there is  a  danger  in
    importing language from one context into another. As Judge Jordan  said
    in his setting aside decision,  it  is  commonplace  for  a  sentencing
    judge, before imposing a sentence of imprisonment,  to  categorise  the
    offence as serious. Indeed, were it not so, a sentence of  imprisonment
    would not be imposed. A similar point is made in paragraph 46 of  Chege
    where the court was invited  to  draw  analogies  in  which  the  words
    "persistently" or "persistent offender" were used  in  the  context  of
    sentencing for youth offending. The Tribunal stated in paragraph 47:

         "However, it would be very unwise for this Tribunal to  import  the
         interpretation placed on a phrase used in  another  statute,  in  a
         context to which very different policy considerations  apply,  into
         part 5A of the 2002 act, even if the words used are identical."

41. In addition, in LT (Kosovo) at [16-18] Laws J rejected  the  submission
    that the definition of serious harm in the Criminal  Justice  Act  2003
    could be imported to paragraph 398(c).

42. Importantly, unlike the sentencing judge, for these  purposes,  we  are
    not concerned with the seriousness of the offence itself but whether it
    has caused serious harm.  In the course of his  decision  finding  that
    there was an error of  law  in  Judge  Ross's  decision,  Judge  Jordan
    described the sentence itself as 'in almost all  cases  [amounting]  to
    the acid test.' On hearing submissions from both counsel, we find  that
    remark to overstate the significance of the sentence, suggesting as  it
    does that the length of  the  sentence  is  determinative.  It  is,  of
    course, often the only means by which an outsider  will  see  reflected
    the seriousness of the offending. However, the greater the  information
    that is provided about the nature of the offence, the more likely it is
    that the decision-maker is  able  to  form  his  own  view  as  to  its
    seriousness, taking into account the sentence and the judges sentencing
    remarks, but not becoming over-reliant upon the length of imprisonment.

43. In his setting aside decision Judge Jordan also spoke of  there  having
    to be additional elements which might be  identified  by  acknowledging
    the position in these colloquial terms:  'notwithstanding  the  lenient
    sentence that has been imposed in this  case,  the  sentence  does  not
    reflect the true gravity of the offending and the serious harm that has
    been caused.' These additional elements are identified  in  the  policy
    guidance by identifying: (a) the causing of serious physical harm;  (b)
    the causing of serious psychological harm;  (c)  a  contribution  to  a
    widespread  problem  that  causes  serious   harm.    This   tripartite
    categorisation must be seen as a  coherent  whole  with  each  category
    assisting to define the type of harm that is  being  addressed.  It  is
    either serious physical or psychological harm both of which are readily
    established by the appropriate evidence.  Alternatively,  although  the
    serious physical or psychological harm may not have been established in
    the case of an individual, by parity of reasoning, the harm  is  of  an
    equivalent level of severity  by  reason  of  its  being  a  widespread
    problem seriously harming the community.

44. The corollary of  this  position  is  that  a  decision-maker  must  be
    extremely cautious in identifying a particular type of case which  does
    not come within the policy  guidance.  In  particular,  he  must  avoid
    lowering the threshold of serious harm. To do so would run the risk  of
    the Secretary of State using serious harm as the means of  categorising
    an individual as a foreign criminal to the  extent  that  it  would  no
    longer be necessary for that individual to have been  sentenced  to  12
    months or to be a persistent offender. All offending harms  society  or
    else it would not be considered an offence. Serious harm is an  elusive
    concept or, at least, an elastic one.  It  might  well  be  argued  bad
    driving, shoplifting, deception or violence of any sort each  causes  a
    serious impact upon our social and economic life. Were the Secretary of
    State to categorise shoplifting as a widespread ill that causes serious
    harm, he may be entitled to do so, at least if he properly reasons that
    decision. However, unless he does  so,  it  would  not  be  open  to  a
    tribunal to reach that conclusion intuitively. Hence, the  significance
    of the policy guidance. That does not mean that there cannot  be  cases
    where a decision-maker  is  entitled  to  conclude  the  offending  has
    contributed to a widespread problem and has  caused  serious  harm  but
    there should be some form of evidence to support it.

45. The Secretary of State has clearly rested his case that the appellant's
    offending has caused serious harm upon the definition of  serious  harm
    in the policy guidance we have described at (c) of paragraph  44  above
    i.e. the appellant's 2016  offence  has  contributed  to  a  widespread
    problem that has caused serious harm to the  community  or  society  in
    general.  We invited Mr Vanderman to take us to any evidence or  policy
    guidance to support the proposition that being involved in a conspiracy
    to commit fraud by seeking to benefit from the use of  an  impersonator
    in a driving theory test has contributed to a widespread  problem.   Mr
    Vanderman submitted that there was no need for any specific evidence or
    policy guidance because the Secretary of State was  entitled  to  adopt
    that view as a matter of social and moral judgment.  In this respect Mr
    Vanderman relied upon the rejection of the submission  in  LT  (Kosovo)
    that the Secretary of State was obliged to  give  additional  reasoning
    for his view that drugs offences are serious offences and cause serious
    harm.  Laws LJ referred to the  Secretary  of  State's  "long  standing
    policy  that  suppliers  of  illegal  drugs  will  be  candidates   for
    deportation" at [22] and concluded at [24] that the view that supplying
    Class A drugs causes serious harm did not require narrative reasons  or
    a particular expertise and "is a matter of social and moral  judgment".
    We reject Mr Vanderman's reliance upon  the  bare  assertion  that  the
    Secretary of State was  entitled  as  a  matter  of  social  and  moral
    judgment to reach the view he did in this case, without more.  Such  an
    assertion is subjective, vague and unsupported by any evidence (in  the
    public domain or otherwise) or policy guidance

46. There are  additional  difficulties  with  Mr  Vanderman's  submission.
    Firstly, the offending in this case does not have any bearing upon  the
    Secretary  of  State's  longstanding   and   well-known   policy   that
    convictions involving violence, drugs and sex are viewed very seriously
    and as causing serious harm.  The policy guidance refers to  this  type
    of offending and no other.  We  appreciate  that  the  policy  guidance
    should not be read as if it is a statute.   We  have  already  accepted
    that there may be cases and examples capable of meeting the  definition
    of serious harm, which are not expressly referred to within the  policy
    guidance.  However, where by way of example,  the  supply  of  Class  A
    drugs gives rise to a sentence of under 12  months,  the  Secretary  of
    State is entitled to rely on his  longstanding  policy  and  his  views
    based upon this, in order to express a clear social and moral judgment.
     There is no corresponding policy or clear expression of the  Secretary
    of State's view in relation to offending involving fraud within driving
    tests.  In offending involving the supply of  drugs  the  Secretary  of
    State is able to point to  his  longstanding  general  policy  and  the
    policy guidance itself.  It is these that express his social and  moral
    judgment.  In this case the Secretary of State has been unable to point
    to anything other than a bare assertion that  the  appellant's  offence
    has contributed to a widespread problem.

47. Second, we have not been taken to any evidence to  link  this  type  of
    offending to a widespread problem.  The sentencing judge quoted Hallett
    LJ as being concerned that with the apparently potential disaster  that
    may be caused by a proliferation of persons unfit to drive.  That  must
    undoubtedly be true.  The  behaviour  that  led  to  the  2016  offence
    clearly has the potential to cause serious harm to  society.   We  have
    however been taken to nothing to support the proposition that there  is
    in fact a proliferation of such persons as a consequence of  this  type
    of or related offending.  There was no evidence of a widespread problem
    and the imposition of a deterrent  sentence  does  not,  without  more,
    establish it.

48. As set out above, where the definition of  foreign  criminal  is  found
    amongst a  number  of  categories,  those  additional  categories  must
    inevitably inform the meaning of the others.  A  person  who  has  been
    sentenced to 12 months imprisonment, which  is  expressly  confined  to
    immediate sentences of imprisonment sets a level of offending which  is
    clear-cut and easily intelligible. Perhaps less  so,  but  nevertheless
    objectively verifiable, is the category  of  the  persistent  offender.
    Clearly the nature of the offending is likely to be less  serious  than
    offences which attract a 12-month sentence of imprisonment. It is  not,
    therefore, the nature of  the  individual  offences  rather  the  sheer
    number of them. Within  this  system  of  categorisation  are  offences
    which, by definition, attract less  than  12  months  imprisonment  and
    which do not fall into  a  pattern  properly  described  as  persistent
    offending. Nevertheless, since the consequences of being  found  within
    this category are the same for the persistent offender  or  the  person
    sentenced to 12 months, there must be a parity between them. It is only
    in this way that s.117D is maintained  as  a  coherent  structure.   In
    other words, the offending, though different, must be capable of  being
    viewed in a similar manner to the offending identified by reference  to
    a sentence of 12 months or the activities of a persistent offender.

49. Both parties relied upon the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  Chege.
    As the title suggests, this was a decision that  centred  upon  section
    117D(c)  (iii)  and  what  is  meant  by  a  persistent  offender.  Its
    consideration of subparagraph  (ii),  namely  a  person  who  has  been
    convicted of an offence which has caused serious harm, is peripheral to
    the decision. However, it is an example of the type of  offending  that
    properly fell to be classified as persistent offending.  Mr Chege  had,
    over a period of  15  years  committed  25  offences  resulting  in  16
    convictions  for  which  he  had  been  sentenced  to  short  custodial
    sentences of between 4 and 9 months (but never as long  as  12  months)
    including at least 2 offences of affray.  No suggestion was made in the
    decision letter that Mr Chege's offending had caused serious harm,  see
    paragraph 22 of the decision. The decision in Chege is but an  example.
    There will be cases, of course, where the period of offending  will  be
    less, perhaps much less, where the number of offences will be  smaller,
    perhaps much smaller and where the number of convictions will be fewer,
    perhaps much fewer and still the appellant will properly be  classified
    as a persistent offender.  However, it provides  an  insight  into  the
    parity of reasoning that is required in order to  maintain  a  coherent
    definition of a foreign criminal. It must at least set  off  an  alarm-
    bell when assessing the appellant who is not a persistent offender  and
    whose record of offending consists of two  offences,  each  meriting  a
    sentence of six months, albeit separated by a period of five years.

50.  Drawing  these  strands  together,  we  consider  that  the  following
    principles are useful in cases where the  Secretary  of  State  asserts
    that  the  appellant  is  to  be  treated   as   a   foreign   criminal
    notwithstanding the fact that he has not been sentenced to a period  of
    12 months immediate imprisonment  or  more  and  is  not  a  persistent
    offender:

          i) Although it is at the discretion of  the  Secretary  of  State
             whether he considers an offence to have caused  serious  harm,
             it is, on appeal, for a tribunal to  make  up  its  own  mind,
             albeit it must have due regard to  the  Secretary  of  State's
             views;

         ii) Policy guidance provided by the  Secretary  of  State  is  the
             lawful means by which the Secretary of  State  identifies  the
             type of offending that he considers to cause serious harm;

        iii) Whilst the remarks of the  sentencing  judge  are  a  material
             consideration, they must  be  seen  as  made  in  a  different
             context from that of Part 5A of the 2002 Act;

         iv) The description of the offence by the sentencing  judge  as  a
             serious offence or  a  very  serious  offence  is  of  limited
             assistance when a tribunal is required to consider whether the
             appellant has contributed to a widespread problem that affects
             and seriously harms society or a part of it;

          v) The question whether  the  appellant  is  a  foreign  criminal
             because he  has  contributed  to  a  widespread  problem  that
             seriously harms society or a part of it,  should  be  assessed
             within  the  context  of  the  other  categories  of   persons
             classified as foreign criminals.

51. We are not satisfied that  the  appellant's  2016  offence  has  caused
    serious harm.  The Secretary  of  State  conceded  that  there  was  no
    psychological or physical serious harm caused  and  focussed  upon  the
    offence having contributed to a widespread problem.  We have been taken
    to no evidence that  the  2016  offence  contributed  to  a  widespread
    problem.  We entirely accept  that  conspiracy  to  defraud  government
    departments is a serious issue and inimical  to  the  public  interest,
    with the potential to cause serious harm.  However, the policy guidance
    is correct in so far as short of serious physical or psychological harm
    to an actual victim or victims, any serious harm to the wider community
    or society must involve offending that has contributed to a  widespread
    problem.  That level of serious harm can be said to  be  equivalent  to
    the other statutory definitions of a foreign criminal in s.117D, and is
    not present in this case.

S.117B(6)

52. Having concluded that the appellant is not a "foreign criminal" because
    his offending has not caused serious harm, the Secretary of State is no
    longer  entitled  to  maintain  the  view  that  he   is   "liable   to
    deportation".  This is because the Secretary of State's view  that  the
    appellant's deportation is conducive  to  the  public  good  is  solely
    predicated upon his contention that the appellant was convicted  of  an
    offence which has caused serious harm.  The latter provides the gateway
    to the former.  No other reasoning is offered in the  decision  letter.






53. We invited Mr Vanderman to explain  how  it  could  be  said  that  the
    appellant remained liable to deportation when we  had  found  that  the
    very basis of that view could no longer  be  properly  maintained.   Mr
    Vanderman was unable to do so other than to take us to the  Immigration
    Act 1971 which provides at s.3(5):

         "A person who is not a British citizen  is  liable  to  deportation
         from the UK-

               a) if the Secretary of State  deems  his  deportation  to  be
                  conducive to the public good...."

54. This does no more than define who is liable to  deportation.   Although
    the Secretary  of  State  deemed  the  appellant's  deportation  to  be
    conducive to the public good, this was predicated upon the Secretary of
    State's view that the appellant had been convicted of an offence  which
    has caused serious harm.  The Secretary of State can no longer properly
    maintain that view in light of  our  findings.   It  follows  that  the
    appellant is no longer liable to deportation and the question  that  we
    must decide for the purposes of s.117B(6) is what is reasonable for  S.
    In  assessing  that  question  we  must  take  into  account  her  best
    interests.  We have no doubt that S's best  interests  require  her  to
    remain in the UK by a significant margin.  She is  a  British  citizen.
    She was born in the UK.  She has resided in the UK and nowhere else for
    nearly 15 years.  The evidence from her parents,  which  has  not  been
    disputed, is that  her  father  has  been  unable  to  set  himself  up
    financially in Nigeria and is living  in  difficult  conditions  there.
    Her mother K is also a British citizen.  She is also a DRC citizen  but
    not a Nigerian citizen.  She  was  recognised  as  a  refugee  and  has
    already had to move her entire life from one country to another.

55. In KO (Nigeria) the Supreme Court made it clear that it is relevant  to
    consider where the parents are expected to be, since it  will  normally
    be reasonable for the child to be with them.   That  argument  is  less
    strong the older the child is and the more deep-rooted her ties are  to
    a particular country, as in  this  case.   In  any  event,  can  it  be
    properly said that the mother, a British citizen, can  be  expected  to
    follow the father  to  Nigeria?   In  answering  that  question  it  is
    relevant to consider the "real world" in which S and her  parents  find
    themselves- see [19] of  KO  (Nigeria)  and  [27]  of  JG  (s  117B(6):
    "reasonable to  leave"  UK)  Turkey  [2019]  UKUT  72  (IAC)  (Lane  J,
    President and Gill UTJ).  In JG the Upper Tribunal carefully considered
    KO (Nigeria) and concluded (as set out in the headnote) that  s.117B(6)
    requires a tribunal to hypothesise that the  child  in  question  would
    leave the United Kingdom, even if this is not likely to be the  case  ,
    and ask whether it would be reasonable to expect her to do so.

56. This is not a case in which both parents are expected to leave the  UK.
    The mother is a British citizen and has clearly chosen to remain in the
    UK with S.  She has opted not to join the appellant in Nigeria and  has
    provided evidence that the family is simply unable to afford to do  so.
    The mother is not a Nigerian national and her unwillingness to go to  a
    country she has never been to and is not a national of, having  already
    left  the  country  of  her  birth  as  a  result  of  persecution,  is
    understandable.  S therefore finds herself  lawfully  living  with  her
    mother in the UK, her mother having made a decision to  remain  in  the
    UK.  S's best interests strongly favour remaining in  the  UK  and  her
    mother's decision must be viewed in this context.

57. S continues to suffer the  deleterious  consequences  (financially  and
    emotionally) of not living with her father.   The  natural  expectation
    might be for a young child to  accompany  her  mother  in  joining  her
    father in Nigeria, but S is nearly 15.  In any event, as set out  above
    we are required to hypothesise that S would leave the  United  Kingdom,
    even though it is very clear that she has not left  (even  though  that
    has meant separation from her father since his removal)  and  will  not
    leave.  We are satisfied that it will be very difficult for S to adjust
    to life in Nigeria at her age  and  stage  of  education,  particularly
    bearing in mind the difficult and unstable conditions the appellant  is
    living under in Nigeria.  We acknowledge that S  is  unlikely  to  have
    language issues in Nigeria as English is her first language but she  is
    likely to suffer as a result of the disruption to her long-standing and
    settled academic and social environment. When all the circumstances  of
    the case are viewed cumulatively including S's age; stage of education;
    best interests; choices made by her mother and reasons for them; likely
    difficult family circumstances in Nigeria; we  are  satisfied  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect S to leave the UK.  We also note that
    there has been no dispute that although the appellant has  lived  apart
    from K and S for over two years their relationship remains genuine  and
    subsisting. As such,  and  in  accordance  with  s.117B(6)  the  public
    interest does not require the appellant's removal.

58. This appellant has already been removed pursuant to the "remove  first,
    appeal later" provisions.  It cannot be properly (and was  not)  argued
    that a person who is removed on the basis of being a  foreign  criminal
    but is subsequently found not  to  be  such,  cannot  benefit  from  an
    application of s.117B(6) when a tribunal considers his out  of  country
    appeal.

Conclusion

59. We are therefore satisfied that:

          i) The appellant is not a foreign criminal;

         ii) It cannot properly be said that he is liable to deportation;

        iii) The appellant has a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with
             S, a qualifying child;

         iv) It would not be reasonable to expect S to leave the UK.

60. It follows that the appellant meets the requirements  of  s.117B(6)  of
    the 2002 Act.  The structured approach to ss. 117A-117D produces in all
    cases a final result which is compatible with, and not in violation  of
    Article 8 of the ECHR - see [36] of Rhuppiah v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2018] UKSC 58.  We therefore allow the appellant's
    Article 8 appeal.

Decision

61. We remake the decision by allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 12 March 2019

