
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: HU/14629/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                                                        |
|Decision and Reasons Promulgated                                            |
|On 9 April 2018                                                             |
|On 18 April 2018                                                            |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JOHN FREEMAN

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ABADUR RAHMAN CHOWDHURY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr A R Islam, chambers of Aminul R Islam

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a Home Office appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Susan Clarke,  sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  6  November  2017,
    allowing an appeal by a citizen of Bangladesh refused leave  to  remain
    under the ten-year partner route.  This appellant was born in 1984, and
    arrived here in 2010 on a student visa valid until 2016.  In the course
    of a renewal application in 2012, he filed a TOEIC ETS English language
    test certificate with his application.  In 2015, apparently  for  other
    reasons, his leave to remain was curtailed with removal directions, and
    on 9 March 2016 he applied for further leave to remain on  private  and
    family life grounds.  On 26 May that was refused for  various  reasons.
    The one with which I am concerned was the first, which  relied  on  the
    fact that his ETS language test result had been cancelled on the  basis
    of evidence showing he had taken the test by proxy.
2.   The judge considered the evidence,  and  referred  to  various  decided
    cases up to Nawaz [2017] UKUT 288  (IAC)  in  relating  it.   She  also
    referred to the respondent's evidence, which included specific evidence
    about the result obtained at the test centre in question on the day the
    appellant took his test, which was 29 August 2012.   92%  of  all  that
    day's results at  that  centre  were  shown  to  be  invalid,  and  the
    remaining 8% all questionable.  None were regarded as acceptable.

3.   There is a reference to the usual generic evidence, and then the  judge
    deals with the appellant's own evidence.   She  accepts  that,  dealing
    with how he went to the centre and the way in which he took  his  test,
    and says this "I have considered very  carefully  the  account  as  set
    against the invalid score against his  test  number,  but  I  find  the
    appellant has been a credible witness".

4.   It may be difficult, with evidence of  two  different  kinds,  in  this
    case the scientific evidence about the invalidity of the test  and  the
    appellant's own evidence about how he took it,  for  a  judge  to  give
    intelligible  reasons  for  explaining  why.  However  there   is   the
    additional factor, which the judge did  not  take  account  of  in  her
    decision paragraph, that, of the tests taken that day at  that  centre,
    none were shown to be valid, and only 8% even questionable.   While  it
    was open for the judge, after a proper assessment of  the  evidence  on
    both sides to accept the evidence that the appellant did take the  test
    himself, in my view she did not give satisfactory reasons for doing so.



5.   There is another point, which is that  the  judge  allowed  the  appeal
    without referring to the Human Rights Convention, human rights  grounds
    or ss. 117A to D of the 2002 Act at all.  By the date of  the  decision
    in question there was only one ground which  an  appeal  of  this  kind
    could be allowed which was that the decision had been in breach of  the
    applicant's human rights.  Although not everything had to be spelt out,
    the very least that the judge had needed to do,  as  set  out  in  Dube
    [2015] UKUT 90, was to address the s.117 considerations  in  substance.
    While there might or might not have  been  material  before  the  judge
    which would have justified allowing an appeal on that basis, she failed
    to explain why she was doing so at all, and did not even go so  far  as
    to say that she was allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.

6.   For both those reasons the decision is set aside. In view of  the  need
    for oral evidence,  there will have to be a fresh hearing,  which  will
    take place at Taylor House before another first-tier judge.

Home Office appeal allowed: first-tier decision set aside
Fresh hearing at Taylor House before a first-tier judge, not Judge Clarke
                                                                       [pic]
                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)

                                                        Dated: 17 April 2018
