
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/14893/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 7 February 2019              |On 13 February 2019             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                CHARLENE [W]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRCETION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Corban, Solicitor (Corban Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.     Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Hodgkinson on 27 December 2018 against the decision to dismiss  the
         Appellant's Article 8 ECHR appeal made by First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Beg in a decision and reasons promulgated on 13 August  2018.   The
         Appellant is a national of Nigeria, who had sought  existing  leave
         to remain under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules,  i.e.,  10
         years' continuous lawful residence.

    2.     Judge Beg found that the Appellant had not shown  that  she  met
         the Immigration Rules.  There was too large a gap  in  her  claimed
         continuity of lawful leave.  Nor  could  the  Appellant  show  that
         could satisfy the requirements of Appendix FM because  her  British
         Citizen partner and sponsor was unable to meet the minimum earnings
         level prescribed.  The Appellant's child was a British Citizen  but
         her best interests were to  remain  with  her  mother  who  had  no
         continuing right to remain in the United Kingdom. The child, mother
         and father could all live in Nigeria, as the mother and father held
         Nigerian nationality, had lived in Nigeria  previously  and  had  a
         network of family support there.  The  child  (born  on  9  October
         2017) was young enough to adapt and it was in effect reasonable for
         the child to go to Nigeria with her parents.  There was no  Article
         8 ECHR disproportionality in such circumstances. Hence  the  appeal
         was dismissed.

    3.     When permission to appeal was granted it was  noted  that  there
         was no challenge to the judge's finding  that  the  long  residence
         provisions of paragraph 276B had not been  met.   Nevertheless,  as
         was submitted, it was arguable that the judge failed to conduct  an
         adequate Article 8 ECHR balancing exercise, had failed to recognise
         the best interests of the British Citizen child  and  had  not  had
         regard to Home Office guidance.

    4.     There was no rule 24 notice from the Respondent but Ms Isherwood
         indicated at the start of the hearing that the appeal was opposed.

    5.     Mr  Corban  for  the  Appellant  confirmed  that  there  was  no
         challenge to the dismissal of the continuous lawful long  residence
         claim.  He relied  on  the  grounds  submitted  and  the  grant  of
         permission  to  appeal.   No  adequate  Article  8  ECHR  balancing
         exercise had been conducted.  The judge had approached the case  on
         the basis that both parents would  be  removed,  whereas  only  the
         mother faced removal.  There was a very strong expectation that the
         British Citizen child's best interests will be  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom, which  was  Home  Office  policy.   The  judge  had
         misunderstood Appendix FM which the Appellant could  satisfy.   The
         judge  had  ignored  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  husband's
         relationship with his other child living in the United Kingdom  and
         had  not  considered  the  reasonableness  of  separation  of   the
         Appellant's child from either the Appellant or the child's  father.
         Discussion and dialogue followed with Mr Corban, who contended that
         the decision disclosed material errors of law  and  should  be  set
         aside. The appeal should be allowed and the decision remade in  the
         Appellant's favour.

    6.     Ms Isherwood for the Respondent relied on  KO  (Nigeria)  [2018]
         UKSC 53, which in effect the judge  had  anticipated  although  the
         Supreme Court's decision clarifying the law had  been  handed  down
         after the promulgation of the First-tier Tribunal's  determination.
         After considering all of the evidence  and  examining  the  child's
         best interests, the judge had decided that it  was  reasonable  for
         the child to go to Nigeria with her parents.   That  was  a  choice
         open to them and was a "real world" choice.  The  judge  had  found
         that  Appendix  FM  was  not  met:  not  only  were  the  financial
         requirements not satisfied, no application in the  prescribed  form
         had been made: R-LTRP1.1(c) applied.  The judge had  addressed  all
         of the submissions made in the skeleton argument presented  at  the
         First-tier Tribunal hearing.  Evidence  had  been  taken  from  the
         Appellant's partner and the judge had reached conclusions  open  to
         her.  The appeal should be dismissed.

    7.     The main focus of the First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  was  on  the
         paragraph 276B claim.  That was dismissed by the judge  with  clear
         findings and sound reasons, which have not been challenged.

    8.     The judge's consideration of  the  alternative  claim  based  on
         family life was attacked at some  length  by  Mr  Corban,  somewhat
         artificially in the tribunal's view.  It  is,  for  example,  clear
         that the judge accepted that the Appellant was not  an  overstayer:
         see [27] of the decision.  Nor was any other alleged error of  fact
         shown.  The Appellant  was  unable  to  meet  Appendix  FM,  as  Ms
         Isherwood correctly emphasised, although there  was  no  suggestion
         that the Appellant would never be able to do so, which is obviously
         relevant for proportionality purposes.

    9.     Mr Corban's submissions about compliance with Appendix  FM  were
         plainly  wrong,  as  the  tribunal  pointed  out  at  the  hearing.
         Similarly, his submission that the judge  had  not  considered  the
         evidence about the Appellant's husband's other  child  was  equally
         wrong.  The judge noted  the  husband's  evidence  at  [8]  of  the
         determination and explained the findings she reached at [21] of the
         determination.  They were open to her on the evidence presented.

    10.    As the British Citizen child's father is also a British Citizen,
         it was and is obvious that the child concerned  does  not  have  to
         leave the United Kingdom and Judge Beg made no such suggestion.  It
         is a question of "real world" choice for the parents, choices which
         include the Appellant's making an application under Appendix FM for
         entry clearance application, sponsored by her husband, or of  going
         to live in Nigeria as a family, which is the cultural background of
         the parents (both of whom are Nigerian citizens) and  their  child,
         who must also be entitled to Nigerian  nationality.  There  was  no
         evidence identified before the First-tier Tribunal judge  that  the
         process  of  obtaining  entry  clearance   would   necessarily   be
         protracted or that the child would suffer harm as the result  of  a
         temporary separation from either parent. As the  judge  found  that
         the Appellant's husband had not proven that  he  had  contact  with
         another child of his living in the United  Kingdom,  either  choice
         was demonstrably open to the couple.  The key fact was  the  choice
         of the venue for the couple's family life was not  one  which  they
         could dictate absent compliance with the Immigration Rules or  very
         compelling circumstances outside the rules, which the  judge  found
         did not exist.

    11.    As noted above, the judge carefully considered  the  Appellant's
         child's best interests and reached sustainable  conclusions  as  to
         the  reasonableness  of  the  child's  departure  from  the  United
         Kingdom. In the tribunal's  judgment,  the  experienced  First-tier
         Tribunal  judge  produced  a  full  and   balanced   determination,
         reflecting  current  law  such  as  KO  (Nigeria),  which  securely
         resolved the live issues. The tribunal  finds  that  there  was  no
         error of law and the onwards appeal must be dismissed.

    DECISION

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    There was no  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision and reasons, which stands unchanged.




    Signed Dated 7 February 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
