
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/14345/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 1 March 2019                      |On 6 March 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 LABH SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 18 September  2018,  FtT  Judge  MacKenzie
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against refusal of his application for
    leave to remain in the UK on family and private life grounds.

 2. The grounds of appeal are:

         1 - error when assessing insurmountable obstacles:

         The FtT erred ... at [42] ... the finding that the appellant's wife
         would not  face  very  significant  difficulty  is  not  adequately
         supported ... the country information demonstrated there  would  be
         very significant difficulties in terms of violence, harassment  and
         discrimination faced  by  women  in  India  ...  the  appellant  is
         prejudiced as he does not know why the FtT reached such a finding.

         2 -  errors in assessing proportionality:

         (i)  the  FtT  erred  at  [52-53]  by  failing  to  recognize  that
         insurmountable obstacles is a test under the immigration rules  but
         only a factor when assessing proportionality ...  and  that  simply
         because it has found ... no insurmountable obstacles  that  is  not
         determinative of the proportionality assessment ... the FtT  failed
         to step back and consider  whether  the  decision  is  nevertheless
         disproportionate where the appellant's wife will be separated  from
         her family; the parties have accommodation; the appellant's wife is
         suffering from mental health issues;  the  prognosis  is  that  her
         mental health  will  deteriorate  if  she  has  to  move  to  India
         (notwithstanding it was accepted there were facilities for  her  to
         be treated); she has limited  ties  with  India;  and  the  country
         conditions she would face ...;

         (ii) the FtT erred ... at [48] and [52]  by  failing  to  recognize
         that although little weight can be given to the appellant's  family
         life, that can be overridden where there is a  sufficiently  strong
         case ...;

         (iii) the FtT erred ... at [51] as there was no evidence  ...  that
         the appellant was a burden on the state.

 3. Mr Winter submitted further to ground 1 along those lines.   There  had
    been a previous tribunal decision adverse to the  appellant.   However,
    the principal matter on which he later relied was the fragile state  of
    his wife's mental and emotional health, the couple's child having  died
    shortly after birth.  This occurred  after  the  previous  proceedings.
    Her distress was spoken to by her mother and sister and was the subject
    of reports from a psychologist  and  a  psychiatrist.   The  references
    provided in ground 1 showed the difficulties and  discrimination  faced
    by women in India.  There was a lacuna at [42] of the  decision,  which
    stated a conclusion but no reasons.  The decision also paid  inadequate
    regard to the evidence of the potential impact of moving  to  India  on
    the  sponsor's  mental  health,  in  the  context   of   her   relative
    unfamiliarity with India and her extensive reliance on  family  support
    in the UK.  The FtT had not grappled with the impact of separating  the
    sponsor from her family and requiring her to move to a new environment.

 4. Turning to ground 2, Mr Winter said that even if the case did not reach
    the  insurmountable  obstacles  test,  there  were  additional  matters
    relevant to proportionality, outside the rules.   He  referred  to  the
    respondent's delay in removing the appellant.

 5. Mr Govan submitted that general discrimination against women  in  India
    had not been the focus of the appeal in the  FtT  and  was  not  highly
    relevant  in  a  human  rights  case.   Gender  violence  might  be   a
    significant  problem,  but  there  was  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant was likely to become a victim.  The  judge  referred  to  the
    previous tribunal decision, and took the matter for  her  consideration
    as the change of  circumstances.   That  was  the  correct  focus,  and
    everything relevant was taken into account, including the mental health
    diagnosis.  The judge noted the appellant's family  support,  but  also
    that by the date of the hearing there had been a degree of  improvement
    in  her  mental  health.   Treatment  was  not  ongoing,  and  it   was
    acknowledged for the appellant that  medical  treatment  (although  not
    direct family support) would be available in India.  Ground 1 disclosed
    no error.

 6. I did not need to hear from the respondent on ground 2.

 7. In reply, Mr Winter said that the country information was  relevant  to
    the human rights grounds in this case; although the judge  referred  to
    that information, she failed to explain what she made of it; and on the
    principal issue, which was the separation of  the  appellant  from  her
    family and her environment, the decision was unreasoned.

 8. I reserved my decision.

 9. The general difficulties for women in India which were in evidence were
    not difficulties which were likely to be acute for the appellant, as an
    educated  woman  relocating  there  with  her  husband.  There  is   no
    deficiency in [42], which makes it clear to the appellant why the judge
    resolved that point as she did.

10. There were difficulties in the way of the sponsor relocating to  India,
    but those were recognised by the judge at [39] in terms of  her  mental
    health, at [40] in terms of her close relationship with her mother  and
    three  sisters  in  the  Glasgow  area,  and  at  [41]  in   terms   of
    inconvenience and a period of adjustment.  Rather than showing that the
    judge failed to deal with such matters, the  appellant's  complaint  is
    that they did not yield a different result.  The sponsor has had a hard
    time in recent years, and it is understandable that she does  not  wish
    to move to  India.   The  difficulties  in  her  way  might  be  termed
    significant.  The judge concluded at [41] and [43] that they  were  not
    "very significant difficulties that could not be overcome or that would
    involve very serious hardship".  That conclusion was open to  her,  and
    it has not been shown that the reaching of it involved  the  making  of
    any error on a point of law.

11. There was nothing in the case by which it might have  succeeded,  other
    than by showing insurmountable obstacles.  Ground 2 (i) repeats matters
    relevant to that issue, and (ii) and (iii) are not matters which  might
    come close to tipping the balance.  Mr Winter founded  also  on  delay,
    but there has been no delay by the respondent which might contribute to
    the appellant having a  right  to  remain.   He  entered  and  remained
    unlawfully,  has  never  established  a  right  to  be  here,  and  his
    immigration history (although not among the worst) is poor.

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

13. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]
      5 March 2019
      UT Judge Macleman
