
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15905/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 January 2020                            |On 10 March 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                               bir bahadur pun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss K McCarthy instructed by Everest Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision of the Respondent made on 13 April
    2018 to refuse him entry clearance to the United Kingdom.  The decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 26 June 2019 dismissing  that
    appeal was set aside by the Upper Tribunal for the reasons set out in a
    decision promulgated on 18 November 2019, a copy of which is attached.

 2. The issue in this case is relatively narrow: does there exist a  family
    life between the appellant and sponsor such that Article  8(1)  of  the
    Human Rights Convention is engaged?  The Secretary  of  State  concedes
    that if that is so, then the refusal of entry clearance  would  not  be
    proportionate given the historic injustice in the treatment of  Ghurkha
    families.

 3. I heard evidence from  the  sponsor  and  oral  submissions  from  both
    representatives.

 4. The sponsor (the appellant's mother) gave evidence in Nepali  with  the
    assistance of a court interpreter.  She adopted her witness  statement.
    She confirmed that she sends money to her son; that he  had  no  income
    from other sources; that he grows some crops but this was not enough to
    sustain him or his brother with whom he lived.  She confirmed that  the
    money transferred to him was for him and the brother, Hom  Kumar.   She
    said she was not planning to bring him to the United Kingdom but it was
    difficult for her now as she was elderly.  She said that they  had  not
    come in 2009 as it had not been possible at that point.

 5. The sponsor said she had not been to Nepal since 2018 but that  she  is
    illiterate and had to rely on  what  she  had  been  told  was  in  her
    passport.  She said she had no relatives in the  United  Kingdom.   She
    said that she did not know how to phone her son  and  that  she  needed
    help even to buy her own food.  Since she did  not  know  how  benefits
    worked or her bank account, or was not even able to withdraw money from
    her account and that her sight was bad.

 6. In cross-examination the sponsor said she did not know if she had  been
    in the United Kingdom since December 2010 other than it was written  in
    her passport.  She said that she had visited  Nepal  between  2010  and
    2017 and when she had done so  she  had  withdrawn  the  pension  money
    accrued and given it to her son.  She said it was difficult for her  to
    get by on benefit but  she  was  able  to  save  some  money.   It  was
    difficult for her to travel to Nepal but she just was able to do it.

 7. She confirmed that, as she had  said  in  her  witness  statement,  her
    husband's pension had not been enough after  he  retired  and  so  they
    relied partially on agriculture.  She confirmed that she had said in  a
    previous hearing her son had done some farming job but this was a  very
    small farm; it was not in the right location; that the ground was  very
    steep.  She said that she suffered a lot and wished she could  go  back
    but it was no longer the right place for her.  She said that she was on
    her own now and that if her son come he would be able to help  her  and
    look after her.  There  was  no  re-examination.   In  response  to  my
    questions the sponsor said that people were able to help her  with  her
    bank account and to help her make phone calls to her son using Viber.

 8. She said that she did not know if her son  spoke  English  but  thought
    that he would be able to get a job if he came to the United Kingdom but
    was not sure what type of job.

 9. In submissions, Miss McCarthy relied on  Rai  submitting  that  on  the
    facts as proven the appellant met that test; and, that AAO v ECO [2011]
    EWCA Civ 840 could be distinguishable  as  facts.   She  admitted  that
    there  was  here  a  financial  dependence  as  well  as  an  emotional
    dependence; that the family had formed a unit until the husband's death
    and  thereafter.   She  submitted  that  the  farming  that  had   been
    undertaken by the  appellant  was  subsistence  farming,  not  just  an
    income, it was necessary for him and  his  brother  to  live  on.   She
    submitted that Article 8(1) was engaged and,  in  light  of  the  clear
    historical justice, it would be disproportionate to refuse entry.

10. Mr Tufan submitted that there was no longer family life in  this  case,
    properly applying the law to the facts and that, the appeal fell to  be
    dismissed on that basis.  He did, however, concede that  where  Article
    8(1) met, then in light of the historic injustice he had nothing to say
    with regards to proportionality under Article 8(2).

The Law

11. It is accepted that the appellant does not meet the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules.  This case is argued solely on the  basis  that  the
    refusal of entry clearance to the appellant is contrary to  his  rights
    pursuant to Article 8(1) of the Human Rights Convention.   Accordingly,
    I must take into account Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

12. As was noted in Rai v  ECO,  New  Delhi  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  320,  legal
    principles are not  controversial  as  regards  whether  Article  8  is
    engaged.  The Court of Appeal said this:-

         17. In Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003]
         EWCA Civ 31, Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 17 of his judgment)
         that "if dependency is read down as meaning "support", in the
         personal sense, and if one adds, echoing the Strasbourg
         jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or "effective" to the word
         "support", then it represents ... the irreducible minimum of what
         family life implies". Arden L.J. said (in paragraph 24 of her
         judgment) that the "relevant factors ... include identifying who
         are the near relatives of the appellant, the nature of the links
         between them and the appellant, the age of the appellant, where and
         with whom he has resided in the past, and the forms of contact he
         has maintained with the other members of the family with whom he
         claims to have a family life". She acknowledged (at paragraph 25)
         that "there is no presumption of family life". Thus "a family life
         is not established between an adult child and his surviving parent
         or other siblings unless something more exists than normal
         emotional ties". She added that "[such] ties might exist if the
         appellant were dependent on his family or vice versa", but it was
         "not ... essential that the members of the family should be in the
         same country". In Patel and others v Entry Clearance Officer,
         Mumbai [2010] EWCA Civ 17, Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 14 of his
         judgment, with which Longmore and Aikens L.JJ. agreed) that "what
         may constitute an extant family life falls well short of what
         constitutes dependency, and a good many adult children ... may
         still have a family life with parents who are now settled here not
         by leave or by force of circumstance but by long-delayed right".


         18.  In Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) the Upper
         Tribunal accepted (in paragraph 56 of its determination) that the
         judgments in Kugathas had been "interpreted too restrictively in
         the past and ought to be read in the light of subsequent decisions
         of the domestic and Strasbourg courts", and (in paragraph 60) that
         "some of the [Strasbourg] Court's decisions indicate that family
         life between adult children and parents will readily be found,
         without evidence of exceptional dependence". It went on to say (in
         paragraph 61):


             "61. Recently, the [European Court of Human Rights] has
             reviewed the case law, in [AA v United Kingdom [2012] Imm.
             A.R.1], finding that a significant factor will be whether or
             not the adult child has founded a family of his own. If he is
             still single and living with his parents, he is likely to
             enjoy family life with them. ...".


         The Upper Tribunal set out the relevant passage in the court's
         judgment in AA v United Kingdom (in paragraphs 46 to 49), which
         ended with this (in paragraph 49):


             "49. An examination of the Court's case-law would tend to
             suggest that the applicant, a young adult of 24 years old, who
             resides with his mother and has not yet founded a family of
             his own, can be regarded as having "family life"."


         19.  Ultimately, as Lord Dyson M.R. emphasized when giving the
         judgment of the court in Gurung (at paragraph 45), "the question
         whether an individual enjoys family life is one of fact and depends
         on a careful consideration of all the relevant facts of the
         particular case". In some instances "an adult child (particularly
         if he does not have a partner or children of his own) may establish
         that he has a family life with his parents". As Lord Dyson M.R.
         said, "[it] all depends on the facts". The court expressly endorsed
         (at paragraph 46), as "useful" and as indicating "the correct
         approach to be adopted", the Upper Tribunal's review of the
         relevant jurisprudence in paragraphs 50 to 62 of its determination
         in Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy), including its
         observation (at paragraph 62) that "[the] different outcomes in
         cases with superficially similar features emphasises to us that the
         issue under Article 8(1) is highly fact-sensitive".


         20.   To similar effect were these observations of Sir Stanley
         Burnton in Singh v Secretary of State for the Home Department
         [2015] EWCA Civ 630 (in paragraph 24 of his judgment):


             "24. I do not think that the judgments to which I have
             referred lead to any difficulty in determining the correct
             approach to Article 8 in cases involving adult children. In
             the case of adults, in the context of immigration control,
             there is no legal or factual presumption as to the existence
             or absence of family life for the purposes of Article 8. I
             point out that the approach of the European Commission for
             Human Rights cited approvingly in Kugathas did not include any
             requirement of exceptionality. It all depends on the facts.
             The love and affection between an adult and his parents or
             siblings will not of itself justify a finding of a family
             life. There has to be something more. A young adult living
             with his parents or siblings will normally have a family life
             to be respected under Article 8. A child enjoying a family
             life with his parents does not suddenly cease to have a family
             life at midnight as he turns 18 years of age. On the other
             hand, a young adult living independently of his parents may
             well not have a family life for the purposes of Article 8."


13. I have no reason to doubt the evidence of  the  sponsor  which  is  not
    directly challenged in submissions.  I accept  that  she  is  still  in
    receipt of a widow's pension as a result of her  husband's  service  in
    the Ghurkhas.  I accept also that this money is handed  over  regularly
    to the appellant and his brother to support them  in  Nepal.   Applying
    the  principles  set  out  above,  I  accept  that  family  life  would
    necessarily have existed between the appellant,  his  brother  and  his
    parents while they were under  18.   I  accept  also  given  that  they
    remained unmarried and continued to live in  the  same  household  this
    family life continued.  After the father's death, the appellant and his
    brother continued to live in the same household with their mother until
    2010 when the sponsor came to the United Kingdom.  At  that  point  the
    appellant was 44 years old.  His mother was 70.

14. It is inevitable that the pattern of dependency within  a  parent/child
    relationship changes; as the child  matures  he  or  she  becomes  less
    dependent but equally as a parent  ages  then  the  parent  may  become
    dependent, emotionally and/or financially, on the by now  adult  child.
    I have no reason to doubt the account I have given of a  family  living
    in a remote, poor area where the family relied on  subsistence  farming
    to prodice some of the food they ate but primarily were reliant on  the
    widow's pension paid for military service.  Viewing the evidence  as  a
    whole, including that of the sponsor and appellant, I am satisfied that
    certainly when the sponsor left the United Kingdom there  continued  to
    exist a family life between the appellant and the sponsor  albeit  that
    the reality is the sponsor is becoming  more  dependent  on  her  adult
    sons.

15. Further, I have no reason to doubt  the  evidence  that  the  financial
    dependency existed and that there was no possibility of any  employment
    for the appellant given his lack of connections, education and lack  of
    any skills over and above subsistence farming.  There  was  clearly  at
    that point financial and emotional dependence albeit  that  the  latter
    was co-dependence between the appellant  and  sponsor.   There  was,  I
    accept, committed and effective support.

16. There was a change in circumstances after that.  The mother decided  to
    leave Nepal and settle in the United Kingdom as in  Rai  and  I  accept
    that at that, as there, they did so because of  the  previous  historic
    injustice (see Rai at [41] to [43]). I also accept that the reason they
    did not do so earlier was due to them being unable to do so.

17. Turning to the situation now, I accept that  the  sponsor  is  in  poor
    health.  I accept also that  she  is  illiterate  and  does  not  speak
    English.  It is inevitable, in the circumstances, that she is dependent
    on others for most of  the  activities  of  day-to-day  life  including
    claiming benefits and operating her bank account.  I accept her account
    of being assisted to make phone calls  via  Viber  to  her  son  and  a
    substantial number of transcripts has been provided covering  the  last
    year.  No challenge is made to these and  I  am  satisfied  that  these
    indicate that there continues to be regular communication  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor.

18. I find that the sponsor is isolated in the United Kingdom as she has no
    family with her.  She is,  I  accept,  in  a  difficult  position  and,
    consistent with her culture and background wishes to have  the  support
    of her son.  Given the level of contact between the two, I am satisfied
    on a balance of probabilities that she is now emotionally dependent  on
    him albeit the financial support she receives is partly from the United
    Kingdom government and that the pension she receives now  goes  to  the
    son.   There  is,  I  find,  an  inter-dependency,  the  sponsor  being
    emotionally dependant on her son, the son being reliant on funds  given
    by his mother. Whether that is of necessity is not clear.

19. I accept that they are no longer in the same country  but  that  in  my
    view does not mean there is no relationship of dependence.  The sponsor
    is now 80 and I accept has no relatives to whom she  can  turn  in  the
    United Kingdom.

20. Taking all of these factors into account I am satisfied that as at  the
    date of application and now there exists  a  family  life  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor.  Accordingly, I am  satisfied  that  Article
    8(1) is engaged.

21. I now turn to the issue of proportionality.  It is not  suggested  that
    the decision was not in accordance with the law and I note that this is
    a case in which the sole issue is now proportionality.  Mr  Tufan  made
    no submissions that, where Article 8(1) engaged, that the refusal would
    be proportionate.  That  is  because  of  the  historic  injustice  and
    accordingly, Section 117B notwithstanding, I am satisfied that for that
    reason that the public interest which would otherwise exist in refusing
    entry clearance given that the appellant does not speak  English,  does
    not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  would  not  be
    self-sufficient is outweighed on these particular facts.

22. For these reasons, I remake the appeal by allowing the appeal on  human
    rights grounds.

Addendum

23. It is of some concern that the  appellant's  solicitors  in  this  case
    submitted a bundle which, although it bore an index  relating  to  this
    case, consisted entirely of material relating to another case.  I  have
    not read it. Whether or not that is a "data loss" or whether there  has
    been a breach of the duty  of  confidentiality  is  a  matter  for  the
    appellant's solicitors.

Notice of Decision

1.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside.

2.   I remake the appeal by allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.

3.   There is no anonymity order.


Signed                                  Date 10 February 2020
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
                       ANNEXE - ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15905/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 12 November 2019                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |.................            |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                               Bir Bahadur pun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy, Counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against a  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to refuse him entry clearance to the United  Kingdom.
    The application was made on the basis that the appellant is the son  of
    a former Gurkha whose mother had been granted indefinite leave to enter
    in 2010 on the basis of the prehistoric injustice by which Gurkhas were
    not allowed to settle in the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant's father ceased  to  be  a  Gurkha  as  long  ago  as  14
    September 1968.  He had been married in 1960 and the appellant's mother
    is now 80 years of age.  The appellant's father died in 1992,  and  was
    only in 2010 that the appellant's mother was granted leave to enter.

 3. The hearing proceeded on the basis, as is noted at paragraph  11,  that
    the appellant could not meet the requirements of Appendix  FM  and  the
    appeal was pursued on an Article 8 only basis.  The Secretary of  State
    was not represented at the hearing and the judge did put  a  number  of
    questions himself.  The judge directed himself at paragraph 20 in  line
    with Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 but does not appear to have  addressed
    anything more of the subsequent cases addressing the  issue  of  family
    life such as  Ghising (family life - adults  -  Gurkha  policy)  [2012]
    UKUT 00160 (IAC) before going on to make findings.

 4. In this case the judge found at paragraph [21]:-

         "I find on the particular facts of this case, that family life  has
         not been established.  The appellant  was  an  adult  male  in  his
         forties, when the sponsor applied  for  settlement  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  He had no particular vulnerabilities or  health  problems
         that would have made him dependent upon his  mother  in  adulthood,
         and as the respondent says, would  have  been  caring  for  himself
         independently and fully fit and capable of leading  an  independent
         life and working at that point."

 5. The judge then went on to consider matters in the  alternative  in  the
    remainder of paragraph [21] noting that it was a choice that  had  been
    made.  This would not have happened if there was in fact a relationship
    where bonds and ties of mutual dependencies that went  over  and  above
    the normal relationship, nor would they have waited eight years for the
    appellant to apply if the need to be reunited  was  so  pressing.   The
    judge  also  concluded  that  there  was  no  emotional  or   financial
    dependency relationship that had continued, nor did he accept that  the
    appellant needed the emotional support of his mother,  but  rather  the
    situation was the reverse.

 6. The judge also then found at [23] there  were  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence.  He went on to conclude that Article 8(1) was not engaged and
    then did not consider Article 8(2).

 7. The grounds are twofold: first, there is a submission  that  the  judge
    failed to apply the correct  test  of  the  threshold  of  family  life
    between adults; failed to consider evidence  and  made  errors  in  the
    treatment of the mother's evidence; and second, that the judge erred in
    not conducting  a  proper  proportionality  exercise  with  respect  to
    Article 8(2).

 8. I turn first to the submissions regarding Article 8(1).   Miss  Everett
    for the Secretary of State submits that there was a proper finding that
    the family life had not been shown to exist prior to departure  of  the
    mother.  I have considered that submission and I conclude  that  whilst
    if there had been a proper finding to that effect then the rest of  the
    challenge raised by the appellant  would  have  fallen  away,  but  the
    findings are insufficiently rigorous.  What there is not in  this  case
    is any consideration of what  the  situation  was  in  a  chronological
    order.  Whilst there are comments made about what was going on in Nepal
    in paragraph 23 these do not appear  to  have  been  brought  into  the
    circumstances of family life being established.  It is an obvious point
    that in this case it is evident that family life must have  existed  at
    some point in the past.  There is no submission to the contrary but the
    question is if and whether that had ceased to exist.  The thrust of the
    judge's comments at [21] are that family life had not been  established
    at the relevant time, that is the date of hearing or application.   The
    failure to find facts is also evident at paragraph 21 where  the  judge
    says that even if the family were all still living together, but  again
    there are no findings on this.  I accept the submission that the  judge
    has erred in a number of respects with regard to whether  there  was  a
    choice, whether they would have waited eight years, and in finding that
    there  was  no  relationship   of   emotional,   financial   dependency
    continuing.

 9. There is a confusion of  an  emotional  relationship  which  one  would
    expect to exist between a  mother  and  an  adult  child  with  one  of
    dependency and it may be that the judge did not properly  consider  the
    law on this point.  Further points made are that the judge did not take
    into account oral evidence in making findings with regard to  the  lack
    of financial dependency at  paragraph  25,  and  whilst  one  of  these
    factors is and of itself definitive or determinative, I  conclude  that
    viewing the decision as a whole it  is  not  possible  to  sustain  the
    findings reached by the judge with respect  to  Article  8(1)  and  the
    existence or not of family life.

10. Given that I have found the background is  made  out  it  follows  that
    ground 2 is also made out as it may be necessary to remake the decision
    on that point.

Notice of Decision

 1. For these reasons I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for it to be remade.

 2. Having canvassed the opinions of both representatives I  consider  that
    it is best retained in the Upper Tribunal for a further  hearing  which
    will require oral evidence from the  appellant  as  well  as  from  the
    Sponsor.

 3. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  18 November 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
