
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15791/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On : 22 March 2021                           |On : 7 April 2021             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                             love wlehnee logan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Tettey, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Liberia, born on 21 May 2001. She  appeals,
   with  permission,  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal
   dismissing her human rights appeal.

2. The appellant applied, on 1 May 2019,  for  entry  clearance  to  the  UK
   under Appendix FM of the immigration rules as the  child  of  her  father
   Preston Logan, the sponsor, a British citizen residing  in  the  UK.  The
   respondent refused the application on 19 August 2019 on the grounds  that
   it was not accepted that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  were  related  as
   claimed and it was not accepted that the sponsor had sole  responsibility
   for the appellant's upbringing, or that there were serious or  compelling
   circumstances which made her exclusion  from  the  UK  undesirable.   The
   respondent also considered that were no exceptional circumstances leading
   to unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant for the purposes of
   Article 8.

3. The appellant appealed against that decision and her appeal was heard  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Gould on 5 October 2020. The sponsor gave  oral
   evidence before the judge. His evidence was that he had initially entered
   the UK in 1999 and had been granted exceptional leave to remain  in  July
   2000. He had returned to Liberia twice since the  appellant's  birth,  in
   2007 and 2017. The appellant had been living with his mother  in  Liberia
   and had been cared for by her since birth, but his mother had passed away
   in 2016 and he therefore wanted the appellant to  join  him  in  the  UK.
   After his mother died, his sister and her six  children  moved  into  the
   family home, but  his  sister  could  not  continue  to  look  after  the
   appellant as she had her own caring responsibilities. The  appellant  had
   since gone to stay with a family friend in Ghana whilst making her  entry
   clearance application. The sponsor explained that it  had  taken  him  to
   2019 to make the application  as  he  had  been  badly  affected  by  his
   mother's death and had been gathering the relevant documentation.

4. The judge accepted that the sponsor was the appellant's  father,  but  he
   considered that the appellant's grandmother had exercised  responsibility
   for her for most of her life and that the sponsor had exercised no degree
   of control over her welfare. The judge considered  that  the  arrangement
   made for the sponsor's sister to move into the  family  house  after  his
   mother's death was further evidence of the appellant's care  and  welfare
   being met by persons other than the sponsor. The  judge  considered  that
   the fact that the sponsor allowed almost three years to  pass  after  his
   mother's death before making  the  entry  clearance  application  further
   demonstrated that the appellant's care and welfare was met by others. The
   judge did not accept that the appellant's mother had disappeared, but  in
   any event found that the sponsor's interest in  his  daughter's  progress
   from time to time and his provision of financial  support  from  time  to
   time, and the fact  that  the  sponsor  had  belatedly  taken  a  limited
   interest in the appellant's  life  in  advance  of  the  entry  clearance
   application lodged just before  her  18th  birthday,  did  not  meet  the
   threshold for 'sole responsibility'. The judge  considered  further  that
   there  were  no  serious  or  compelling  circumstances  which  made  the
   appellant's exclusion from the UK undesirable and that  the  respondent's
   decision was a proportionate one and was not in breach of the appellant's
   Article 8 rights. He accordingly dismissed the appeal.

5. The appellant sought permission to appeal the decision on  the  following
   basis: that the judge had failed to  apply  the  proper  test  for  'sole
   responsibility' in TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility")  Yemen
   [2006] UKAIT 00049; that the judge had misdirected  himself  by  implying
   that the sponsor needed to demonstrate a longer history of  control  over
   the appellant's life; that the judge had erred by failing  to  take  into
   account relevant information such  as  the  sponsor's  oral  evidence  in
   relation to his access to the appellant's school reports, his role in the
   appellant's medical treatment and his reasons for the delay in making the
   entry clearance application; that  the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
   reasons  for  rejecting  the   sponsor's   evidence   about   his   daily
   communication with the appellant and the sponsor's sister's evidence that
   she was unable to care for the appellant in the long-term; that there was
   a lack of clarity in the judge's finding in  regard  to  the  appellant's
   mother; and that the judge failed to consider that the appellant  was  in
   Ghana, supported by the sponsor and awaiting the  outcome  of  her  entry
   clearance application.

6. Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal  on  26  November  2020
   and the matter then came before me for a remote hearing.

Hearing and submissions

7. The parties made submissions before me. Mr  Tettey  relied  and  expanded
   upon the grounds of appeal and submitted that the  judge's  decision  was
   unsustainable owing to numerous errors of law and ought to be  set  aside
   and the case remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. Mr Tan  submitted  that
   the judge's decision was sustainable and that he had applied the  correct
   test for 'sole responsibility' and had undertaken a  holistic  assessment
   of 'sole responsibility'. It was open to the judge to conclude  that  the
   sponsor had taken a belated interest  in  the  appellant  which  was  not
   sufficient to demonstrate  sole  responsibility  and  that  the  evidence
   before the judge in support of the appellant's case was scant. Mr Tettey,
   in response, reiterated the points previously made, emphasising that  the
   sponsor had completed the same process as he had done  for  his  son  for
   whom he had previously successfully applied for entry clearance.

Discussion and conclusions

8. The first two grounds of  challenge  to  Judge  Gould's  decision  are  a
   failure to apply the appropriate test for 'sole  responsibility'  as  set
   out in TD (Yemen) by referring instead to "parental  responsibility"  and
   the requirements for a  history  of  control  by  the  sponsor  over  the
   appellant rather than a consideration of the position at the time of  the
   application. Indeed, it  was  on  the  basis  of  those  two  grounds  in
   particular that permission was granted. However, I do not consider either
   ground to be made out.

9. At [18(d)] and [18(g)], the judge referred to  'parental  responsibility'
   but that was in the context of  the  various  findings  he  made  on  the
   evidence at [18] which in turn formed part of his assessment  of  whether
   'sole responsibility' had been demonstrated. There is nothing to  suggest
   that  he  considered  the  relevant  test  to  be   that   of   'parental
   responsibility' and it is clear that he was well  aware  of  the  correct
   test. Neither is it correct  that  the  judge  required  there  to  be  a
   continuous history of responsibility by the sponsor. On the contrary  the
   judge was clearly aware of the claim that the circumstances changed  when
   the sponsor's mother died and her care for the appellant ceased  and  the
   claim  that  it  was  after  that  time  that  the  sponsor   took   sole
   responsibility for his daughter. However, that did not mean that  he  had
   to ignore the  situation  prior  to  the  sponsor's  mother's  death.  An
   assessment of the sponsor's role prior to his mother's death was  plainly
   of relevance to,  albeit  not  determinative  of,  his  role  thereafter.
   Indeed, at [18(l)] and  [18(m)]  the  judge  specifically  addressed  the
   situation after the death of the appellant's grandmother and  found  that
   the appellant's care and welfare was met by  other  family  members.  The
   judge found it relevant that, rather than seeking to have  the  appellant
   join him in the UK after her grandmother died, the appellant was left  in
   the care of another family member for  almost  three  years  and  he  was
   perfectly entitled to consider that as an  indication  of  the  sponsor's
   limited role in her life. I note that the sponsor's sister's evidence  in
   her written statement before the judge was, in fact,  that  she  and  her
   children had been living with the appellant in her mother's  house  prior
   to her mother's death, as is the  indication  in  the  sponsor's  written
   statement, albeit that was not the situation described to the  judge.  It
   seems to me that that serves further to fortify the judge's view  of  the
   limited nature of the sponsor's role in the appellant's life.

10. The appellant's grounds go on to make various assertions of failings  by
   the judge in regard to his consideration of the sponsor's oral  evidence,
   in relation to his awareness of the appellant's academic performance, his
   involvement in the appellant's medical treatment, his communication  with
   the appellant, his explanation for the delay in  making  the  application
   and his claim that his sister could no longer look after  the  appellant.
   However, those were all matters which the judge  clearly  considered  and
   referred to in his decision. What concerned the judge  was  the  lack  of
   relevant supporting evidence, the sponsor's limited knowledge  about  his
   daughter's education, the  fact  that  the  sponsor  had  only  seen  his
   daughter twice in her life and the fact that the  limited  evidence  that
   was  available  was  only  for  the  purposes  of  the  entry   clearance
   application. Indeed, as Mr Tan submitted, the evidence  of  communication
   was very recent and I note that the WhatsApp communications at  pages  34
   to 54 of the appeal bundle commenced shortly after  the  entry  clearance
   application was refused and relate largely  to  the  preparation  of  the
   appeal. Whilst the appellant's grounds  properly  assert,  as  previously
   mentioned, that it was the sponsor's role at the time of the  application
   rather than historically that was relevant, that did not  mean  that  the
   judge was not entitled to draw the adverse conclusions  that  he  did  at
   [18(p)] from the evident belated interest taken by the sponsor.

11. In all of the circumstances, and given the very limited  nature  of  the
   evidence produced, the judge was perfectly entitled to  find  that  there
   was insufficient evidence to demonstrate  that  the  sponsor  was  solely
   responsible for the appellant's upbringing and to  come  to  the  adverse
   conclusion that he did. He directed himself  properly  in  law  and  made
   appropriate findings based on the evidence before him. The grounds do not
   identify errors of law in his decision.

DECISION

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   an error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision. The decision
   to dismiss the appeal stands.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated:  25 March
2021
