
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/15593/2018
     HU/14893/2018
     HU/14890/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 April 2019                              |On 10 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Sachidanand [D]
                                   Bib [D]
                                    [S D]
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr C Jacob of Counsel, instructed by Ahmed Rahman
                    Carr Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    original appellants as the appellants herein.   The  first  and  second
    appellants are the parents of the third-named appellant who was born on
    5 February 2001.  They are citizens  of  Mauritius.   They  applied  to
    regularise their stay on 7 June 2017 on human rights grounds but  their
    applications were refused on 3 July 2018.  In  relation  to  the  third
    appellant the Secretary of State noted "You are under the  age  of  18,
    you have lived continuously in the UK  for  at  least  the  last  seven
    years, but it would be reasonable for you to leave the UK".  She  would
    be returning with her  parents  to  Mauritius  and  would  be  able  to
    reintegrate into Mauritian society.  The appellant failed to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules.  She did not meet
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) of the Rules as she was  not
    aged between 18 and under 25.  She did not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) having not lived continuously in the UK for at
    least twenty years.  There were no  exceptional  circumstances  despite
    the interfaith marriage between the third-named appellant's parents and
    the distress and anxiety  which  it  was  claimed  affected  the  third
    appellant.  There was treatment available in Mauritius for  depression.



2.   The appeal came before a First-tier Judge on 11  February  2019  a  few
    days after the appellant had turned 18.  The judge heard from all three
    appellants.  The first-named appellant explained how as a Hindu he  had
    married out of his faith with a Muslim and this had caused great  grief
    for the family.  The second appellant highlighted physical assaults  in
    her country of origin.  The third appellant spoke of her trauma  as  to
    what had happened to her in Mauritius and that she even avoided  French
    TV stations.  She spoke of her integration into the UK.  She was  doing
    A-levels but hoped to go to university in 2020.  Letters of support had
    been received including a report from a social  worker,  Sally  Deacon.
    It was accepted  in  paragraph  11  of  the  decision  that  the  third
    appellant had had nine years of schooling in the UK  and  although  now
    over 18 had been in the UK for over seven years.   Having  referred  to
    Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  the
    judge made positive  credibility  findings  in  respect  of  all  three
    appellants.  The account of animosity as  a  result  of  a  mixed-faith
    marriage was supported by independent agencies and the medical evidence
    supported the contention that the second  appellant  was  assaulted  as
    claimed and that the third appellant was burnt as  claimed.   They  had
    suffered as a result of family animosity arising out of  a  mixed-faith
    marriage.

3.   In paragraph 17 of the  determination  the  judge  noted  that  it  was
    accepted that the third appellant met the requirements of  suitability.
    He was satisfied that she  had  demonstrated  an  exceptionally  strong
    private life in the UK having been in this country for over nine  years
    and four months.  The evidence from her school  and  from  friends  was
    overwhelming as was the expert opinion of the social worker.   She  had
    arrived at the age of 8 and had spent over half her life in the UK.  He
    accepted the argument that the third appellant was at a critical  stage
    of her personal and educational development.  She had spent  over  half
    her life in the UK and in the light of these matters  and  her  overall
    integration and her ability to make a useful contribution to the UK  he
    was  satisfied  that  the  third  appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE.  The judge then addressed Article 8 as follows:

         "18. Turning to consider Article 8 as it is the distinct element in
             this case.  The Tribunal has had regard  to  the  case  of  SS
             (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 which notes the court will be slow
             to find a positive obligation  on  a  state  to  facilitate  a
             choice (also made by a married  couple  in  that  case).   The
             Rules themselves are the appropriate starting point (and often
             the end point) of any consideration.  They  provide  almost  a
             complete code and that any proportionality assessment  outside
             of them must be made through the lens of the new rules AQ  and
             others [2015] EWCA Civ 250.


         19.  The Tribunal has had regard to the case of Agyarko [2017] UKSC
             11 and the commentary therein especially whether an Article  8
             proportionality  assessment  would  result  in  insurmountable
             obstacles for the Third Appellant so that the refusal  of  the
             application would  not  be  proportionate.   The  Tribunal  is
             beholden to carry out  an  analysis  of  the  public  interest
             consideration if going outside  of  the  Rules  as  was  noted
             above.


         20.  The best interests of  the  child  have  at  all  time  to  be
             considered and the usual starting point is that it is  in  the
             best interests of the child to be brought up  by  his  or  her
             parents.  The Third Appellant has been here  in  excess  of  7
             years as a child and although over 18 by a  period  of  a  few
             days does not live independently.


         21.  The Tribunal therefore considered Article 8 in  the  light  of
             the above and notes that it  is  a  qualified  right.   It  is
             normally for an appellant to establish  that  he  or  she  has
             family and/or private life that will  be  interfered  with  on
             return to his or her own country, and the burden  then  shifts
             to the Respondent to establish that any such  interference  is
             not only legitimate but is also necessary and proportionate."

4.   Having referred to Razgar v Secretary of State [2004] UKHL 27  and  the
    five-stage test the judge concluded his determination as follows:

         "23. The Tribunal finds that the Third Appellant  has  demonstrated
             that it would be disproportionate for her to leave the  UK  as
             her ability to satisfy the Rules for the reasons  given  would
             be positively determinative of her  Article  8  position  even
             having regard to Section 117B.  The Third Appellant  has  been
             here for more than half her life and had arrived as an 8-year-
             old child.


         24.  Having considered the oral and documentary evidence with  some
             care and giving a proper consideration to the public interest,
             the Tribunal is satisfied that it would be disproportionate to
             remove the Third Appellant in the particular circumstances  of
             this case.


         25.  The Tribunal is satisfied that much of this is related to  the
             circumstances of  these  particular  individuals,  namely  the
             complete lack of physical and emotional support  in  Mauritius
             as well as the best interest of the Third  Appellant  and  the
             system of life and support in  the  UK  enjoyed  by  both  the
             Appellant's, their lack of a home in Mauritius,  wider  family
             estrangement and hence a lack  of  support.   This  is  beyond
             merely 'facilitating' a choice but rather is  related  to  the
             reality  of  the  situation.   Taken  together  these  factors
             together satisfy the Tribunal that to refuse the matter  would
             have unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  this  particular
             Appellant.


         26.  In respect of family  life  as  between  the  Appellant's  the
             Tribunal noted the Ghising case, the  Tribunal  accepted  that
             the Third Appellant  has  never  lived  independently  and  is
             currently doing her A levels and continues to  reside  in  the
             family home as she has always done.  Her family life  did  not
             cease 6 days before the Tribunal hearing when  she  turned  18
             years of age.  The Tribunal accepted from the evidence of  Ms.
             Deacon in particular that the family unit is a close knit  one
             and has to an extent been dictated by what has happened to the
             family in the past.  The Tribunal finds  that  to  remove  the
             First and Second Appellant  in  the  circumstances  where  the
             Third Appellant can succeed in respect of her own private life
             in the UK would result in insurmountable obstacles  to  family
             life  being  continued  and  would  have  unjustifiably  harsh
             consequences for the whole family unit.  The Tribunal has  off
             considered Section 117B in respect of  the  First  and  Second
             Appellant's and noted that they  are  financially  independent
             and off course family  life  was  in  existence  because  they
             arrived as a family unit in the first place.  The Tribunal was
             satisfied that if the First and Second Appellant  were  to  be
             returned this would have unjustifiably harsh consequences  for
             the Third Appellant who has already succeeded under the  Rules
             and under Article 8.  This is not allowing the adult child  to
             be used as a 'trump card' but a recognition of the  particular
             facts of this case."

5.   Accordingly the judge allowed the appeals under  the  Rules  and  under
    Article 8 for the third appellant and under Article 8 for her  parents.
    The Secretary of State applied for permission to  appeal  arguing  that
    the third-named appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE. The Judge had not taken into consideration KO (Nigeria)  [2018]
    UKSC 53. He had to approach the appeal "as in  the  real  world".   The
    parents had no leave to  remain  in  the  UK.   Their  daughter's  best
    interests lay in remaining with the family unit.  The family would  not
    face unjustifiably harsh consequences in  the  light  of  the  case  of
    Treebhawon and Others (Mauritius) [2017] UKUT 13.  Permission to appeal
    was granted on 19 March 2019 by the First-tier Tribunal.

6.   Mr Kandola relied on the grounds of  appeal  but  did  not  pursue  the
    point based on KO (Nigeria).  The point was a narrow one and  based  on
    276ADE.  He agreed with the point made in  relation  to  TZ  (Pakistan)
    [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 that had  been  referred  to  in  the  submissions
    before the First-tier Judge and featured in paragraph 10  of  Counsel's
    skeleton argument before me.  It was accepted that  the  appellant  now
    met the Rules.  However at the date of the hearing one could not ignore
    that the third appellant was 18.  Reference was made to 276  (1)ADE(v).
    Mr Jacob submitted that the points made with respect to the Rules  were
    academic.  The judge had allowed the appeal outside the Rules come what
    may.  Counsel referred to paragraph 23 of the  judge's  decision.   The
    third appellant had been in the UK for more than half her life and  had
    arrived  as  an  8-year-old  child.   Counsel  referred  to   paragraph
    276ADE(v).  The judge had considered it would  be  disproportionate  to
    remove the child in the light of the material before him including  the
    social worker's report.  The positive credibility findings had not been
    the subject of challenge and the decision to allow the  appeal  outside
    the Rules had not been appealed from.  The appeal had been  allowed  on
    two bases and the judge had made clear findings  determinative  of  the
    proportionality argument.  Counsel distinguished the case of Treebhawon
    which turned on different facts and where no 276ADE  (1)(v)  issue  had
    been raised before the Upper Tribunal.  Counsel referred  to  paragraph
    11(i) of his skeleton  argument.   Reliance  was  placed  on  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv).  It was clear that the judge had found that it would not
    be reasonable for the appellant to leave the UK as set out at paragraph
    17 of the decision.  As argued in paragraph 11(ii) of the skeleton, the
    appellant would now meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE (1)(v) if
    she made a further application - it was analogous to the  situation  in
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40.  The appeal of the Secretary of State  should
    be dismissed.  Any error was not material in the circumstances of  this
    case.

7.   In response Mr Kandola pointed out that the  only  appeal  was  against
    Article 8 and the arguments covered both limbs.  With reference to  the
    case of Ghising [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC)  which  had  been  put  in,  Mr
    Kandola said there was no challenge to family life being established in
    this case.

8.   At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered all the material before me.  I can of course  only
    interfere with the judge's decision to  allow  the  appeal  if  it  was
    materially flawed in law. The positive credibility findings made by the
    First-tier Judge are not the subject of challenge in the grounds.

9.   The judge refers to paragraph 276ADE and while no doubt it  would  have
    been helpful to specify which part or parts of the rule were in play  I
    am not satisfied that there is a material error of law in this case for
    the reasons advanced  by  Counsel.  I  note  there  was  There  was  no
    Presenting Officer to assist the First-tier Judge.

10.  I accept Counsel's analysis of the basis on  which  the  judge  reached
    his conclusions by reference to  particular  Rules  and  in  any  event
    outside the Rules under Article 8.  I note that the Secretary of  State
    accepted in the decision to refuse the  third  appellant's  application
    that she was under the age of 18 and had lived continuously in  the  UK
    for at least the last seven years but argued it would be reasonable for
    her to leave the UK.  It is at least implicit in the  judge's  decision
    that he was not satisfied that that was the case.   Counsel  refers  in
    particular to paragraphs 11 and 17 of the judge's decision.  The appeal
    had also been allowed outside the Rules as said in paragraph 23 of  the
    judge's decision.  There  is  no  challenge  to  family  life  existing
    between the members of this family.  While  another  judge  might  have
    reached a different decision I do not find  his  conclusions  were  not
    properly open to him.

11.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the  decision  of
    the First-tier Judge shall stand.

12.  The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order in this  case  and  I  was
    not invited to make one.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made a whole fee award in favour of the  appellants  as
they had been successful in their appeals.  There is no reason to  interfere
with this fee award which stands.



Signed                                  Date: 7 May 2019


G Warr, Judge, of the Upper Tribunal





