
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15177/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 12 February 2020                          |On: 2 March 2020             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                wahida begum
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr MA Muid Khan, of Lincoln's Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a national of Bangladesh  born  on  15  February  1985,
      appeals, with permission,  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal dismissing her human rights appeal.

   2. The appellant entered the UK on 6 September 2015 with entry  clearance
      as the Tier 2 Dependant Partner of Toufiqul Alam Suhel, valid until 14
      June 2016. On 14 June 2016 she made a human rights claim on the  basis
      of her family life in  the  UK.  Her  application  was  refused  on  2
      November 2017 and she appealed against that decision.

   3. In the meantime, the appellant's husband, Toufiqul Alam Suhel, made an
      application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of five  years
      as a Tier 2 migrant which was refused on the basis of  allegations  of
      fraud and deception in relation to  an  English  language  certificate
      obtained through the Educational testing Service (ETS).  He  lodged  a
      judicial review claim to challenge the  decision  and  the  claim  was
      stayed behind lead cases involving the same issues.  A  Consent  Order
      was sealed on 10 June 2016 in which it was agreed that the appellant's
      husband would submit a further application for leave to remain,  which
      would operate to continue his valid leave,  and  that  the  respondent
      would not make a decision on that application until the outcome of the
      judicial review. The appellant's husband then made an  application  on
      14 June 2016 for indefinite leave to remain as a Tier  2  migrant  and
      under Article 8. That application was  refused  on  15  December  2016
      under paragraph 322(5) of the immigration rules in relation to the ETS
      allegation, but the decision was subsequently withdrawn on 20  January
      2017. The appellant's husband made further human rights submissions on
      16 February 2018.  Those matters remain outstanding.

   4. The appellant's appeal was listed for hearing on 7 August 2018 but was
      adjourned at the request of the respondent as well as the appellant in
      order to await the outcome of the appellant's husband judicial  review
      claim which was still pending in  the  Court  of  Appeal.  There  then
      followed a number of case management review  hearings  and  a  further
      adjournment of a hearing,  all  of  which  postponed  the  substantive
      consideration of the appeal on the basis of the appellant's  husband's
      outstanding judicial review claim in the Court of Appeal.

   5. The appeal was then listed once again for a substantive hearing in the
      First-tier Tribunal on 20 August 2019. A further  written  adjournment
      application was made on the same basis as  previously,  on  15  August
      2019, but the  appellant's  representatives  were  informed  that  the
      request had been received too late to be considered.

   6. The matter then came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Sweet  on  20
      August 2019. Judge Sweet noted the absence of the  appellant  and  her
      legal  representative  and,  in  the  absence  of  a  renewal  of  the
      adjournment request before him, decided to  make  a  decision  in  the
      appeal. He dismissed the appeal  on  the  basis  of  the  respondent's
      refusal letter and the  appellant's  failure  to  provide  a  detailed
      update on the current state of her husband's appeal.

   7. The appellant sought permission to appeal Judge  Sweet's  decision  on
      the basis that her solicitors had told her not to attend  the  hearing
      as it was adjourned and that, contrary to the judge's  statement,  her
      solicitors had provided an update  of  the  status  of  her  husband's
      appeal.

   8. Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal and the matter  came
      before me.

   9. Ms Isherwood confirmed that the appellant's husband's judicial  review
      was still pending in the Court of Appeal. She also confirmed  that  it
      had previously  been  agreed  that  the  appellant's  appeal  and  her
      husband's appeal should be linked. In  the  circumstances  she  agreed
      that Judge Sweet should not have proceeded to make a decision  in  the
      appeal and that his decision  should  be  set  aside  and  the  matter
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be linked with her husband's if
      his application was eventually refused and appealed.

  10. In light of Ms Isherwood's concession,  I  set  aside  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's decision and agreed to remit the matter.

DECISION

  11. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set  aside.  The
      appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt with afresh,
      pursuant  to  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunals,   Courts   and
      Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(a), before  any  judge
      aside from Judge Sweet.

  12. Unless otherwise agreed, the appellant's appeal is not  to  be  listed
      until a decision is made in her husband's  application  for  leave  to
      remain and, in the event  that  his  application  is  refused  and  he
      appeals that decision, the appeals are to be linked.


Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  13 February
2020
