
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/15342/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 October 2018                            |On 5 November 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                              mr alfred gabusu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chelliah, Solicitor, Quality Solicitors (A-Z
Law)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   On 2 November 2017  the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  refuse  the
    appellant, a citizen of Ghana, leave to remain.  The appellant's appeal
    came before Judge E M Smith who, in a decision  sent  on  5  June  108,
    dismissed his appeal.

2.   The appellant's written grounds challenged  the  judge's  treatment  of
    the appellant's case under the Immigration Rules and outside the Rules.

3.   The crux of the challenge raised in the written grounds  of  appeal  to
    the judge's assessment of the appellant's case under the Rules was that
    he had  erred  in  finding  that  the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the
    suitability requirements as set out in S-LTR.1.4 and 1.6 because he had
    wrongly combined three  prison  sentences  applying  the  principle  of
    totality  so  as  to  treat  the  appellant  as  someone  sentenced  to
    imprisonment in excess of twelve months, whereas his  highest  sentence
    was ten months.  Mr Chelliah before me stated  that  the  appellant  no
    longer relied on this ground since, even if paragraph S-LTR.1.4  -  1.5
    did not apply against the appellant, he could not argue that  S-LTR.1.6
    did apply.  Mr Chelliah  said  the  appellant  relied  solely  on  the
    challenges to the judge's assessment of the  appellant's  circumstances
    outside the Rules.

4.   These challenges contend that the judge  failed  to  adequately  assess
    the best interests of the children concerned  namely  their  son  B,  a
    British citizen aged 2, and his partner's two children from a  previous
    relationship, aged 7 and 5  (the  latter  live  with  their  respective
    fathers).

5.   In particular it was argued that the judge  had  not  properly  decided
    the likelihood of B not being able to continue living with  his  mother
    and having to go into care if the  appellant  was  returned  to  Ghana.
    There  was  a  letter  from  Probation  stating  that  Social  Services
    considered the appellant could be seen as a protective factor  for  his
    son.

6.   It was submitted that the judge made a mistake of fact in finding  that
    there was no contact between the appellant and his partner's other  two
    children.

7.    It  was  also  contended  that  the  judge  wrongly   discounted   the
    relationship between the appellant and his partner on  the  basis  they
    had not been in a relationship for two years.

8.   As regards the judge's  assessment  of  public  interest  factors,  the
    grounds submit that the judge failed to take into account that  he  was
    at a low risk of reoffending and there  was  a  Probation  report  that
    supported his case.  There was no direct victim of any of the  offences
    and all were based on the appellant's attempts to  survive  by  working
    unlawfully.

9.   I see no merit in the various points raised in the  grounds  concerning
    the judge's treatment of the public interest factors.  In particular, I
    consider he was entitled to attach  limited  weight  to  the  Probation
    Service letter.  Whilst the judge accepted that this  established  that
    the appellant had not (as the respondent alleged) breached his  licence
    requirements, its assessment of the appellant's past conduct failed  to
    address the appellant's deliberate failure to answer his  bail  or  the
    fact that he was convicted by his own plea and sentenced to ten  months
    for further deceit (see paragraph 26 of the judge's decision).

10.  However,  I  do  consider  that  the  judge's  treatment  of  the  best
    interests of the children involved is significantly  flawed.   Although
    the judge appears to have accepted there was a family life relationship
    between the appellant and B and  that  he  had  been  living  with  his
    partner and B since at  least  December  2016  (when  he  came  out  of
    prison), the judge conducts no analysis of the quality and contents  of
    the appellant's relationship with B and does not specify, for  example,
    whether he accepts it is a genuine parental relationship.  The  judge's
    sole focus was on whether B could live with his mother  notwithstanding
    that Social Services had put in place a child  in  need  plan  and  had
    become involved due to possible concerns about her neglect  of  B.   At
    paragraph 30 the judge considered that what was important was that:

         "the child was born just after the appellant went to  prison  [and]
         the child remained with the [partner] even if the  Social  Services
         monitored the position.  The sponsor for  the  following  8  months
         appeared to cope to the satisfaction of the Social Services."


    This treatment did not address whether, even if the partner had "coped"
    with the help of Social Services whilst the appellant  was  in  prison,
    the appellant's involvement in the child's life  after  coming  out  of
    prison had improved the welfare of B by performing what Social Services
    described as a "protective role"

11.  A further difficulty with the judge's unduly  narrow  approach  to  the
    issue of the best interests of B is that  at  paragraph  31  the  judge
    considered it very relevant to the issue of the proportionality of  the
    decision that B could go with the appellant and his partner and live in
    Ghana.  It is far from clear that the judge understood that it  is  the
    respondent's own policy that it is not reasonable to expect  a  British
    citizen child to leave the UK.

12.  Compounding the judge's errors in relation to B, he  was  simply  wrong
    to state in paragraph 31 that "there is no evidence that the sponsor or
    indeed the appellant has contact with [the other two children]."  There
    was such evidence and it needed to be addressed  and  evaluated  as  to
    whether it significantly added to the appellant's case that his and his
    partner's family life would be disrupted either by him alone  returning
    to Ghana or the couple (and B) going to live as a family in Ghana.

13.  Whilst I do not intend by  anything  said  in  the  above  analysis  to
    suggest that the appellant is entitled to succeed in  his  appeal  (his
    criminal history and his poor immigration history  are  weighty  public
    interest factors counting against his case), I do not consider that the
    judge conducted either a proper best interests of the child  assessment
    or a proper proportionality assessment.

14.  I consider that the judge's errors of law necessitate that I set  aside
    the decision.  Given that the next judge  will  need  to  consider  the
    situation of B  and  the  other  children  much  more  closely,  it  is
    appropriate to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.

          Direction

15.  To assist the FtT Judge who hears this case next,  I  direct  that  the
    appellant's representatives by 21 December 2018 produce (1)  an  up-to-
    date welfare report relating to the child B; and (2) the report already
    in existence from Bracknell Forest Council concerning the issue of what
    contact if any the appellant and his partner have with  the  two  other
    children; (3)  if  (2)  above  is  out-of-date,  then  the  appellant's
    representatives should produce evidence of  a  similar  kind  (from  an
    independent professional service).

16.  To conclude:

    -    I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  for
         material error of law.

    -    The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with the direction
         set out above in para 17.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 25 October 2018

            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

