
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15666/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Considered on the papers             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 November 2020                  |On 3 December 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                              Mr faizanul hasan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hatton, promulgated on 7 April 2020. Permission to appeal  was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on 10 August 2020.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now.

Background

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 13  February  2007  with
    entry clearance as a student. He switched to the Highly Skilled Migrant
    Programme and thereafter to Tier 1 Highly Skilled General  Migrant  and
    was granted successive periods of leave, valid until 6 April 2013.  The
    appellant's leave to remain was cancelled on 15 November  2011  and  he
    was removed to India the  following  day.  The  appellant  successfully
    appealed the cancellation of his leave and  he  was  granted  leave  to
    remain under Tier 1 until 13  January  2017.  The  Secretary  of  State
    informed the appellant that there would  be  no  break  in  his  lawful
    residence from 15 November 2011 until 13 January 2014.  On  13  January
    2017, the appellant applied for  settlement  on  the  grounds  of  long
    residence and under the HSMP as well as leave to remain on human rights
    grounds. Those applications  were  rejected  for  failure  to  pay  the
    application fee. On 14 August 2018, the appellant applied,  in  person,
    for settlement on the grounds of long residence. That  application  was
    "voided" as he  did  not  provide  the  required  documentation.  On  7
    September 2018, the appellant submitted an application  for  settlement
    on  the  grounds  of  long  residence.  It  is  the  refusal  of   that
    application, by way of a decision dated 4 September 2019, that  is  the
    subject of this appeal.

 4. According to the decision letter of 4 September 2019.  The  application
    under paragraph 276B of the Rules was refused because  the  appellant's
    lawful residence was from 13 February 2007 until 13 January  2017,  one
    month short of 10 years, falling foul of 276B(i).  It  was  noted  that
    thereafter he remained without lawful status which meant  that  276B(v)
    was not met. The appellant's  human  rights  claim  was  considered  in
    respect of private life alone, given that his spouse and child  resided
    in India. The respondent did not accept that the appellant  could  meet
    any of the requirements of  276ADE  (1)  or  that  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences would result from the refusal of his human rights claim.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant's appeal was considered on the papers, at his request. In
    short, the First-tier  Tribunal  noted  that  the  appellant  had  been
    granted an in-country right of appeal but  that  the  appeal  had  been
    lodged from abroad. While the judge concluded that the Tribunal did not
    have jurisdiction to consider the matter, he dismissed the human rights
    appeal.

The grounds of appeal

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that there  was  arguable
    unfairness in that despite stating that he  had  no  jurisdiction,  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had  purported  to  dismiss  the   appeal.
    Reference was made to an  earlier  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  to
    proceed on the basis that there was an in-country right of appeal.

 7. Directions were served on the parties by email on 28 August 2020, which
    communicated that a provisional view had been  taken  that  the  matter
    could be decided without a  hearing  and  invited  written  submissions
    regarding whether the First-tier Tribunal made  an  error  of  law  and
    whether that decision should be set aside.  The  parties  were  further
    invited to submit reasons if it  was  considered  that  a  hearing  was
    necessary.

 8. Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  states
    that the Upper Tribunal may make any decision with or without a hearing
    but must have regard to any view expressed by  a  party  when  deciding
    whether to do. The respondent gave no indication of her view as to  the
    issue of whether there was a material  error  of  law  which  could  be
    justly determined without  an  oral  hearing.  The  appellant  did  not
    respond.

 9. I have considered the judgment in JCWI v The  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin) and conclude that the  appellant  has
    not been disadvantaged by the error of law issue being decided  without
    a hearing in this instance for the  following  reasons.  The  appellant
    left the UK voluntarily on 17 September 2019  and  requested  that  his
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal be considered on the  papers.  He
    has not responded to the directions of  28  August  2020  despite  them
    being forwarded to the email address he provided, and which was used to
    serve him with the First-tier Tribunal decision as well as the grant of
    permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.  There  is  no  reason  to
    suppose that  the  appellant  has  not  received  the  directions.  The
    respondent's Rule 24 response, received on 9 September 2020,  indicated
    that the appellant's appeal was  not  opposed  but  invited  the  Upper
    Tribunal to set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    either to treat the appeal as invalid or as abandoned.

Decision on error of law and remaking

10. The preliminary issue before the First-tier Tribunal  was  whether  the
    appellant was entitled to pursue his appeal against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision of 4 September 2019 despite  having  left  the  United
    Kingdom before lodging that appeal. The decision of  4  September  2019
    informed the appellant that he did not have to leave the UK during  the
    time period in which he might appeal or  until  that  appeal  had  been
    decided, if he did appeal.  The  said  decision  was  received  by  the
    appellant's former representatives on 6 September 2019.  The  appellant
    voluntarily left the UK on 17 September 2019.  The  appeal  was  lodged
    online with the First-tier Tribunal on 19 September 2019. The appellant
    gave an address for service in India.

11. Section 92(3) of the NIA  2002  stipulates  that  "an  appeal  must  be
    brought from within the United Kingdom,"  unless  the  claim  has  been
    certified under section 94(1), 94(B) or it involves the removal  of  an
    asylum seeker to a safe third country.  The  appellant's  human  rights
    claim was not certified and did not  involve  a  protection  or  third-
    country issue. He brought his  appeal  shortly  after  his  arrival  in
    India. Accordingly, the judge was right to find at [34], that there was
    no jurisdiction to decide the appeal. That there had  been  an  earlier
    decision to allow the appeal to proceed to listing is neither here  nor
    there.

12. The judge erred only in proceeding to briefly consider and dismiss  the
    human rights appeal at [39]  and  reflecting  this  in  the  notice  of
    decision. In these circumstances, I consider  that  I  can  immediately
    proceed to remake the decision. Accordingly, I set aside  the  decision
    of the judge  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  and
    substitute it with a decision that there is no jurisdiction to consider
    this appeal.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The Upper Tribunal has no jurisdiction to consider this appeal.


Signed:  Date 3 December 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days,  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

