
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15707/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 November 2019                            |On 19 February 2020           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                 Finest [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford instructed by Thompson & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Smyth, instructed by the Government Legal
Department


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals  pursuant  to  section  82  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) against a decision  made
    on 16 July 2018 to refuse his protection and human rights  claims,  the
    Secretary of State  having  decided  that  he  is  a  foreign  national
    offender who must be deported. His appeal  against  that  decision  was
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in a decision  promulgated  on  27
    December 2018.  The Upper Tribunal set that decision aside for  reasons
    set out in a decision issued on 23 May 2019 and in  which  it  directed
    the appeal be remade in the  Upper  Tribunal  which,  subsequent  to  a
    transfer order, we now do.

 2. The appellant's wife has been recognised as a refugee and granted leave
    to remain on that basis. The appellant is, however, a foreign  criminal
    whom the Secretary of State must deport unless he falls within  one  of
    the exceptions set out in section 33 of the UK Borders Act.   His  case
    is that he meets the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  to  be
    granted leave as the spouse of a  refugee;  and,  on  that  basis,  his
    deportation is disproportionate because the Immigration Rules  set  out
    where the Secretary of State says the public interest lies.  In  short,
    that it cannot be in the public interest to deport  someone  who  meets
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules. The Secretary of State  does
    not accept that the appellant cannot be deported.

    Background

 3. We consider it necessary to set out in some detail the complex  history
    of this case and how this appeal came about.

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria. He first  entered  the  UK  with
    entry clearance as a visitor on 19 October 2005. It  appears  from  the
    sentencing remarks of the Crown Court judge that in early 2007, when in
    the UK as an overstayer, the appellant decided to change  his  identity
    to assume British citizenship. He came across  the  identity  of  James
    Samuel Walters, a British citizen born in 1968 who had died in  America
    in 1989 and whose death had  never  been  registered  in  the  UK.  The
    appellant applied for and obtained a British  passport,  a  UK  driving
    licence and a National Insurance number in that name then travelled  to
    Nigeria in that identity and married his wife there on 3 November  2007
    in his false identity. Leaving his wife in Nigeria, he returned to  the
    UK and obtained employment in his false identity. He then  applied  for
    visas, ultimately successfully obtaining settlement visas, for his wife
    and B, his son by another woman. They arrived in the UK in June 2010.

 5. On 28 April 2011 the appellant's daughter C was  born  in  the  UK.  In
    September 2011 the appellant applied for settlement for 2 more  of  his
    children (from another past relationship)  but  this  was  unsuccessful
    because the appellant was arrested on 16 December 2011 after  he  tried
    to re-enter the UK from Nigeria where he had travelled to  assist  with
    the applications.

 6. The appellant pleaded guilty  on  2  April  2012  to  three  counts  of
    assisting illegal entry for which he was sentenced (on 15 June 2012) to
    32  months'  imprisonment  to  run  concurrently,  to   two  counts  of
    dishonestly making false representations and to 12 months' imprisonment
    on each of two counts of  possessing  or  controlling  a  false/another
    person's identity document, both sentences  to  run  concurrently  with
    each other and with the other sentences.

 7. On 29 June 2012 the appellant's wife applied for leave to remain on the
    basis of her human rights. In August  2012  she  gave  birth  to  their
    second daughter.

 8. On 20 August 2012 the  appellant  was  notified  of  his  liability  to
    deportation. He claimed asylum on 27 February  2013  but  withdrew  his
    claim on 12 March 2013.

 9. On 17 April 2014 the respondent refused the  appellant's  wife's  human
    rights application. She appealed against that decision.

10. On 25 June 2014 the respondent made a deportation order in  respect  of
    the appellant and served that decision together with one dated  1  July
    2014 finding that he is a person  to  whom  the  automatic  deportation
    provisions set out in the UK Borders Act 2007 applied.

11. Meanwhile, on 30 September 2014, the appellant's  wife's  human  rights
    appeal was dismissed, the judge noting that the  appellant's  wife  had
    raised the first time, in the bundle  of  documents  prepared  for  the
    hearing, a  claim that her daughters would be at risk of FGM if removed
    to Nigeria, but concluding that it was a new matter and so could not be
    considered. The  appellant's  wife  sought  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision but this was refused on 1 December 2014.

12. On 9 December 2014 the appellant's wife claimed asylum on the basis  of
    fear of FGM for her daughters. The  appellant  and  the  children  were
    named as dependents on her claim. On 23 April 2015, the  appellant  and
    his wife's third child was born.

13. By a decision promulgated on 3  June  2015,  Judge  Phull  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal to the limited extent that the decision was  not  in
    accordance with the law and the appellant awaited  a  lawful  decision.
    Her reasons (at [50]) were that the respondent had failed to  give  any
    consideration to the risks of FGM that the appellant's daughters  might
    face on return to Nigeria, this preventing  the  judge  from  making  a
    proper assessment under Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.

14. On 26 January 2016 the respondent refused the appellant's wife's  claim
    for asylum. She appealed but her claim was dismissed by  Judge  O'Hagan
    by a decision promulgated on 14  October  2016.  The  appellant's  wife
    gained permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and,  by  a  decision
    promulgated on 10 May 2017, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Eshun  allowed
    the appeal finding that the  children  would  be  at  risk  of  FGM  in
    Nigeria. The respondent sought permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal but was unsuccessful, permission to appeal being refused  on  30
    June 2017.

15. On 22 December 2017 the appellant's  wife  and  children  were  granted
    leave to remain in the UK on asylum grounds for five years.

16. By a letter of 1 February 2018, the appellant was told  that  his  case
    fell for consideration under section 72(2) of the 2002  Act.  The  same
    letter included a one-stop notice and  invited  the  appellant  to  put
    forward reasons why he should not be deported.

17. On 16 July 2018, for the reasons set out in the refusal letter of  that
    date, the Secretary of State decided that she was required  to  make  a
    deportation order against the appellant as he did not fall  within  any
    of the exceptions to deportation set  out  at  Section  33  of  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007. Having concluded that section 72(2) of the  2002  Act
    applied to the case, the respondent stated in the refusal letter:

         "76. Your legal representatives have relied on Paragraph 349 of the
         Immigration Rules in that they claim  you  are  a  dependant  of  a
         refugee and, as such, you should be granted  asylum  and  Leave  to
         Remain in line with your partner and  children.  However,  you  are
         subject to a signed deportation order, dated 25 June 2014, and were
         at the time of your partner's application for asylum, in which  she
         named you as a dependant, dated 9  December  2014.  As  such,  your
         deportation order would need to be revoked  prior  to  a  grant  of
         leave and there are no issues raised in your case that would result
         in this action.

         77.  You and your partner are not in need of protection in Nigeria,
         your partner's appeal was allowed  due  to  the  Immigration  Judge
         finding that she would be unable to  resist  societal  pressure  to
         have your daughters subjected to FGM  because  of  a  lack  of  her
         education; there are therefore no protection issues for you on your
         return to Nigeria."

    Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

18. The First-tier Tribunal noted that it was accepted  by  the  respondent
    that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant's children to  live  in
    Nigeria given the grant of asylum to them and their mother but that  it
    was not accepted it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in
    the United Kingdom without the appellant.  The judge found that:

      i) the appellant had rebutted the statutory presumption under s.72  of
         the 2002 Act;

     ii) it would not be unduly harsh for the children to be separated  from
         their father [58];

    iii) there were no very compelling circumstances such that the appellant
         should not be deported as Article 3 would not be breached if he was
         returned because the wife and daughters would not be  returned  and
         so would not be at risk of FGM;

     iv) paragraph 349 of the Immigration Rules was not absolute, given  the
         guidance set out in the Asylum Policy Instructions, and  that  this
         was  permissible  having  had  regard  to   Article   23   of   the
         Qualification Directive;

      v) there were  no  sufficiently  compelling  circumstances  such  that
         deportation would be disproportionate [90, 91].

19. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:

      i) in her interpretation of paragraph 349 of the Immigration Rules;

     ii) in failing to appreciate the effect of the grant of  refugee  leave
         to the appellant's family members would have upon  the  appellant's
         own outstanding Article 3 claim;

    iii) in taking an erroneous approach to the "unduly harsh" test.

20. On 18  March  2019  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Storey  granted  permission
    stating:

         "It is arguable that the judge erred in failing to properly  assess
         the   significance,   when   assessing   the   proportionality   of
         deportation, of the fact that the appellant,  a  foreign  criminal,
         was the dependant of a refugee.  It is also arguable that the judge
         failed to properly approach the issue of  whether  the  appellant's
         deportation would be unduly harsh to the child who could not  visit
         him in Nigeria as she has refugee status."

21. The appeal then came before the Upper Tribunal sitting as a panel  (the
    Honourable Mrs Justice Whipple, DBE and Upper Tribunal  Judge  Freeman)
    at a hearing on 14 April 2019.  A copy of that decision is attached  to
    this decision.

22. The panel noted that the judge had been referred to  paragraph  349  of
    the Immigration Rules rather than paragraph 339Q. They took note of  Mr
    Bedford's submission that, unless the terms set out  at  339Q  applied,
    the appellant was entitled to leave to remain as a  dependant,  despite
    his otherwise continuing liability to deportation. The panel also noted
    that at [74] the judge, again referring to paragraph  349,  found  "the
    rule appears to be absolute in the way it is worded", and at [79]:



         "Paragraph 349 of the immigration rules is written in  an  absolute
         way, but it is clearly not intended to be  completely  absolute  as
         explained above. I consider that the making of a deportation  order
         can prevent leave under paragraph 349 being granted  or  invalidate
         it if it has been granted in the same way as any other leave can be
         invalidated or the grant prevented."


23. For reasons to which we will turn, we consider it necessary to set  out
    the previous panel's conclusions at [20] to [25]:



         "20.  The answer to that point is that paragraph 339Q does  contain
         the conditions on which the dependant of a refugee may be refused a
         residence permit,  and  those  include  the  'reasons  of  national
         security or public order', mentioned in article 23 (see 15  above).
         While those might or might not be directly applicable in this case,
         the exclusion of cases where the  person's  character,  conduct  or
         associations otherwise require" is more obviously relevant.

         21.  Because the judge was not referred to paragraph 339Q by either
         side, she never considered either of those bases for exclusion of a
         dependant on their own merits on the facts  of  the  case.  We  did
         raise  the  'character,  conduct  or  associations'  point  at  the
         hearing; but Mr Bedford's answer was simply that  the  Home  Office
         had put their case on the basis of the s. 72 presumption, and  were
         not entitled to succeed on any other.

         22.  Despite the immense trouble and thought given to the  case  by
         the judge, we do not think her decision can be upheld on the  basis
         she gave for it. On  the  other  hand,  Mr  Bedford  put  his  case
         squarely on the terms of paragraph 339Q on the basis set out by the
         Senior President of Tribunals  in  TZ  (Pakistan)  and  PG  (India)
         [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 at paragraph 34:

         "...where a person satisfies the Rules, whether or not by reference
         to an article 8 informed requirement, then this will be  positively
         determinative of that person's article  8  appeal,  provided  their
         case engages article 8(1), for the very reason that it  would  then
         be disproportionate for that person to be removed."

         23.  Although the subject-matter of  the  cases  involved  in  that
         decision  (the  'insurmountable  [pic]obstacles'  test  under   the
         private and family life Rules) was quite different  from  the  main
         point in the present case, the argument on it was entirely  on  the
         same lines: the appellant satisfied the provisions of the  relevant
         rule, and that has to be treated as decisive on  his  human  rights
         appeal.

         24.  Given the history of this case (see 2 - 5 above), there was an
         obvious point (see Robinson [1997] EWCA Civ 3090) as to whether the
         appellant's past conduct did require him to be excluded from  being
         given a residence permit in line with Joy. While  the  judge  found
         that conduct was not likely to be repeated, there might well  be  a
         significant public interest in not allowing it to  succeed  to  the
         extent of achieving the perpetrator's object  of  regularizing  his
         own status in this country

         25.  For those reasons we set  aside  the  judge's  decision,  with
         considerable regret for the trouble and thought she gave to it,  no
         doubt very much in view of the same public interest  considerations
         we have had in mind.  There  does  not  seem  to  be  any  previous
         decision on this point, and in our view the decision on  it  should
         be re-made by the Upper Tribunal, so that an authoritative one  can
         be given. Ground (b) will become relevant if that goes against  the
         appellant."

24. Subsequent to this decision a transfer order was made  and  the  matter
    then came before Judge Rintoul on 24 June 2019.  He  heard  submissions
    from both representatives.  In the event, having reserved the decision,
    he considered it appropriate to issue directions for a further  hearing
    and for submissions to be made.   In reply to  those  directions,  both
    representatives provided skeleton arguments; and, in Mr Bedford's case,
    a response to Ms Smyth's skeleton argument.

25. Mr Bedford's submission is that the Upper Tribunal had accepted in  its
    error of law decision, in line with TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) [2018]
    EWCA Civ 1109, that a foreign criminal who satisfies  the  requirements
    for leave to remain under the  Rules  is  entitled  to  succeed  in  an
    Article 8 claim.  He submitted that in this case the appellant  fulfils
    the requirements of paragraph 352A of the Rules and thus,  following  R
    (Alvi) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 33 he cannot be required to pass any  further
    character, conduct or association  test  unless  it  is  an  additional
    requirement of the Rules.

26. Having noted that the  Secretary  of  State  no  longer  contends  that
    paragraph 339Q does not permit her to refuse leave to the partner of  a
    refugee,  Mr  Bedford  submitted  that  the  appellant  met   all   the
    requirements of paragraph 352A submitting that these were in fact  more
    generous to the appellant the guarantees under Articles  20  to  24  of
    Directive 2004/83/EC ("the Qualification Directive") which  underpinned
    paragraph 339Q of the Immigration Rules.  He submitted  that  at  best,
    paragraph 339Q was an exception in the terms of the length of a  permit
    that its conferred.  He submitted that at most, all  the  Secretary  of
    State could do would be to reduce the  period  of  leave  granted.   He
    submitted further that, given the finding that the appellant no  longer
    presents a real risk of offending  again  or  being  a  danger  to  his
    community,  the  provisions  in  the  Qualification  Directive   permit
    restrictions on the  rights  of  dependents  to  be  imposed  only  for
    compelling reasons of national security or public order, did not apply.
     He did not accept the respondent's  position  that  the  threshold  of
    refusing a residence permit is the lower one in Article 23 and not  24.
    He submitted that in any event  the  justification  of  "public  order"
    presupposes a serious breakdown of the social order etc. in line with T
    v Land Baden-Wurttemberg [2016] 1 WLR 109 at [75].  He  submitted  that
    in this case it was understandable that the  restrictions  on  refusing
    entry to dependants of refugees was stronger.

27. Mr Bedford submitted that paragraph A362 of the Immigration  Rules  did
    not assist the respondent as it did not preclude grants of leave.

28. Further, although the appellant accepts that Section 117C of  the  2002
    Act is a relevant consideration, he submits that even if  he  does  not
    satisfy the Rules, there are very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above the Exception as it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  qualifying
    children to be separated from their father without the  possibility  of
    visiting him in Nigeria because of their refugee status.

29. Ms Smyth submitted that there were five essential points which could be
    made in this case:

      i) that appellant does not qualify  for  leave  to  remain  under  the
         Rules;

     ii) even if he does, the case is about the removal of a deportee and is
         thus covered by Section 32 and 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007;

    iii) the appellant gets no protection from the Refugee Convention as  he
         is not a refugee;

     iv) the Qualification Directive did not assist  him  as  that  did  not
         provide protection against deportation;

      v) there is no  basis  for  the  appeal  to  be  allowed  due  to  his
         relationship with his children.

30. Ms Smyth relied on OA and Others (human rights;  "new  matter";  s.120)
    Nigeria [2019] UKUT 00065 (IAC) at [27] and [28] and submitted that, as
    was permitted by Section 79 to the 2007 Act, there  was  a  deportation
    order in place which had been in place since July  2014  prior  to  his
    wife applying for leave.

31. Ms Smyth submitted that because the  appellant  is  the  subject  of  a
    deportation order, he is not entitled to leave under paragraph  394  of
    the  Immigration  Rules  as  paragraph  322(1B)  (general  grounds  for
    refusal) apply.  While accepting that the general grounds  for  refusal
    are not applied to  applications  for  asylum,  there  was  nothing  to
    prevent them from applying to the family member  relying  on  paragraph
    394 who does not himself qualify as a refugee.  She submitted that even
    were the Rules to be met, the appellant was still  a  foreign  national
    offender.  She submitted further that it did  not  matter  whether  the
    appellant was entitled to leave or not  because  the  question  is  not
    whether he is entitled to leave but whether he can  be  deported.   The
    decision had been made and could only be revoked if one of the  grounds
    of Section 33 of the 2007 Act were made out.

32. Ms Smyth submitted further that the  Qualification  Directive  did  not
    provide the appellant with protection against deportation as it did not
    confer a substantive right of residence nor was  it  a  shield  against
    deportation.

33. Ms  Smyth  concluded  submitting  that  in  any  event  separating  the
    appellant from his children was not unduly harsh.

34. In response Mr Bedford submitted that the Secretary of State's approach
    was excessively formalistic.  He submitted that this  was  an  "outside
    the Rules" case and policy was relevant.  He submitted further that the
    Secretary of State's approach was excessively technical  and  this  was
    not an approach taken in the  first  appeal.   He  submitted  that  the
    Secretary of State's argument was circular and that in this  case,  the
    issue of paragraph 352A had been  drawn  attention  to  in  submissions
    prior to the Secretary of State's decision.

35. Mr Bedford submitted  further  that  the  Qualification  Directive  did
    protect against deportation as could be seen at Article 14.4 and 14.5.

The Law

36. Section  79  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    provides:

         79 Deportation order: appeal

         (1)  A deportation order may not be made in respect of a person
         while an appeal under section 82(1)[that may be brought or
         continued from within the United Kingdom relating to]1 the decision
         to make the order-
         (a)  could be brought (ignoring any possibility of an appeal out of
         time with permission), or
         (b)  is pending.


         (2)  In this section "pending"  has the meaning given by section
         104.


         (3)  This section does not apply to a deportation order which
         states that it is made in accordance with section 32(5) of the UK
         Borders Act 2007.


         (4)  But a deportation order made in reliance on subsection (3)
         does not invalidate leave to enter or remain, in accordance with
         section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971, if and for so long as
         section 78 above applies.

37. Sections 32 and 33 of the UK Borders Act 2007 provides, so  far  as  is
    relevant:


         32 Automatic Deportation


         (4)  For the purpose of section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971
         (c. 77), the deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to the
         public good.


         (5)  The Secretary of State must make a deportation order in
         respect of a foreign criminal (subject to section 33).


         (6)  The Secretary of State may not revoke a deportation order made
         in accordance with subsection (5) unless-
         (a)  he thinks that an exception under section 33 applies,
         (b)  the application for revocation is made while the foreign
         criminal is outside the United Kingdom, or
         (c)  section 34(4) applies.


         33 Exceptions


         (1)  Section 32(4) and (5)-
         (a)  do not apply where an exception in this section applies
         (subject to subsection (7) below), and
         (b)  are subject to sections 7 and 8 of the Immigration Act 1971
         (Commonwealth citizens, Irish citizens, crew and other exemptions).


         (2)  Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign criminal in
         pursuance of the deportation order would breach-
         (a)  a person's Convention rights, or
         (b)  the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.
         ...


         (7)  The application of an exception-
         (a)  does not prevent the making of a deportation order;
         (b)  results in it being assumed neither that deportation of the
         person concerned is conducive to the public good nor that it is not
         conducive to the public good;
              but section 32(4) applies despite the application of Exception
         1 or 4.

38.  Directive  2004/83/EC  ("the  Qualification  Directive")  provides  at
    Articles 23 and 24:


         Article 23 Maintaining family unity


         1.   Member States shall ensure that family unity can be
         maintained.


         2.   Member States shall ensure that family members of the
         beneficiary of refugee or subsidiary protection status, who do not
         individually qualify for such status, are entitled to claim the
         benefits referred to in Articles 24 to 34, in accordance with
         national procedures and as far as it is compatible with the
         personal legal status of the family member.
         In so far as the family members of beneficiaries of subsidiary
         protection status are concerned, Member States may define the
         conditions applicable to such benefits.
         In these cases, Member States shall ensure that any benefits
         provided guarantee an adequate standard of living.


         3.   Paragraphs 1 and 2 are not applicable where the family member
         is or would be excluded from refugee or subsidiary protection
         status pursuant to Chapters III and V.
         4.   Notwithstanding paragraphs 1 and 2, Member States may refuse,
         reduce or withdraw the benefits referred therein for reasons of
         national security or public order.


         5.   Member States may decide that this Article also applies to
         other close relatives who lived together as part of the family at
         the time of leaving the country of origin, and who were wholly or
         mainly dependent on the beneficiary of refugee or subsidiary
         protection status at that time.


         Article 24
         Residence permits


         1.   As soon as possible after their status has been granted,
         Member States shall issue to beneficiaries of refugee status a
         residence permit which must be valid for at least three years and
         renewable unless compelling reasons of national security or public
         order otherwise require, and without prejudice to Article 21(3).
         Without prejudice to Article 23(1), the residence permit to be
         issued to the family members of the beneficiaries of refugee status
         may be valid for less than three years and renewable.


         2.   As soon as possible after the status has been granted, Member
         States shall issue to beneficiaries of subsidiary protection status
         a residence permit which must be valid for at least one year and
         renewable, unless compelling reasons of national security or public
         order otherwise require.

39. So far as is relevant, the Immigration Rules provide:


         322. In addition to the grounds for refusal of extension of stay
         set out in Parts 2-8 of these Rules, the following provisions apply
         in relation to the refusal of an application for leave to remain,
         variation of leave to enter or remain or, where appropriate, the
         curtailment of leave, except that only paragraphs (1A), (1B), (5),
         (5A), (9) and (10) shall apply in the case of an application made
         under paragraph 159I of these Rules.
         Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave to enter or
         remain in the United Kingdom are to be refused


         (1) the fact that variation of leave to enter or remain is being
         sought for a purpose not covered by these Rules.


         (1A) where false representations have been made or false documents
         or information have been submitted (whether or not material to the
         application, and whether or not to the applicant's knowledge), or
         material facts have not been disclosed, in relation to the
         application or in order to obtain documents from the Secretary of
         State or a third party required in support of the application.


         (1B) the applicant is, at the date of application, the subject of a
         deportation order or a decision to make a deportation order;


         339Q(i) The Secretary of State will issue to a person granted
         refugee status in the United Kingdom a residence permit as soon as
         possible after the grant of refugee status. The residence permit
         may be valid for five years and renewable, unless compelling
         reasons of national security or public order otherwise require or
         where there are reasonable grounds for considering that the
         applicant is a danger to the security of the United Kingdom or
         having been convicted by a final judgment of a particularly serious
         crime, the applicant constitutes a danger to the community of the
         United Kingdom or the person's character, conduct or associations
         otherwise require..
         ...
          (iii) The Secretary of State will issue a residence permit to a
         family member of a person granted refugee status or humanitarian
         protection where the family member does not qualify for such
         status. A residence permit may be granted for a period of five
         years. The residence permit is renewable on the terms set out in
         (i) and (ii) respectively. "Family member" for the purposes of this
         sub-paragraph refers only to those who are treated as dependants
         for the purposes of paragraph 349.


         349. A spouse, civil partner, unmarried partner, or minor child
         accompanying a principal applicant may be included in the
         application for asylum as a dependant, provided, in the case of an
         adult dependant with legal capacity, the dependant consents to
         being treated as such at the time the application is lodged. A
         spouse, civil partner, unmarried partner or minor child may also
         claim asylum in their own right. If the principal applicant is
         granted refugee status or humanitarian protection and leave to
         enter or remain any spouse, civil partner, unmarried partner or
         minor child will be granted leave to enter or remain for the same
         duration. The case of any dependant who claims asylum in their own
         right will be also considered individually in accordance with
         paragraph 334 above. An applicant under this paragraph, including
         an accompanied child, may be interviewed where they make a claim as
         a dependant or in their own right.


         ...


         352A The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter
         or remain in the United Kingdom as the partner of a person granted
         refugee status are that:
         (i) the applicant is the partner of a person who currently has
         refugee status granted under the Immigration Rules in the United
         Kingdom; and
         (ii) the marriage or civil partnership did not take place after the
         person granted refugee status left the country of their former
         habitual residence in order to seek asylum or the parties have been
         living together in a relationship akin to marriage or a civil
         partnership which has subsisted for two years or more before the
         person granted refugee status left the country of their former
         habitual residence in order to seek asylum; and
         (iii) the relationship existed before the person granted refugee
         status left the country of their former habitual residence in order
         to seek asylum; and
         (iv) the applicant would not be excluded from protection by virtue
         of paragraph 334(iii) or (iv) of these Rules or Article 1F of the
         Refugee Convention if they were to seek asylum in their own right;
         and
         ...
         A362. Where Article 8 is raised in the context of deportation under
         Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article 8 will only succeed
         where the requirements of these rules as at 28 July 2014 are met,
         regardless of when the notice of intention to deport or the
         deportation order, as appropriate, was served.


         396. Where a person is liable to deportation the presumption shall
         be that the public interest requires deportation. It is in the
         public interest to deport where the Secretary of State must make a
         deportation order in accordance with section 32 of the UK Borders
         Act 2007.


         397. A deportation order will not be made if the person's removal
         pursuant to the order would be contrary to the UK's obligations
         under the Refugee Convention or the Human Rights Convention. Where
         deportation would not be contrary to these obligations, it will
         only be in exceptional circumstances that the public interest in
         deportation is outweighed.

    Discussion

40. We remind ourselves that the immigration decision  under  appeal  is  a
    decision to refuse a human rights claim. The  sole  permissible  ground
    under section 84 (2) is  that  that  the  decision  is  unlawful  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

41. In this case, the submission is that a refusal  to  revoke  the  extant
    deportation  order  would  be  in  breach  of  the   United   Kingdom's
    obligations pursuant to article 8 of the Human Rights Convention. It is
    not in dispute that a family life exists  between  the  appellant,  his
    wife and their children, nor  that  deportation  would  interfere  with
    that, nor that the decision is in accordance with  law.  The  issue  in
    contention is whether deportation would be proportionate.

42. We remind ourselves that it is established  law  that  the  Immigration
    Rules are a means by which the Secretary of State sets out  her  policy
    and, so far as they relate to family and private life,  set  out  where
    she considers the balance of proportionality  lies.  Broadly  speaking,
    they crystallise the circumstances in  which  the  Secretary  of  State
    considers that the right to respect for family  and  private  life  are
    outweighed by the public interest in immigration  control;  and,  where
    appropriate, in the removal of foreign criminals. The rules are in this
    aspect underpinned by sections 117A to 117D of the 2002 Act.

43. The appellant's case, relying on TZ (Pakistan), is that  he  meets  the
    requirements of the Rules and therefore has shown that the interest  in
    his deportation is outweighed,  and  thus  to  enforce  that  would  be
    disproportionate.

44. Two issues arise from that: does the appellant meet the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules; and, is that sufficient.

45. We considered it appropriate to examine first Mr  Bedford's  submission
    with regards to  TZ  (Pakistan).  We  note  that  neither  case  in  TZ
    (Pakistan) concerned deportation and, as is noted at  [18(b)],  neither
    appellant qualified for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules.

46. We consider that a correct analysis of  TZ (Pakistan) is set out in  OA
    and Others (human rights; 'new matter'; s.120) Nigeria [2019]  UKUT  65
    (IAC) at paragraphs [27] and [28]:



         "27.  The significance of an  appellant  proving  to  a  First-tier
         Tribunal  judge  that  he  or  she  meets  the  requirements  of  a
         particular immigration rule, so as to be entitled to be given leave
         to remain, lies in the fact that - provided Article 8 of  the  ECHR
         is engaged - the respondent will  not  be  able  to  point  to  the
         importance of maintaining immigration controls as a factor weighing
         in favour of the respondent in the proportionality balance, so  far
         as that factor relates to the particular immigration rule that  the
         Tribunal has found to be satisfied.




         28.           Whether  or  not  such  a  finding  in  favour  of an
         appellant is likely to be determinative of the human rights  appeal
         will depend upon whether the respondent has any additional  reason,
         effectively overriding that particular rule, for  saying  that  the
         effective  operation  of  the   respondent's   immigration   policy
         nevertheless outweighs the appellant's  interest  in  remaining  in
         this  country.  To  take  one  simple  example,  an  appellant  who
         persuades the First-tier Tribunal that he meets the requirements of
         the Immigration Rules relating to entrepreneur  migrants  will  not
         thereby succeed in his human rights appeal  if  the  appellant  has
         been found by the respondent (and the  Tribunal  agrees)  that  the
         appellant falls foul of one or  more  of  the  general  grounds  of
         refusal contained in Part 9 of the Rules; for example,  because  he
         made  false  representations  in   connection   with   a   previous
         application for leave (paragraph 322(2))."


47.  In  the  example  given,  the  appellant  simply  did  not  meet   the
    requirements  of  the  Rules  but  the  point  made  is  that  in   the
    circumstances where the  Immigration  Rules  are  met,  the  respondent
    cannot plead the maintenance of immigration control as a factor  to  be
    given weight. That observation relates to the effect of section 117B of
    the 2002 Act.

48. The position in the case of deportation  appeals  where  those  concern
    foreign criminals is different due to the effect of section 117C of the
    2002 Act. There is a distinction to be  drawn  with  Section  117B  and
    117C.  Section 117B (1) which  would  apply  in  cases  such  as  those
    contemplated  in  OA,  states  only  that  maintenance   of   effective
    immigration  controls  is   in   the   public   interest.    In   those
    circumstances, it is difficult to see how if an  individual  meets  all
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules there is a public interest in
    refusing leave to remain.

49. In contrast, section 117C states clearly  the  deportation  of  foreign
    criminals is in the public interest. Section 117C(v) provides that  the
    public interest requires a criminal's deportation  unless  one  of  the
    exceptions applies.  Those exceptions are mirrored in  the  Immigration
    Rules.

50. Further, Section 117A sets out that a court considering  the  potential
    breach of a right to respect for private and family life under  Article
    8 must in all cases consider the deportation of criminals in  light  of
    section 117C.

51. Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 provides also that deportation of
    a foreign criminal is conducive to the public good, that  remaining  so
    even if Exception 1 within section 33 of that Act is established.

52. In that context, it cannot properly be  said  that  simply  because  an
    individual met the requirements of some parts of the Immigration  Rules
    (but not those dealing directly with deportation) that would negate the
    weight to be attached to the public  interest  in  the  deportation  of
    foreign criminals imposed by operation of  section  117C.  We  consider
    therefore that TZ (Pakistan) and OA are of  limited application in this
    appeal except insofar  as  the  principle,  applied  in  a  deportation
    appeal, is that if an appellant meets the  relevant   provisions,  that
    is, those within Part 13 setting out the exceptions to the  presumption
    in favour of  deportation,  then  deportation  is  not  in  the  public
    interest, albeit that it would remain conducive to the public good.

53. We now turn to an analysis of the effect of the  Immigration  Rules  in
    this case, bearing that what is being sought is  the  revocation  of  a
    deportation order.  We bear in mind R (Alvi) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 33, but
    unlike the position  in  that  case,  the  provisions  upon  which  the
    respondent seeks to rely are set  out  in  the  Immigration  Rules,  in
    particular at A362 and 396. It cannot, we consider, properly be  argued
    that in seeking to rely on these provisions,  that  the  respondent  is
    adding to or supplementing any requirement set out in the  rules  by  a
    requirement not in the Immigration Rules.

54. The  starting  point  for  the  appellant's  case  that  he  meets  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules is paragraph 349  which  provides
    as follows:

         If  the  principal  applicant  is   granted   refugee   status   or
         humanitarian protection and leave to enter or  remain  any  spouse,
         civil partner, unmarried or same sex partner or minor child will be
         granted leave to enter or remain for the same duration.

55. Paragraph 352C sets out the circumstances in which leave to remain  can
    be refused which is confined to a failure to  comply  with  352A(i)  to
    (vi).

56. There is, however, a tension between paragraph 349 and the more  recent
    provisions, including paragraph 339Q, which  were  introduced  to  give
    effect to the Qualification  Directive.  We  note  also  that  what  is
    referred to in 339Q is a "residence permit", not leave to remain.

57. Even if it were shown that the appellant  came  within  paragraph  352A
    (which would require us to accept that his wife had come here to  claim
    asylum, a point not addressed by either party), it does not follow that
    his deportation is disproportionate.  That is for the reasons  set  out
    above with respect to a proper understanding of TZ (Pakistan)  and  the
    application of Section 117C.  We bear in mind that  the  appellant  has
    not been recognised as a refugee and  accordingly  the  non-refoulement
    provisions do not apply to him.

58. We also agree with Mr Bedford's submission that the respondent is wrong
    to rely on paragraph 322 of the Immigration Rules.  We  do  not  accept
    that provision is worded in such a way as it would  cover  applications
    made under Part 11 which is not mentioned in  the  text.   We  note  Ms
    Smyth's concession that paragraph 322 could not apply to a refugee, but
    that is because grants of leave to refugees are not granted under those
    parts of the Immigration Rules referred to in paragraph 322. That is so
    because the clear intention of paragraph 322 is that it applies only to
    applications made under certain parts of the Rules and  that  does  not
    include asylum. There is no logical basis by which  a  provision  which
    does not apply to classes of applications made under specific parts  of
    the Rules could be construed as applying  to  certain  cases  (such  as
    here) within that. Our view is strengthened by the wording of paragraph
    322(1E) which is expressly said to apply to part 11 applications  which
    it would not have to do if the whole of paragraph  322  applied  across
    the Immigration Rules.

59. A further difficulty with the Secretary of State's argument is that  if
    322(1B) were to apply, then there is no reason why  any  of  the  other
    Rules would not apply to somebody who  claims  asylum  and  then  seeks
    leave to enter or remain on that basis.  Of particular relevance  would
    be the use of false documents (1A) not to mention the normative grounds
    set out at sub-paragraphs 2 to 13.

60. That said, we bear in mind that paragraph 396 of the Immigration  Rules
    provides that  where  a  person  is  liable  to  deportation,  as  this
    appellant clearly is by operation of paragraph 363 of  the  Immigration
    Rules and Section 32(4) of the UK Borders Act 2007 and Section 33(7)(b)
    of the same Act, then it is in the public interest to deport where  the
    Secretary of State must make a deportation  order  in  accordance  with
    section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007.

61. Further, by operation of paragraph A398, Part  13  of  the  Immigration
    Rules applies to this appeal.  This in turn mandates the application of
    paragraphs 398 to 400 of the Immigration  Rules  which  mirror  section
    117C of the 2002 Act.

62. Stepping back to look  at  the  structure  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
    sections 32 and 33 of the 2007 Act and section 117C of the 2002 Act  as
    a whole, we conclude that  clear  intention  of  the  scheme  is  that,
    irrespective of whether an individual might qualify for leave  in  some
    capacity, it is in the public interest that foreign criminals should be
    deported, unless they  fall  within  certain  limited  exceptions.  The
    effect of these provisions is that, unlike  the  scenario  in  OA,  the
    Secretary of State is not debarred from seeking to rely on  the  strong
    public interest in deporting a criminal.

63. Further, we do not consider the appellant  can  obtain  any  assistance
    from the Qualification  Directive.   We  consider  that  Ms  Smyth  was
    correct in her submission that the appellant is not  protected  against
    deportation as, again, he is not a  refugee.   Further,  the  Directive
    refers only to the issue of documentation albeit that  we  accept  that
    the Secretary of State could not refuse to issue it in his case  or set
    restrictions as to its length and duration.  We note that the Directive
    whilst providing for non-refoulement provisions in the  case  of  those
    recognised as refugees the same does not apply to their dependants.

64. For the reasons set out above, it is our conclusion that the  appellant
    is subject to the deportation regime provided by s.32 and s.33  of  the
    UK Borders Act 2007, Part 5A of  the  2002  Act  and  Part  13  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The Qualification  Directive  does  not  assist  the
    appellant as it does not provide  a  shield  against  deportation;  the
    existence of leave or a permit to remain is obviously not in  itself  a
    bar to removal that would defeat the whole purpose of mechanism  as  to
    how deportation operates. Further, we note that even  in  the  case  of
    those recognised as refugees, as with Articles 32 and 33 of the Refugee
    Convention,  Article  22  of  the   Qualification   Directive   permits
    expulsion.

65. Before us the appellant also maintained that the high threshold  for  a
    finding of undue hardship was met here  because,  over  and  above  the
    expected  harshness  when  a  child  is  separated  from  a  parent  by
    deportation, his children would be unable to visit him  in  Nigeria  as
    they are refugees. It is  uncontentious  that  when  considering  undue
    hardship for  the  appellant's  children  that  it  is  in  their  best
    interests for their father to remain in the UK with  them.  It  is  our
    conclusion, however, that even where that is so,  the  inability  of  a
    child to have very little or no direct contact  with  a  parent  is  an
    expected hardship arising from deportation and there remains the option
    of the children visiting the appellant outside Nigeria, for example, in
    a neighbouring  country.   We  also  did  not  find,  even  taking  the
    appellant's length of residence in the UK, the status  granted  to  his
    wife and children and the hardship they will all inevitably  experience
    if he is deported, that anything in the materials before us showed very
    compelling circumstances capable of outweighing the public interest  in
    the deportation of the appellant.

66. Accordingly, we dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and we set it aside.

 2. We remake the decision by dismissing it on all grounds.

 3. We make no anonymity order.


Signed:                             Date:  18 February 2020
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



