
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15776/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 July 2019                      |On 2 August 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                        Robert Adrian Campbell Logan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, Counsel instructed by One Immigration
(Leicester)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.   The appellant appealed against a decision of the Secretary of  State
      to refuse him leave to remain on human rights  grounds.   That  appeal
      was heard first in the First-tier Tribunal before First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Robertson and dismissed.  The appeal then came before me  on  17
      April 2019 when I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Judge.   I
      wrote:-

         "1.  The appellant appeals against a decision by Judge of the First-
             tier Tribunal Robertson who, in a determination promulgated on
             28 November 2018, dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  a
             decision dated 11 July 2018 to refuse him leave to  remain  on
             private life  grounds.   I  have  decided  to  set  aside  the
             decision of the First-tier Judge and I direct that the  appeal
             proceed to a hearing afresh which will take place on  12  July
             2019.


         2.   In brief, I have found that there are two errors of law in the
             determination.   Firstly,  that  the  judge   erred   in   her
             consideration of the family life of  the  appellant  here  and
             secondly,  in  not  considering,  or  not  giving  appropriate
             scrutiny to, the multiplicity of relevant factors in this case
             which could have led to a decision that  the  removal  of  the
             appellant would be a disproportionate  interference  with  his
             rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.


         3.   In particular I consider that the judge erred in paragraph  17
             of  the  determination  when  she  stated  that  although  she
             accepted that the appellant had a close family bond  with  his
             children there was nothing more  than  normal  emotional  ties
             between a father and his children and, furthermore,  when  she
             appeared to assert  that  he  was  not  currently  financially
             independent - a conclusion which is not sustainable given  the
             conclusions of the Supreme Court in  Rhuppiah  v  SSHD  [2018]
             UKSC 58.  I would add that Mr  Kotas  very  properly  accepted
             that sufficient scrutiny had not been  given  to  the  factors
             which would mean that the removal of this appellant  would  be
             disproportionate.


         4.   The facts of this case are unusual.  The appellant was born in
             Zimbabwe on 31 January 1971.  His father had been born in  New
             Zealand in 1939 and  his  paternal  grandmother  was  born  in
             Britain.  The reality is that had Zimbabwe not  been  expelled
             from the Commonwealth the appellant would be  entitled  to  an
             ancestry visa.  Moreover, as I expand  below  the  reason  the
             appellant left Zimbabwe - because of the treatment he received
             as a white  farmer  from  the  Zimbabwean  regime  -  was  the
             behaviour  of  the  regime  which  prompted   that   country's
             expulsion from the Commonwealth.


         5.   I would add that Mr Bazini indicated that,  some  years  after
             the expulsion of Zimbabwe from  the  Commonwealth,  Zimbabwean
             citizens who had grandparents born in Britain were still being
             treated as commonwealth citizens when the  issue  of  ancestry
             visas  were  considered  by  the  Home  Office.   Furthermore,
             although it appears that the appellant would not  be  entitled
             to New Zealand nationality,  despite  his  father  being  born
             there it is possible that he would  be  entitled  through  his
             mother, who was born in  Holland,  to  Dutch  nationality  and
             should that be the case he  would  be  entitled  to  leave  to
             remain as an EEA worker.


         6.   The appellant came to Britain in 2006 as a  husband  with  his
             wife who, although born in Zimbabwe, was  of  British  descent
             and therefore entitled to indefinite leave  to  remain.   They
             came with their three children, Ryan born  on  11  July  1991,
             Danielle born on 21 July 1994 and  Erin,  born  on  30  August
             1997.  The appellant was  given  the  appropriate  two  years'
             leave  to  enter.   Before,  however,  he   could   make   the
             application for indefinite leave to  enter  his  passport  was
             stolen.  As he did not have a passport the Home  Office  would
             not entertain the application for an  extension  of  stay  and
             similarly did not accept further applications made  for  leave
             to remain on human rights grounds on the basis that he did not
             have a passport.  It was not until a  decision  to  refuse  to
             consider an application was challenged by judicial review that
             the application was considered and then refused, that  refusal
             being the subject of this appeal.  In the  meantime,  however,
             the strains of his situation, and possibly  his  treatment  in
             Zimbabwe by ZANU-PF, led to the appellant  becoming  depressed
             and  suffering  mental  health  problems.    He   remains   on
             antidepressants.


          7. That, it appears,  was  a  factor  in  the  breakdown  of  his
             marriage,   although   the   appellant's   wife,   who   lives
             approximately one hour from where he lives with his son  Ryan,
             remains supportive of him and they  are  still  married.   The
             appellant lives with Ryan, who supports  him  financially,  as
             the appellant is  unable  to  work.   His  daughter  Erin  has
             herself suffered mental health problems caused,  in  part,  by
             the lack of security.  Following the decision of the House  of
             Lords in Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39).and  a  number  of
             other judgments in the Court of Appeal  and  in  the  European
             Court of Human Rights, I consider  that  these  factors  would
             mean that the judge should have found that there would  be  an
             interference with the  appellant's  family,  as  well  as  his
             private life,  if he were removed.  I would add also that,  of
             course, his family life here  was  established  while  he  was
             legally in Britain. It is further of note that  the  appellant
             has done all he could  to  regularise  his  status  since  his
             initial leave to enter expired but was unable to do so because
             of his lack of  a  passport.   It  is  his  evidence  that  he
             attempted to  obtain  another  passport  from  the  Zimbabwean
             authorities here but they stated that he would have to  return
             to Zimbabwe.  He was reluctant  to  do  that  because  of  the
             treatment which he had received there before which caused  him
             to leave, that is the appropriation of his farm  (albeit  that
             he  was  given  a  small  amount  of  compensation)  and   the
             harassment which he received in Zimbabwe.


         8.   The appellant has chosen not to apply  for  asylum  but  given
             that he himself was a member of the MDC and  that  his  father
             was a prominent critic of Mugabe, there must have been a  case
             for asylum which could have been made ten years ago given  his
             own past political  involvement.  It  may,  possibly,  now  be
             arguable that what he would face on  return  might  amount  to
             persecution.


         9.   I would add that there was considerable evidence  put  forward
             at the appeal which indicated the difficulties  faced  by  the
             small white minority in Zimbabwe now, let alone the  financial
             difficulties which he might face  in  making  a  living  there
             which it is arguable could lead to  the  lack  of  ability  to
             reintegrate into life in Zimbabwe in any meaningful way.


         10.  It is of note that the Presenting Officer at the appeal in the
             First-tier did not challenge the appellant's evidence relating
             to his family relationships or his  ancestry  or  the  reasons
             that he and his family left Zimbabwe.


         11.  Mr Kotas  indicated  that  he  would  endeavour  to  ascertain
             whether or not the appellant  might  still  be  treated  as  a
             Commonwealth citizen by the respondent and therefore  entitled
             to an ancestry visa and if he is able to obtain  any  definite
             answer he will correspond with Mr Bazini who  will  also  make
             his own researches in that regard.  The  respondent  may  also
             wish to reconsider his response in the light  of  the  various
             factors which I have set out above.


         12.  For the reasons which I have  given  above  I  set  aside  the
             determination of the First-tier Judge and I will  direct  that
             the appeal appears to a hearing fresh before  me  on  12  July
             2019.

             Directions

             (1)  The appeal is listed for a hearing  afresh  on  12  July.
             Time estimate, three hours.


             (2)  The appellant will inform the Tribunal  of  any  response
             which he receives from the Dutch Embassy with  regard  to  his
             application for Dutch nationality.


             (3)  The appellant will prepare  a  skeleton  argument  cross-
             referenced to the  documentary  evidence  in  support  of  the
             appellant's claim (a skeleton argument  will  largely  reflect
             the terms of the grounds of  appeal  cross-referenced  to  the
             bundle of documents".

2.   I now come to remake the decision. Ms Jones very properly did not  make
    submissions other than referring to the letter of refusal

3.   For the reasons which I set out in my first decision I found  that  the
    appellant has both family life here  and  indeed  I  find  that  he  is
    exercising private life here. His removal would be an interference with
    his both his family and private life here.

4.   With regard to the family life I would point out that I am  aware  that
    Ryan is his stepson, but clearly he is a child of the family and it  is
    clear that the appellant is exercising family life with Ryan, his wife,
    and Erin, his biological child, who is just an adult.  While of  course
    these relationships are ones between adults, the support that  Ryan  is
    giving to him clearly takes this case beyond the position of mere  ties
    between adults, and there is clearly emotional dependence  between  all
    members of the family. I would add that the appellant would qualify  as
    self-supporting following the decision in Rhuppiah.

5.   Having found the appellant is exercising private and family  life  here
    I must then consider whether or not he would succeed  under  the  Rules
    under the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  I find that he  would
    because I consider that there are very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    reintegrating into life in Zimbabwe.  I say that given that  he  had  a
    farm there, that although that farm was purchased it was purchased  for
    a very small amount, but the reality is that  the  background  evidence
    makes it quite clear that those such as the appellant,  who  no  longer
    have property  or  a  means  of  livelihood  there   would  have  great
    difficulty in  reintegration.  Moreover,  he  is  not  merely  a  white
    dispossessed  farmer.   The  additional  factors  relates  to  his  own
    involvement with the MDC and his father's  political  profile.  Indeed,
    given his profile I consider that he might well have an  arguable  case
    to apply for asylum.   I consider  that  the  background  documentation
    makes it quite clear that he would not be able to  reintegrate.   There
    is nothing to indicate that a man such as he would be able to find work
    and start a full life  again.  I  consider  that  the  appellant  would
    qualify for leave to remain under the provisions of paragraph  276  ADE
    (1) (vi)

6.   However, even if I were wrong in that conclusion, I can only find  that
    his removal would be disproportionate.  I find that because there are a
    large number of compelling and exceptional circumstances in this  case.
    These I set out in my earlier decision.   They  relate  to  his  family
    relationships here, to his own mental health and indeed  to  an  extent
    that of Erin too, but also to his particularly  close  ties  with  this
    country.  The issue raised at the previous hearing as to whether or not
    he would be able to apply for a grandparent visa by  descent,  has  now
    been resolved by the evidence that has been put forward in  the  e-mail
    from Miss Wackett to Mr Neil  O'Brien  MP  dated  24  June  2019.   The
    reality is that should the appellant  make  such  an  application  that
    would succeed.  He would be entitled to work here because his  paternal
    grandmother was born in Britain.

7.   I consider that given all the circumstances of the case, including  the
    time which he has lived here, and I would emphasise that he has  at  no
    time lived without making attempts to remain, and that indeed the  fact
    that he did not get an extension of  stay  almost  ten  years  ago  was
    because of the exceptional  circumstances  in  that  his  passport  was
    stolen,  that  following  the  judgment  in  Chikwamba  it   would   be
    inappropriate to expect him to leave the country to make an application
    for the ancestry visa abroad.

8.   These are exceptional and compelling factors, which again  lead  me  to
    the conclusion that he is entitled to  leave  to  remain.   Having  set
    aside the determination of the First-tier Judge I therefore remake  the
    decision allowing this appeal.

9.   No anonymity direction is made.

Decision.

This appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.



Signed: [pic]                           Date: 17 July 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

