
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15264/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 17 March 2021                           |On 22 April 2021                |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                 KABITA RAI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Moriarty instructed by Everest Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Nepal.  She appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the respondent's decision of 30 July 2019 refusing her
    application for entry clearance for the purpose of  settlement  as  the
    adult dependant of her father who is a former Ghurkha soldier.

2.   The judge accepted that if he was satisfied  as  to  the  existence  of
    family life capable of engaging Article 8 the weight to  be  attributed
    to the "historic injustice" referred to in the authorities  was  likely
    to exceed that given to the requirements  of  immigration  control  and
    therefore if the appellant succeeded in establishing family  life  then
    the proportionality issue would be resolved in her favour.

3.   The judge noted the evidence.  The  appellant's  father,  the  sponsor,
    had served with the Ghurkhas between  1967  and  1982.   He  had  seven
    children including, of course, the appellant, who was born on 22 August
    1985.

4.   The appellant was married to Mr Dev Kumar Rai on 28 February 2008.   It
    was an arranged marriage.  Her husband  was  at  the  time  living  and
    working in Dubai.  He returned to Nepal for the marriage  ceremony  but
    only remained for a short time before returning to Dubai  and  did  not
    return to Nepal for several years.  After the  marriage  the  appellant
    went to live with her in-laws but often returned  to  the  family  home
    where she would complain about the  treatment  she  received  at  their
    hands.  She would sometimes stay at the family home before returning to
    her in-laws of her own accord.

5.   In 2009 the sponsor first became aware that he and his  family  members
    might be allowed to settle  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  he  made  an
    application for them to do so.  Having been granted visas in 2011 they,
    i.e. he, his wife and his two youngest daughters  who  were  then  aged
    under 18, came to settle in the United Kingdom in  January  2012.   The
    appellant and her sister Babita, who had been born in 1987, remained in
    Nepal.

6.   Before coming to the United Kingdom the sponsor left some cash  from  a
    loan he had taken out for the use of his two daughters  and  left  also
    two signed cheques drawn on the bank account  into  which  his  Ghurkha
    pension was paid.  He sent a total of NPR 2 lakh in 2012  to  2013  and
    when he visited Nepal in 2014 he again left some money for  their  use.
    It appears that by this time the appellant was living  with  Babita  in
    the family home which it was claimed was  badly  damaged  in  the  2015
    earthquake and had not been properly repaired.

7.   In 2017 Babita was granted a settlement visa and came to  live  in  the
    United Kingdom in November of that year.  This left  the  appellant  as
    the only surviving member of the family unit in Nepal.   In  June  2018
    she was divorced from her husband, effectively by  consent.   Following
    her divorce she set about making her own application to join  the  rest
    of the family in the United Kingdom.  The sponsor visited her in  Nepal
    in 2019.  At the time of her application the appellant was living  with
    a relative in Kathmandu rent free although she was required to pay  for
    food and the sponsor said he was sending money from the United  Kingdom
    to cover the cost.

8.   The sponsor's evidence was that he  and  his  wife  had  a  very  close
    relationship with the appellant.  They spoke regularly by telephone via
    Viber.  The sponsor is in poor health, not having fully recovered  from
    a stroke, and his wife has some age related conditions.  They  wish  to
    have the appellant on hand to provide them with care and to reunite the
    family in the United Kingdom.

9.   At the hearing he said that the appellant was  presently  living  alone
    at the family home, going on to state that she  had  then  been  living
    with his wife's brother's daughter in Kathmandu  at  the  time  of  the
    application and had been moving between the  two  places.   As  to  how
    often he spoke to the appellant he said it varied, maybe once a week or
    two weeks or a month and they talked about her wellbeing  and  how  she
    was doing.

10.  As to where the appellant had lived during her marriage, he  said  that
    she had lived with her in-laws but would often  return  to  the  family
    home when she complained about the treatment she received, particularly
    at the hands of her mother-in-law who would beat  her.   When  she  was
    asked whether her husband had remitted money from Dubai for her  upkeep
    during the marriage her father responded in the  negative  stating  "we
    looked after her", going on to say that he had sometimes given money to
    the appellant when she was living with her in-laws.  The appellant  had
    never been employed in Nepal.  She had no health issues preventing  her
    from taking employment, it was difficult to get jobs there and her only
    experience was as a housewife.

11.   The  judge  also  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant's  mother  who
    essentially confirmed what her husband had said.   She  said  that  her
    daughter had not  had a relationship with her husband, her husband  had
    come to Nepal in 2015, the appellant had stayed at her in-laws for only
    a week and during that week did not  have  the  relationship  with  her
    husband as couples would be expected to do.  Subsequently the appellant
    only heard from him in 2018 when the divorce was arranged.

12.  The appellant's mother went on to say that they had felt  the  physical
    absence of Kabita in each passing moment  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    shared all their troubles with her over the phone and  she  would  talk
    about how she was alone and how much she wished to be with them and had
    no one in Nepal to help her live and provide support.   She  had  never
    lived on her own nor away from home.

13.  The judge set out relevant case law including  Patel  [2010]  EWCA  Civ
    17, Ghising [2012] UKUT 00160, Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ 8 and  PT  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 612.  The question of whether or not Article 8 was engaged  as
    between an adult child and his  or  her  parents  was  a  highly  fact-
    sensitive matter, there was no requirement of  "exceptionality",  there
    was no legal or factual presumption as to the existence or  absence  of
    family life for the purposes of Article 8.  It was said in PT that  the
    love and affection between an adult and his parents  or  siblings  will
    not of itself justify a finding  of  family  life.   There  had  to  be
    something more.  The judge observed  that  one  of  the  common  themes
    running through  the  authorities  was  that  for  an  adult  child  to
    establish the existence of a family life with a parent he/she must  not
    have established an  independent  life  or  an  independent  family  of
    his/her own.

14.  The judge noted that the appellant was married in  2008,  over  a  year
    before the prospect of  settlement  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  even
    contemplated by her parents and that therefore  her  and  her  parents'
    intention was that she would form an independent family of her own.  It
    was clear from her  parents'  evidence  that  she  regarded  it  as  an
    obligation to reside with her  husband's  family,  notwithstanding  her
    complaints about the manner of  her  treatment  and  although  she  was
    accustomed to visit her  own  family,  which  the  judge  found  to  be
    entirely natural given that they all lived in  the  same  village,  she
    would return to her husband's family of her own accord.

15.  With regard to the submission that by the time her family left for  the
    United Kingdom in 2012 her marriage was to all intents and purposes  at
    an end and the bonds that had previously existed with her  parents  had
    been re-forged and family life restored, this was at variance with  the
    appellant's  mother's  evidence  that  when  the  appellant's   husband
    returned to Nepal in 2014 to 2015 the appellant returned to her marital
    home for a week until she was scolded by her mother-in-law.  The  judge
    found this to indicate that whatever had  gone  before,  the  appellant
    regarded her family life with her husband as being extant.   The  judge
    also noted that she had not taken any steps to bring her marriage to an
    end until six years after her parents had gone to  the  United  Kingdom
    and several years after her sister Babita had obtained  her  settlement
    visa, and only then at the behest of her husband.

16.  The judge found that in the absence of documentary evidence he did  not
    accept that the appellant was financially  maintained  by  her  parents
    throughout her marriage as was claimed.  He found that at  least  prior
    to 2018 the appellant was in receipt  of  financial  support  from  her
    husband.  He bore in  mind  the  limited  financial  resources  of  the
    sponsor, noting also the copy money transfer  receipts  submitted  from
    early 2018.

17.  The judge found that when the appellant married her husband she  ceased
    to enjoy family life with her parents capable of engaging Article 8 and
    that when her parents came to the United Kingdom  in  2012  she  was  a
    married woman and regarded herself as such, as  did  her  parents.   He
    found that since 2012 she had been living independently of her  parents
    who had visited her on only two occasions.   He  did  not  accept  that
    since  that  time  she  had  been  wholly  or  mainly  financially   or
    emotionally dependent on her parents.  She was in receipt of  financial
    support from her husband and until 2017 she had emotional support  from
    her sister  Babita.   The  judge  also  noted  that  there  were  other
    relatives in Nepal who were  willing  and  able  to  offer  support  as
    evidenced by the fact that the appellant  was  living  with  family  in
    Kathmandu at the time of her application.

18.  With regard to the submission that family life and  a  relationship  of
    dependence once  lost  could  be  re-established  so  as  to  bring  an
    applicant within the ambit  of  Article  8  was  not  discounted  as  a
    possibility, but the judge considered that once an appellant had become
    independent and founded a family of his/her own, cogent evidence  would
    be required to show that changed circumstances  gave  rise  to  genuine
    dependency, the more so whereas in this  case  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor had been living in different countries for eight years.

19.  The judge regarded it as entirely natural that the appellant would  now
    wish to be reunited with her family in  the  United  Kingdom  and  vice
    versa but that did not amount to more than one would expect from  close
    family members.  He considered that it did  not  amount  to  dependence
    going beyond normal emotional ties.  The evidence of the frequency  and
    content of the telephone contact with the  appellant  went  no  further
    than the usual banalities which might be  expected  of  family  members
    living in different countries.

20.  The judge noted that the appellant was a single  childless  woman  with
    no health conditions which would prevent her  from  taking  employment.
    She had relatives who had been willing to accommodate her in Kathmandu,
    and of his own experience of visiting Kathmandu which he knew to  be  a
    large city and tourist hub with many  hotels  and  guest  houses,  that
    might provide opportunities for employment.  He considered  that  there
    was no reason why she should not be able to support herself  in  Nepal.
    Remittances from the sponsor since 2018 were not evidence of dependence
    but simply evidence of payment of money to support her in the aftermath
    of her divorce, again an entirely natural thing to do.

21.  Looking at the evidence in the round the judge found that  he  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant was genuinely emotionally  or  financially
    dependent upon the sponsor and was not satisfied that the  relationship
    went beyond normal familial affection.  As such he found that Article 8
    was not engaged as there was not family life between the appellant  and
    her parents.  Accordingly the appeal was dismissed.

22.  The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal against  this
    decision, first on the basis that there was nothing in the case law  to
    preclude the re-establishment of a once fractured family life, that, as
    had been held in Uddin [2020] EWCA Civ 338 dependency was not a term of
    art but a question of fact, a matter of substance not  form,  and  that
    there was no need to show exceptional dependence and that  family  life
    was inherently capable of being fluid and changeable.   It  was  argued
    that the judge had erred  in  denying  the  existence  of  family  life
    between the appellant and the sponsor,  notwithstanding  the  financial
    and emotional support which  the  sponsor  and  his  wife  continue  to
    provide to her based on her previous failed attempt to  form  a  family
    unit of  her  own,  which  was  inconsistent  with  the  fact-sensitive
    approach adopted by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Uddin.   The  ultimate
    question was whether the  level  of  financial  and  emotional  support
    currently being  provided  by  the  sponsor  was  "real,  effective  or
    committed" and not a question of whether the appellant was incapable of
    financially supporting herself.  It was erroneous to consider that  her
    lack of children, relatively good health and theoretical ability to  go
    and live with relatives with a view to finding employment in  Kathmandu
    were relevant to the question of whether the sponsor was as a matter of
    present fact providing her with support which is real or  effective  or
    committed.

23.  In his submissions Mr Moriarty relied on and developed the points  made
    in the grounds of appeal.  The issues were overlapping  and  it  was  a
    question of whether family life could be re-established if  disengaged.
    The judge had accepted in principle that that might  be  the  case  but
    seemed to say that he might require a heightened degree  of  dependency
    for family life, and this had informed his approach  to  whether  there
    was enough evidence on the facts of the case to show family life.

24.  It was relevant to note that,  as  was  said  by  the  sponsor  in  his
    evidence, given the opportunity to do so he and his family  would  have
    migrated to the  United  Kingdom  at  the  earliest  opportunity.   The
    difficulties with the decision really arose at  paragraphs  61  to  64.
    The judge did not really grapple with the relevant issues.  He set  out
    facts that were considered to be  counter-indicative  at  paragraph  64
    including the fact that the appellant was single and childless with  no
    health conditions and would be able  to  get  work  in  Kathmandu.   He
    questioned whether this was relevant to the  question  of  whether  her
    father was providing effective and committed support to  her.   It  was
    not relevant to the question to be decided.  It was not suggested  that
    the judge erred in law when referring to his experience  and  knowledge
    of Kathmandu, but given the current pandemic the  question  of  whether
    the appellant could get a job did not go to her father's commitment  to
    support her.  The judge at paragraph 64 accepted that there was support
    but said it was not evidence of dependency and it was unclear  what  he
    thought dependency was beyond that.  The witness statements  should  be
    considered, showing as they did close emotional bonds and distress from
    separation.  The evidence therefore went beyond banalities as  referred
    to by the judge and the financial support was beyond just support.

25.  In her submissions Ms Cunha referred to paragraphs 47 to 50  where  the
    judge assessed the evidence and made points relevant to the family life
    issue.  The question as argued by Mr Moriarty was whether the judge had
    insisted on  a  higher  degree  of  dependency  than  was  required  in
    Kugathas.  The judge had not said there  was  a  higher  threshold  but
    compared the relationship the appellant had with her parents  when  she
    was married, in the assessment at paragraphs 47 and  49  and  paragraph
    50.  The judge assessed that the relationship had been at  the  earlier
    time with the father giving support to the appellant and her sister  in
    2012 and 2014.  The appellant had lived in the family home but that did
    not mean there was dependency more than normal emotional ties.  If that
    threshold could not be met there was no evidence to show  the  position
    was different today.  The appellant had  not  been  held  to  a  higher
    threshold but the judge had said that there had been family life but it
    was not Article 8(1).  The divorce was relevant  for  her  reasons  for
    coming to the United  Kingdom  but  that  did  not  show  the  Kugathas
    threshold was met.  As had been said in Rai at paragraph 17  a  rounded
    assessment was needed and  it  had  to  be  shown  there  was  a  real,
    committed, effective relationship.  The public interest  did  not  come
    into play.  There was more evidence of dependency that had subsequently
    been provided but the judge had not just considered the  past  and  had
    referred to family help  from  relatives  in  Nepal.   The  appellant's
    mother  said  she  was  dependent  on  the  appellant  and  needed  the
    additional support she provided so even if the Tribunal disagreed about
    the consideration as of now it was  nullified  by  the  fact  that  the
    dependency seemed to be the other way.

26.  By way of reply Mr Moriarty argued that  the  point  was  that  if  the
    judge agreed that family life could be re-established then the question
    of engagement with Article 8(1) should be on the same basis as for  any
    appellant.  There was no heightened test.  Any co-dependency  with  the
    parents did not suggest an absence  of  support  from  the  appellant's
    father.  She was entirely reliant on her father for  financial  support
    and dependent on both parents and she could increasingly take  on  care
    for them here, and that was enough to amount to family life.

27.  I reserved my decision.

28.  In my view the key issue here is that relating to what the  judge  said
    at paragraph 61 of his decision and thereafter.  He accepted,  clearly,
    in  my  view,  correctly,  that  family  life  and  a  relationship  of
    dependence once lost can be re-established so as to bring a  person  in
    the position of the appellant again with the ambit of  Article  8  with
    her parents.  Clearly she had family life with her parents  before  her
    marriage and the argument before the judge was whether the relationship
    she now had with them amounted to family life.  The key  point  arising
    from this paragraph is whether the judge imposed too high a  test  with
    regard to the  evidence  required  to  be  provided  to  show  the  re-
    establishment of family life in circumstances such as these.  Though he
    used the term "cogent evidence" as being  required  to  show  that  the
    changed circumstances gave rise to genuine dependency, it  is  not  the
    case in my view that he required a level of evidence going beyond  what
    would have been required to show family life  prior  to  her  marriage.
    The evidence that the judge went  on  to  consider  thereafter  in  his
    decision and the test that he applied is in my view consistent with the
    proper test, noting also his quotation from Kugathas of the remarks  of
    Sedley LJ.  The judge did  not  consider  that  the  evidence  went  to
    dependence going beyond normal emotional ties.  The  use  of  the  term
    "banalities" was perhaps  a  little  unfortunate,  but  the  judge  was
    essentially commenting on the evidence of the frequency and content  of
    the telephone contact which the appellant had with her parents which in
    my view he was  entitled  to  find  went  no  further  than  the  usual
    exchanges to be expected  of  family  members  who  live  in  different
    countries.  Though the use of the term "cogent" might appear  that  the
    judge applied a different test, in my view in the paragraphs subsequent
    to paragraph 61 he did no more than assess the evidence in the  context
    of the correct legal tests.  He was entitled to find that  he  was  not
    satisfied that the relationship went beyond normal  familial  affection
    and that that was not sufficient to engage Article 8(1).   Accordingly,
    I conclude that the judge did not err in law in his evaluation  of  the
    appellant's appeal and the appeal is accordingly dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date 14 April 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
