
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:   HU/15456/2018
      HU/15458/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 June 2019                      |On 9 July 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                               MIR JILAL UDDIN
                               MIR KAMAL UDDIN
                         (NO ANONYMITY ORDERS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Iqbal, legal representative
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh born in June 1999  and  April
    2000.  They appealed against a decision of the respondent  made  on  12
    August 2017 to refuse them entry clearance to the UK as the children of
    their mother Mrs Bibi.  The applications were made on 21 May 2017. They
    were refused under paragraph 297 of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  three
    grounds: first, the  relationship  had  not  been  established;  second
    maintenance; third, accommodation.

 2. They appealed.

First-tier Hearing

 3. Following a hearing at Nottingham on 5 March 2019 Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Place dismissed the appeals.

 4. Noting a DNA report she found that the relationship had been proved.

 5. Turning to maintenance the judge, who heard evidence that  the  sponsor
    was working in a restaurant, found (at [13]) that "at the date  of  the
    respondent's decision the appellants did not  satisfy  the  maintenance
    provisions of the Immigration Rules and that the respondent's  decision
    was correct under the Rules."

 6. However, she went on (at [14]) to  "also  find  that  at  the  date  of
    hearing .... Mrs Bibi's income was sufficient to meet  the  maintenance
    provisions of the Rules, assuming the appellants were still children at
    the date of hearing, which, of course, they were not."

 7. Moving on to accommodation  the  judge  noted  the  evidence  that  the
    sponsor had been living at an address in Bedford and that a report  had
    been provided showing that the accommodation  was  adequate.   However,
    the judge added that she did not have that report.   She  did,  though,
    have a report in respect of a different address in  Bedford,  at  which
    the sponsor  was  currently  living.   She  stated  that  the  evidence
    "satisfies the requirement of there being adequate accommodation  owned
    or occupied by the appellants' parent." [15]

 8. She concluded in respect of the Rules (at [22]) "At  the  date  of  the
    respondent's decision the appellants did not meet the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.  Time has  passed  and  Mrs  Bibi's  income  has
    within the last month  gone  up  to  just  above  the  level  required.
    Adequate accommodation is also now available.  This does not alter  the
    fact that the respondent's decision was correct when it was made."

 9. In the remaining paragraphs, in considering proportionality, the  judge
    found  under  s117B  that  the  appellants  would  not  be  financially
    independent and cannot speak English.  Also,  as  they  are  no  longer
    children their  best  interests  were  not  a  relevant  consideration.
    Further, "As they are no longer under 18, they do not satisfy  the  age
    requirements  of  paragraph  297,  even  though  the  maintenance   and
    accommodation provisions are now satisfied." [23]

10. In final comments the judge found that the  respondent's  decision  did
    not mean that family life between the appellants and their  mother  has
    to be permanently interrupted.  She lived with them alone in Bangladesh
    for 10 years and she could do so again.  Financial support from  family
    members here would be available to them there.

11. The appellants sought permission to appeal which was granted on 15  May
    2019.

    Error of law hearing

12. The thrust of Mr Iqbal's submissions  was  that  the  judge  failed  to
    correctly apply section  85(5)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act  2002.   Reference  was  made  to  DR  (ECO:  post  decision
    evidence) Morocco [2005] UKIAT  38.   The  evidence  presented  at  the
    hearing which satisfied the  judge  on  maintenance  and  accommodation
    related to "circumstances appertaining at the time of the  decision  to
    refuse."

13. It was pointed out that that version of section 85 had been superseded.
    Section 85 (4) states that  the  tribunal  "may  consider...any  matter
    which  it  thinks  relevant  to  the   substance   of   the   decision,
    including...a matter arising after the date of the decision" unless  it
    is a "new matter" which requires the respondent's consent. There is  no
    issue of a "new matter" in these appeals.

14. Ms Everett's position was that as this is a  human  rights  appeal  the
    relevant date is date of hearing.  While that appeared to  benefit  the
    appellants in respect of the post decision evidence which satisfies the
    maintenance and accommodation provisions of the Rules, at the  date  of
    hearing they were over 18 with the result that it  was  more  difficult
    for them to succeed.

Consideration

15. This is a human rights appeal.  As such the Tribunal may  consider  any
    matter relevant to the substance of the  decision  including  a  matter
    arising after the date of decision  and  evidence  bearing  on  such  a
    matter will be admissible.  This is so for both in country and  out  of
    country appeals.  The public interest considerations are also  assessed
    as at the date of hearing rather  than  date  of  decision.   The  duel
    questions of whether Article 8 is  engaged,  and  if  so,  whether  the
    decision under appeal is proportionate must therefore be  evaluated  as
    at the date of hearing.

16. The judge properly made findings as to maintenance and accommodation as
    at date of decision  and  date  of  hearing.   However,  she  erred  in
    apparently  taking  date  of  decision  as  the  crucial  date  in  her
    assessment of proportionality.  In doing so  and  in  disregarding  the
    (unchallenged)  findings  that  the   maintenance   and   accommodation
    requirements were satisfied at date of  hearing,  she  made  inadequate
    findings on the issue of proportionality.  Such amounted to a  material
    error of law such that the decision must be set aside to be remade.  It
    was not  suggested  that  any  further  evidence  or  submissions  were
    required.

17. As Ms Everett properly noted the appellants are now both over 18  years
    of age.  The first has just turned 20, the second 19. There is no legal
    or factual presumption as to the existence or absence  of  family  life
    for the  purposes  of  Article  8  nor  is  there  any  requirement  of
    exceptionality. It all depends on the facts. A child enjoying a  family
    life with his parent does not suddenly cease to have a family  life  at
    midnight as he turned 18 years of age.  On the facts of this  case  the
    evidence is that they are,  essentially,  alone  in  Bangladesh.  Their
    father died in 2007. Their mother raised them alone with financial help
    from brothers in the UK.  She came lawfully to  the  UK  in  late  2018
    intending that her children should join her soon after, but  there  was
    delay due to errors by lawyers in Bangladesh. They remain dependent  on
    her for financial and emotional support. I find that  family  life  has
    continued with their mother.

18. I find that the refusal to  grant  entry  clearance  is  of  sufficient
    gravity to interfere with the appellants' right to respect  for  family
    life.  The refusal is in accordance with the law and for  a  legitimate
    reason.

19. The issue is proportionality. Immigration  control  is  in  the  public
    interest, and the  s117B  factors  (not  able  to  speak  English,  not
    financially independent) do not assist the appellants.  However,  there
    is no challenge that the appellants through their  mother  now  satisfy
    all the requirements of paragraph 297. She has had sole  responsibility
    for their upbringing. They are unmarried  and  not  living  independent
    lives. The fact that they show they meet the requirements of the  Rules
    which were applicable when their  applications  were  made  and  remain
    applicable until the conclusion of proceedings in their  appeals  under
    that application, weighs  heavily  in  their  favour.  In  that  regard
    paragraph 27 of the Rules has relevance. It states: "an application for
    entry clearance is to be decided in  the  light  of  the  circumstances
    existing at the time of the decision, except that an applicant will not
    be refused entry clearance where entry is sought [under paragraph  297]
    solely on account of his attaining the age of 18 years between  receipt
    of his application and the date of the decision  on  it."  Further,  in
    light of the nature of their relationship with their mother  and  their
    individual circumstances in their home country I am satisfied  that  in
    this case the balance of proportionality lies in favour of allowing the
    appeals.

20. Accordingly, the Article 8 appeals are allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal showed material error  of  law.   It
is set aside and remade as follows:

            The appeals are allowed.

No anonymity orders made.



Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway                        4 July 2019

