
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: HU/15469/2019 (V)

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reason Promulgation|
|On 8 March 2021                               |On 12 March 2021              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     HA

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant: Ms E Rutherford, Instructed by Rodman Pearce Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a national of Pakistan with date of birth given  as
   21.10.02, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  6.4.20  (Judge  French),
   dismissing on  all  grounds  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 20.8.19, to  refuse  his  application  made  on
   28.2.19 for entry clearance to the UK as a child of  his  parent  MK  and
   family life with MK's partner KH, a British citizen.

2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused by the  First-tier
   Tribunal on 14.4.20. However, when the application  was  renewed  to  the
   Upper Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  granted  permission  on
   24.8.20, considering "It is, just, arguable that, as the renewed  grounds
   aver, the  finding  that  the  appellant's  father  does  not  have  sole
   responsibility for him is unsafe, given what is averred at [3.b, d and  e
   to g]. It is also difficult in places, given how the decision is set out,
   to separate findings from evidence and submissions."

3. However, Judge Rintoul added, "That said, close attention  will  need  to
   be paid to TD (Yemen) and this is a  case  in  which  both  parents  have
   contact with the appellant and it should not be assumed that  the  appeal
   will ultimately succeed."

4. In TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole  responsibility")  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT
   00049, the Upper Tribunal held that:

      "Sole responsibility" is a factual matter to be decided upon  all  the
      evidence.  Where one parent is not involved in the child's  upbringing
      because he (or she) had abandoned  or  abdicated  responsibility,  the
      issue may arise between the remaining parent and others who have  day-
      to-day care of the child abroad.  The test is whether the  parent  has
      continuing  control  and  direction  over  the   child's   upbringing,
      including making all the important  decisions  in  the  child's  life.
      However, where both parents are involved in a child's  upbringing,  it
      will be exceptional that one of them will have "sole responsibility".

5. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. I note that the  sponsor  and
   the appellant were both present  remotely  from  Pakistan,  but  made  no
   active contribution as this hearing was a matter of legal submissions.

6. Complaint is first made that the judge relied on the absence of  a  court
   order confirming that the appellant has sole responsibility. At [8],  the
   judge noted that although there was no such court order, it was submitted
   on behalf of the appellant that the father and sponsor had de facto 'sole
   parental responsibility'. The judge pointed  out  that  was  inconsistent
   with the evidence, which included that whilst he  was  living  day-to-day
   with his grandmother, the appellant would  visit  his  mother  every  few
   months. More significantly, the judge was  told  that  if  the  appellant
   became upset, he would go to see her for emotional support. It  is  clear
   that the mother retained at least some involvement with the appellant.

7. I am more concerned with [10] of the impugned decision, where  the  judge
   returned again to the issue of a court order, stating  that  it  was  not
   accepted that the sponsor has  sole  parental  responsibility.  This  was
   followed by the statement that, "There is no legal order to  that  effect
   and the child's mother is still very much part of his life."

8. The judge also noted that the sponsor retained contact  details  for  the
   appellant's mother, which is the subject  of  a  further  complaint  that
   irrelevant matters were taken  into  account.  The  judge  was  also  not
   satisfied that the sponsor had been making regular financial payments for
   the benefit of the appellant, pointing to the paucity  of  the  evidence,
   there being only a few payment slips over a relatively short  three-month
   period, and absence of evidence from any  third  party  as  to  what  the
   payments were for.

9. I remind myself that the decision has to be  read  as  a  whole  and  not
   reduced to an attack on isolated  constituent  parts.  For  example,  the
   submission at [3d] that because the sponsor  continues  to  have  contact
   details for the appellant's mother is insufficient to demonstrate  shared
   responsibility or that she plays any active role, does  not  address  the
   overall reasoning.

10. The grounds assert that the mother played  no  meaningful  role  in  the
   appellant's life, I am satisfied that it may well have been open  to  the
   judge to conclude to the contrary on the evidence summarised above, taken
   in the round, particularly  when  the  burden  is  on  the  appellant  to
   demonstrate that the sponsor has sole responsibility. However, the way in
   which the judge returned to reliance on the absence of a court order, the
   reliance on contact details being retained by the sponsor for the mother,
   and what might be regarded as scant account taken of the other supporting
   evidence, including visits of  the  sponsor  to  the  appellant  and  the
   reasons for the absence of such visits over a  certain  period  of  time,
   when the sponsor was unable to travel because of his immigration  status,
   is unsatisfactory. The judge does not address  the  issue  of  continuing
   control and direction over  the  appellant's  life,  and  the  impression
   created is that because there remains some  limited  involvement  between
   the appellant and  his  mother,  this  is  entirely  undermining  of  the
   assertion of sole responsibility.

11. Taken as a whole, I  conclude  that  the  finding  in  respect  of  sole
   responsibility is unsafe, despite the paucity and inadequacy of  evidence
   in the appellant's support. I cannot be satisfied that the judge did  not
   take place heavy reliance on peripheral and possibly  irrelevant  matters
   in dismissing the appeal.

12. In the circumstances and for the reasons set out above, I find  material
   error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so that  it  must
   be set aside.


13. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set  aside,  section
   12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  requires  either
   that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with directions,  or
   it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal.  The  scheme  of  the  Tribunals
   Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the  function  of  primary
   fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  error  of  law  vitiates  all
   findings of fact and the conclusions from those facts.  In  the  premises
   the appropriate course is to remit this matter to be made  again  in  the
   First-tier Tribunal.


Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside to be  remade  de
      novo with no findings of fact preserved.

      The  matter  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting   at
      Birmingham.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       8 March 2021



Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       8 March 2021





