
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/15418/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1 March 2021                         |On 14 April 2021               |
|                                        |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     KM
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr  Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms Griffiths, Counsel instructed by Turpin and
Miller LLP.

This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State. However, for convenience,
      I will refer to the parties as they were designated in the  First-tier
      Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born in 1981, who has been  in
      the UK since 2002 (with Indefinite Leave to Remain since 2010). He has
      a son, born in 2004, who is a British citizen.

   3. In 2016 the appellant was convicted  of  theft  and  sentenced  to  24
      months' imprisonment. A deportation order was made  against  him.  The
      appellant made a human rights  claim,  arguing  that  his  deportation
      would be  contrary  to  article  8  ECHR.  On  4  September  2019  the
      respondent refused the claim.

   4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  where  his  appeal
      came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Stedman ("the judge"). In
      a decision promulgated on 17 April 2020, the judge allowed the appeal.
      The respondent is now appealing against that decision.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   5. The central issue before the  judge  was  whether  the  conditions  of
      section 117(C)(5) of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
      ("the 2002 Act") were satisfied; that is, whether the  effect  of  the
      appellant's deportation on his son would be unduly harsh.

   6. The judge, who heard evidence  from  the  appellant,  the  appellant's
      brother, and the appellant's former partner (the mother of  his  son),
      gave several reasons for finding that the effect of deportation  would
      be unduly harsh on the appellant's son.  The  following  reasons  were
      given:

        a. The appellant lived with his son until going to prison  in  2015
           and played a major role in his upbringing (as the primary  carer
           whilst his former partner was working).


        b. Whilst in prison he spoke to his son every day.

        c. The appellant and his son have a loving and caring  relationship
           and family life has been flourishing since  the  appellant  left
           prison three years ago.

        d. The appellant's son struggled a great deal when  separated  from
           his  father  (whilst  his  father  was  in   prison)   and   was
           destabilised by this.


        e. The relationship would be completely fractured by deportation.

        f. The appellant's son is at a fragile stage. At paragraph  41  the
           judge stated that there will be:

                 "serious repercussions from a mental health perspective  if
                 he is once again separated from his father."

        g. The appellant has a positive influence on  his  son.  The  judge
           stated at paragraph 41 that:


                 "The appellant sets boundaries for [his  son]  on  the  one
                 hand, and on the other has supported  him  in  his  playing
                 football, which is so important  and  provide  him  with  a
                 healthy outlet for his time and energy".

        h. There would be little scope for the appellant's son to visit the
           appellant given the financial cost.

Grounds of Appeal


   7. The respondent's grounds of appeal submit that the judge erred because
      there was no evidence to support the conclusion that  the  appellant's
      son would suffer serious repercussions to his mental health.  Although
      Mr Lindsay relied on all of the grounds of appeal, this was  the  only
      ground pursued at the hearing.

   8. It is also submitted in the grounds that the judge reasons  given  for
      finding that the effect  of  deportation  would  be  unduly  harsh  or
      insufficient because they do  not  go  beyond  what  would  ordinarily
      result from the deportation of a parent. It is argued that  the  judge
      did not have regard to the established threshold for undue  harshness,
      which requires the harshness to go beyond what  would  necessarily  be
      involved for any child faced with the deportation of a parent, as  set
      out  in  KO  (Nigeria)   v   Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home
      Department [2018] UKSC  53  and  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213.

Submissions

   9. Mr  Lindsay  began  his  submissions  by  accepting  that  this  is  a
      perversity challenge where there is a high threshold. He  argued  that
      the evidence did not support the judge's  finding,  in  paragraph  41,
      that there will be a  serious  mental  health  repercussions  for  the
      appellant's son if he is separated from the appellant and therefore it
      was not open to the judge to make this finding which forms an integral
      part of the reasoning as to why there would  be  undue  harshness.  Mr
      Lindsay stated that there was no medical evidence  to  show  that  the
      appellant's son has, or would develop, a mental health problem.

  10. Ms Griffiths disagreed with Mr Lindsay  on  the  question  of  whether
      there was evidence to support the judge's conclusion about the  effect
      of the appellant's deportation on his son's mental health. She  noted,
      in particular, the opinion of the Independent Social  Worker,  as  set
      out in the report dated 22 January  2020,  that  separating  from  his
      father would be likely to be extremely damaging  for  the  appellant's
      son. The concluding comments of the report are:

           "I am concerned [that the appellant's  son's]  presentation  and
           behaviour is likely to deteriorate again  (previously  reflected
           in stress-related behaviours) if his  father  is  deported  with
           potentially very serious implications for  his  emotional  well-
           being and educational progress..."


  11. Ms Griffith drew attention to recent judgments  in  deportation  cases
      where, as she put it in her skeleton argument, the Court of Appeal has
      cautioned the Upper Tribunal against reopening a decision on the basis
      that the First-tier Tribunal's broad  evaluative  judgment  should  or
      could have been exercised differently. The cases she  relied  on  were
      Lowe v The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2021] EWCA  Civ
      62, KB (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2020]
      EWCA Civ 1385, AA (Nigeria) v Secretary of State [2020] EWCA Civ  1296
      and HA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA
      Civ 117.

Analysis

  12. It is clear from paragraphs 21 - 25 of the decision, where  the  judge
      set out the "unduly harsh" test, that the judge  directed  himself  to
      the correct legal test, having  regard  to  the  relevant  authorities
      including in particular KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [2018] UKSC 53. It is also clear  from  this  part  of  the
      decision that the judge recognised the elevated threshold that must be
      met where undue harshness is claimed. Notably,  at  paragraph  23  the
      judge cited paragraph 46 of MK (section 55 - Tribunal options)  Sierra
      Leone [2015] UKUT 00223 (IAC), where it is stated:

           By way of self-direction, we are  mindful  that  "unduly  harsh"
           does not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or
           merely difficult.  Rather, it poses a considerably more elevated
           threshold.  "Harsh" in this context, denotes  something  severe,
           or bleak.  It is the  antithesis  of  pleasant  or  comfortable.
           Furthermore, the addition  of  the  adverb  "unduly"  raises  an
           already elevated standard still higher.

  13. There is therefore no basis to the  contention  in  the  grounds  (not
      pursued in oral submissions by Mr Lindsay) that the judge did not have
      regard to the established threshold for undue harshness.

  14. Nor is there merit to the submission in the grounds (also not  pursued
      by Mr Lindsay) that the judge erred by not making findings  that  show
      that the harshness the appellant's son would  suffer  go  beyond  that
      which would ordinarily result from deportation. This is because  there
      was no need for such an assessment.  On  the  contrary,  had  such  an
      analysis been undertaken, the judge would have had to be very cautious
      to avoid making an error. As explained in AA at [12]:

           "[I]t  is  potentially  misleading  and  dangerous  to  seek  to
           identify some "ordinary" level of  harshness  as  an  acceptable
           level  by  reference  to  what  may  be   commonly   encountered
           circumstances: there is no reason  in  principle  why  cases  of
           undue hardship may not occur quite commonly;  and  how  a  child
           will be affected by a parent's deportation will depend  upon  an
           almost infinitely variable range of  circumstances.  It  is  not
           possible to identify a baseline of 'ordinariness'."

  15. The respondent's argument that there was no evidence  to  support  the
      finding at paragraph 41 of the decision that the appellant's son  will
      suffer "serious repercussions from a mental health perspective" if the
      appellant is deported is also without merit. As noted by Ms Griffiths,
      there was evidence to support this conclusion,  in  the  form  of  the
      independent social worker's report, where a firm  view  was  expressed
      that the appellant's son is likely to face  serious  implications  for
      his emotional well-being in the event of the appellant being deported.



  16. I accept that an independent social worker is not qualified to express
      a view on the likelihood of the appellant's son  developing  a  mental
      health disorder or illness. However,  that  is  not  what  the  social
      worker said, or what the judge found. The judge did not state that the
      appellant's son will,  or  is  likely  to,  develop  a  mental  health
      disorder.  Rather,  the  judge  found  that  there  would  be  serious
      repercussions from a mental health perspective, which broadly  equates
      to what was said by the independent social worker  about  there  being
      serious implications for his emotional well-being. I am satisfied that
      the judge's finding at paragraph 41 was consistent with  the  evidence
      from the independent social worker and that it was open to -  and  not
      perverse for - the judge to accept this evidence.

  17. This is a case where the judge (a) identified the correct legal  test,
      (b)  applied  the  test  consistently  with  recent  Court  of  Appeal
      authorities, (c) gave cogent reasons to explain  why  he  reached  the
      decision he did, (d) did not take into account irrelevant matters, (e)
      took into consideration all relevant matters, (f) made  a  finding  on
      the mental health of the appellant's  son  that  was  consistent  with
      expert evidence, and (g) undertook a fact specific detailed assessment
      of the circumstances  of  the  appellant's  son  and,  based  on  that
      assessment, reached an overall conclusion that, for the reasons  given
      by the judge (as summarised above in paragraph 6), was not perverse.

Notice of decision

  18. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

  19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error of law. The decision stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the  appellant's  family.
This direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.
|                                   |                                   |
|Signed                             |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|D. Sheridan                        |                                   |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan      |                                   |
|                                   |Dated: 1 April 2021                |


