
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     Appeal Number: HU/15191/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 February 2019                           |On 26 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 WAQAS LATIF
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr A Papasotiriou of Counsel by Direct Access


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as "the Applicant" is a  Pakistani
    born on 23 November 1988.  On 21 February 2007 he entered with leave as
    a family visitor: his father and step-mother are resident in the United
    Kingdom.  His leave was extended on a number of occasions, in the first
    extension in 2009 following an out of time application,  until  2  June
    2017. His previous application of 24 June 2013 was  refused  and  by  a
    decision promulgated on  12  February  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal B Lloyd allowed the appeal in  consequence  of  which  he  was
    granted further leave.  On  30  May  2017,  in  time,  he  applied  for
    indefinite leave on the basis of 10 years' continuous lawful residence.

 2. His application referred to a marriage certificate  and  the  Applicant
    stated he is married to a Mauritian who is said to remain in Mauritius.
    There is no evidence in the Tribunal file that she is elsewhere.

The SSHD's decision

 3. On 1 November 2017 the Appellant (the SSHD) refused the application  on
    the basis  that  the  gap  of  some  49  days  between  expiry  of  the
    Applicant's leave on 19 January 2009 and the grant of further leave  on
    28 April 2009 subsequent to an out of time application made on 19 March
    2009 meant the Applicant had not shown continuous law for residence  of
    at least 10 years at the date of his application. The SSHD noted  there
    was no evidence of any partner or other dependant in the United Kingdom
    and that the Applicant had visited Pakistan for  some  four  months  in
    2008, just over a fortnight in 2010 just over two months  in  2015  and
    for three weeks and 2016.

 4. The SSHD considered the Applicant did not meet any of the time critical
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules  and  that
    it was not unreasonable to expect him to return to  Pakistan  where  he
    would be able to re-integrate, using the experience he  had  gained  in
    the United Kingdom. The SSHD refused the application  by  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi) and by reference to Article 8 of the  European
    Convention.

 5. On 16 November 2017 the Appellant lodged notice of  appeal  under  s.82
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).
     The grounds are general but include a reference to instructing in good
    time a solicitor in connection with his first application  for  further
    leave in 2009.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 6. By a decision promulgated on 19 April  2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ID Boyes dismissed the appeal on  human  rights  grounds.   He
    noted the Applicant stated he had instructed his solicitor in  2009  in
    good time and the solicitor had failed him. The Applicant said that  he
    had made formal complaint but the fire  was  no  longer  in  existence.
    There is no evidence of the making of the complaint  or  anything  else
    relating to the circumstances or the time when the Applicant instructed
    this solicitor. Judge Boyes concluded there was a material gap  in  the
    Applicant's leave so he could not succeed on the  basis  of  10  years'
    continuous lawful residence. He concluded in  short  order  that  there
    were no very significant obstacles to the  Applicant's  return  to  and
    integration into Pakistan.

 7. On 17 May 2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal CA Parker  granted  the
    Applicant permission to appeal. By a decision promulgated on 14  August
    2018 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer  found  there  was  a  material
    error of law in the decision of Judge Boyes in that he  had  failed  to
    refer to the previous decision  of  Judge  Lloyd  which  had  not  been
    appealed and had not considered the relevant provisions of Part  VA  of
    the 2002 Act. He set aside the decision of Judge Boyes and remitted the
    appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. By a decision promulgated on 1 October 2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Page allowed the appeal. On 27  December  2018  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Bird granted the SSHD permission to appeal  on  the
    basis it was arguable the Judge had erred in law in  his  treatment  of
    the Applicant's claimed continuity of residence and had failed to  take
    adequate of the public interest as required by s.117B of the 2002 Act.

The hearing in the Upper Tribunal

9.   The Applicant attended.  I explained the purpose  of  the  hearing  and
    procedure to  be  followed.   He  confirmed  his  current  address  but
    otherwise took no active part in the proceedings.

Submissions for the SSHD

10.  Ms Isherwood relied on all five grounds for appeal. The  Judge  had  at
    paragraph 7 and elsewhere in his decision found that the Applicant  had
    not shown he met the  requirement  of  10  years'  continuous  law  for
    residence  and  had  then  at  paragraph  9  referred  to  a  break  in
    continuity. He had  made  no  finding  whether  the  Applicant  or  his
    solicitor had been responsible for the  out  of  time  application  for
    further leave. She referred to  evidence  about  this  which  had  been
    before Judge Boyes. In fact,  the  Tribunal  file  has  no  documentary
    evidence and Judge  Boyes  referred  to  the  matter  descriptively  at
    paragraph 6 of his decision but without reference to any specific  item
    of evidence. Further, the SSHD had considered the  matter  in  the  top
    half of page 3 of the reasons for refusal.

11.   The Judge had used the expression "near miss". The  principles  of  de
    minimis  and  and  "near  miss"  had  been  discredited  in   Chau   Le
    (Immigration Rules-de minimis principle) [2016] UKUT 186 (IAC). This is
    certainly the case so far as the application of the  Immigration  Rules
    is concerned and of course the SSHD's decision in Chau Le was prior  to
    the coming in to effect of the provisions of the Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2014 and so the appeal was at least in part  on  Immigration  Rules
    grounds.

12.  Ms Isherwood  made  the  point  that  the  skeleton  argument  for  the
    Appellant had not addressed any claim based on his family life. I noted
    that the original grounds of  appeal  had  relied  on  the  Applicant's
    private life but not family life.

13.  The Applicant's leave all time was of a  precarious  nature  and  Judge
    had failed to give little weight to the Applicant's private life during
    the currency of that leave as required by s.117B of the 2002  Act.  She
    submitted the Judge had failed to engage with the high test imposed.

14.  At paragraph 19 of his decision the Judge had relied  on  the  findings
    of Judge Lloyd in 2014 but had not addressed the fact that the relevant
    wording of paragraph 276 ADE(1) (vi) of the Immigration Rules had  been
    amended from a consideration of ties to the country of proposed  return
    to a consideration whether there were very significant obstacles to re-
    integration. The Applicant had spent his early years  in  Pakistan  and
    had made a number of visits.

15.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and should be set aside.

Submissions for the Applicant

16.  Mr Papasotiriou submitted there was  no  material  error  of  law.  The
    Judge was entitled to find there was no evidence before him  to  decide
    whose fault it was that the Applicant's 2009 application had been  made
    late. At paragraph 23 the  Judge  had  dealt  with  the  issue  of  re-
    integration and made findings on the point.

17.  He was clear there had been  no  disagreement  before  the  Judge  that
    there had been a break in the Applicant's leave. This was evident  from
    the Judge's findings at paragraph 17ff of his decision. At paragraph 23
    he had addressed the  issue  of  re-integration.  This  is  a  relevant
    criterion under paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi)  and  the  reference  to  "the
    relevant Immigration Rule at the beginning of the next  paragraph,  24,
    had to be read with reference to    paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi).  It  made
    no sense to seek to say the Judge had paragraph 276B in mind.

18.  The Judge at  paragraph  8  of  his  decision  had  recorded  that  the
    Applicant accepted there was a break in his continuous leave. This  was
    a matter that would have to be brought in to the eventual assessment of
    the proportionality of the SSHD's decision. The Judge at  paragraph  20
    made no finding as to the causation of the late application in 2009 and
    at paragraph 22 acknowledged the lack of finding meant that  no  weight
    for or against the Applicant would be attached  to  the  cause  of  the
    delayed application.

19.  There had been no requirement fourth the Judge to  address  the  family
    life of the Appellant since it had not been pleaded. The  issue  before
    the Judge was whether in all the events and  circumstances  the  SSHD's
    decision was proportionate.

20.  At paragraph 23 of his decision the Judge  had  treated  Judge  Lloyd's
    decision on the Applicant's lack of ties  to  Pakistan  as  a  starting
    point and had gone on to address the  difficulties  he  would  face  on
    return in re-integrating. Paragraph 6 amounted to a self-direction that
    there was a difference between ties  and  integration.  The  Judge  had
    properly taken account of the fact that Judge  Lloyd  had  allowed  the
    appeal. He was entitled to rely on her findings. He had  taken  account
    of subsequent events and given sustainable  reasons  for  finding  that
    there were very significant obstacles to the Applicant's re-integration
    on return to Pakistan.

21.  The Judge had fully rehearsed the provisions of s.117B at paragraph  21
    and at paragraph 24 had given reasons which with  the  benefit  of  the
    subsequent judgment in Rhuppiah v SSHD [2018] UKUT 58 are  sustainable.
    There were no factors identified in s.117B which  were  of  an  adverse
    nature. He relied on his skeleton argument.

22.  The grounds for appeal did not disclose  any  material  error  of  law.
    Alternatively, any error of law was not material once account had  been
    taken that the appeal  had  been  allowed  by  reference  to  paragraph
    276(ADE)(vi) of the Immigration Rules. The Court of Appeal had found in
    TZ (Pakistan) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ.1109 that if the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules were met then Article 8 would be engaged.

Response for the SSHD

23.  Ms Isherwood pointed out that the Judge had not  considered  the  issue
    of interference with the Applicant's family life and the relevant  test
    and  had  not  referred  or  adequately  referred  to  issues  of   re-
    integration. The SSHD challenge the Judge's treatment at paragraphs  22
    and 23 of the Applicant's private life. There had been no reflection on
    matters subsequent to the 2014 decision or of the precariousness of the
    Applicant's  leave.  Paragraph  24's   reference   to   "the   relevant
    Immigration Rule" was to paragraph 276B.

Consideration and conclusions

24.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision which I  now  give  by
    reference to the five grounds  for  appeal,  taking  into  account  the
    submissions made for the SSHD and the Applicant. At  paragraphs  7,  18
    and 20 the Judge found that  there  had  been  a  49  day  gap  in  the
    otherwise continuous leave of the Applicant. It is clear that the Judge
    and indeed the Appellant as already indicated accepted that there was a
    49 day gap. The Judge may at paragraph 18 have described  as  a  "minor
    blip" but nevertheless it is a blip.

25.  The Judge at paragraph 20 then went on to consider the  proportionality
    of the SSHD's decision. Use of the phrases "near miss" and "minor blip"
    may be unfortunate  but  the  principle  remains  that  the  extent  of
    compliance with the requirements of the Immigration Rules is  a  matter
    which must be reflected in any proportionality  assessment.  The  Judge
    did not err in his overall approach.

26.  In  the  light  of  the  Judge's  findings  in  relation  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) there was no need for him to make  any  finding  who  was
    responsible for the late 2009 application. I accept  Mr  Papasotiriou's
    submission that the reference to "the relevant Immigration Rule  is  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  It  is  the  findings  in  relation  to  this
    paragraph which form the main plank of the Judge's decision.

27.  The fourth grounds for appeal challenges the Judge's treatment  of  the
    relevant test imposed  in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),  very  significant
    obstacles to re-integration. The Judge  was  entitled  to  use  as  his
    starting point the findings of Judge Lloyd that the Applicant  in  2014
    had  no  ties  to  Pakistan.  He  addressed  whether  there  are   very
    significant obstacles to his integration on return to Pakistan  at  the
    end of paragraphs 14 and  19  and  gave  sustainable  reasons  for  his
    conclusion at paragraph 23. He had no reason not to rely in  particular
    on the findings of Judge Lloyd at paragraphs 37, 40 and 43 of the  2014
    decision. The Applicant's claim was based on his private life and there
    was no evidence before the Judge of any material  change  in  the  past
    four years. It is of note there was no claim in respect of  his  family
    life or on the basis of his marriage to a Mauritian of whom  there  was
    no evidence she was living elsewhere than in Mauritius.

28.  The Judge fully recited s.117B at paragraph 21  of  his  decision.  The
    SSHD's claim is that he had already decided at paragraph 17 on  the  on
    the proportionality  of  the  decision  before  addressing  the  public
    interest factors identified in s. 117B. At the start  of  paragraph  17
    the Judge had addressed at least some of these public interest factors.
    The absence of a substantial consideration of the precariousness of the
    Applicant's private life might be an error of law but the main plank of
    the decision to allow the appeal was the Judge's  conclusion  that  the
    Applicant faced very significant obstacles to re-integration on  return
    to Pakistan with which I am satisfied that he adequately dealt.

29.  Despite Ms  Isherwood's  determined  and  detailed  submissions,  I  am
    persuaded by those of Mr Papasotiriou and for the  reasons  given  find
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain a material
    error of law such that it should  be  set  aside.  It  shall  therefore
    stand.

Anonymity

30.  There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  heard  the
    appeal consider none is warranted.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and shall stand. The consequences that the  Mr  Latif's  appeal  is
    successful.


    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official Crest                                              Date  22.
ii. 2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

