
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/15699/2018
     HU/15705/2018
     HU/15689/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th July 2019                    |On 06th August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                  m k S C D
                                   K P A D
                                  K G J M D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss S Iqbal (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are  citizens  of  Sri  Lanka.   They  are  respectively
    father, mother and daughter.  The immigration history of the family  is
    set out in a notice of decision to refuse leave to  remain  in  the  UK
    dated 12th July 2018.  What is apparent is that  all  three  Appellants
    entered the UK as visitors on 3rd May  2003  valid  for  three  months.
    Since that date the Appellants have been overstayers.  At date of entry
    to the UK the third Appellant was aged 2.   Subsequent  to  overstaying
    the family made a human rights application on 25th May 2011  i.e.  some
    eight and a half years after they had overstayed.   Thereafter  further
    applications were made in 2013 and 2015.  The  immigration  history  of
    the first and second Appellants can at best be described as  appalling.
    The third Appellant clearly relied on steps being taken with regard  to
    her immigration status by her parents.

 2. The most recent application for leave to remain based on  human  rights
    was made on 26th June 2017 and refused on 12th July 2018.  Thereinafter
    the Appellants appealed and the appeal came before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Courtney sitting at Hatton Cross on 10th April 2019.   In
    a decision and reasons promulgated on 29th April 2019 the appeal of the
    first and second Appellants, i.e. the  parents,  were  dismissed.   The
    third Appellant's appeal was allowed  to  the  extent  referred  to  at
    paragraph 37 of that decision, i.e. that  the  Appellant  in  principle
    qualifies for leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) were she now
    to make an application.  However, absent a fresh application  she  does
    not satisfy the requirements because it is assessed as at "the date  of
    application".

 3. On 13th May 2019 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal on
    behalf of the first and second Appellants.  On 4th June 2019  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Andrew granted  permission  to  appeal.   Judge
    Andrew considered that it was arguable that in coming to  his  decision
    the judge did not consider whether it was reasonable for  a  child  (as
    she was at the date of application) who had been in the United  Kingdom
    for a period of over seven years,  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  and
    further did not factor into his decision in relation the parties' human
    rights.  It was noted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had found that
    the first and second Appellants enjoyed  family  life  with  the  third
    Appellant and in such circumstances and given his decision to the third
    Appellant it was arguable that the judge had erred in his assessment of
    proportionality.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellants appear by  their  instructed
    Counsel Miss Iqbal.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Tarlow.  At the time  of  application  the  third
    Appellant was a minor.  I made an anonymity direction and this  applies
    to all three Appellants.  Such  application  was  not  opposed  by  the
    Secretary of State.

Preliminary Issue

 5. I sought clarification from the parties and  gave  guidance  as  to  my
    interpretation of the present position regarding the  third  Appellant.
    It was agreed that there was no appeal extant before me relating to the
    third Appellant, i.e. there has been  no  cross-appeal  lodged  by  the
    Secretary of State.  At the date of application the third Appellant was
    a  minor.   She  is  now  18  years  old.   Consequently  it  would  be
    appropriate for her instructed solicitors and for the  third  Appellant
    to note the basis upon which she has been granted leave which is as set
    out in paragraph 37 of the  decision  of  Immigration  Judge  Courtney.
    Whether it is appropriate for a further application  (which  presumably
    would be accepted) to be made under paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) is a  matter
    for the third Appellant and her instructed solicitors.

 6. Secondly it was accepted that the  first  and  second  Appellants  were
    overstayers and that despite a number of applications being  made  over
    the past eight years they had a very poor immigration history.   Whilst
    it is no  criticism  of  the  conducting  officers  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State it is, bearing in mind the fact that the overstaying
    must have been known to the Home Office, to be a matter for which  they
    are open to substantial criticism  for  allowing  the  situation  which
    comes before the Tribunal today to have happened.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. Miss Iqbal submits that the approach of the judge, bearing in mind  the
    finding that the judge makes at paragraph 33 that there is an emotional
    and financial dependence by the  third  Appellant  on  her  parents  to
    justify the conclusion that they enjoy a protected family life together
    for the purpose of Article 8, is subsequently wrong.  She submits  that
    when considering the reasonableness of the third Appellant's return the
    judge fell into  material  error  by  not  adequately  considering  and
    applying MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 and that the judge has given
    inadequate weight to the significance of  the  third  Appellant's  more
    than seven years' continuous residence in the UK, which she points  out
    to me is in fact sixteen years, notwithstanding what the judge says  at
    paragraph 27 of her decision.  Further she submits that the  judge  has
    failed to adequately identify powerful reasons why a child who has been
    in the UK for some sixteen years should be removed and  has  failed  to
    identify strong countervailing factors and/or compelling reasons to the
    contrary.  She reminds me that there is  an  absence  of  the  type  of
    behaviour such as criminal  behaviour  or  any  outrageousness  of  the
    parents' conduct including false  claims  that  would  amount  to  very
    strong reasons rendering removal  of  the  family  proportionate.   She
    submits that the judge erred in finding  it  not  disproportionate  and
    that the error of law is to be found in the way  the  judge  has  dealt
    overall with this appeal.

 8.  She  submits  that  the  judge's  conclusion  that  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable to expect the child to leave the UK materially impugns her
    assessment at paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) in respect of the child  and  the
    proportionality in respect of the first and second Appellants.

 9. Finally she submits that the overall approach of the judge is  contrary
    to the guidance on qualifying child and the only  matter  that  can  be
    particularly held against the parents is  that  they  are  overstayers.
    She refers me to the decision in MT and ET (Child's best interests;  ex
    tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018]  UKUT  88  (IAC)  which  she  submits  is
    authority for concluding that even that is not enough  to  "trump"  the
    reasonableness position.   Further  she  submits  that  the  judge  has
    applied the wrong approach to reasonableness when making her assessment
    at paragraph 25 and 26.

10. In response Mr Tarlow submits that the decision was one that the  judge
    was open to make and that the judge has dealt with  the  relevant  case
    law at paragraph 34.  He reminds me that he agrees  that  the  relevant
    date is the date of application and that the findings  were  ones  that
    the judge was entitled to reach and that reasons have  been  given  for
    this.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that there are material errors of law in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   The  judge  did  fall  into  error  in
    concluding it would not be unreasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
    the UK.  Such findings are made at paragraphs 27, 36 and  40  and  that
    materially impugns the assessment of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) in respect
    of the child bearing in mind that the judge has concluded at  paragraph
    37 that it would be  disproportionate  to  remove  her  before  she  is
    reasonably able to make an application for leave to remain consequently
    allowing the Appellant's appeal.

14. Further the judge errs in finding that the child is no longer  a  minor
    for the purpose of  this  application  so  the  distinct  duty  on  the
    Respondent under Section 55 no longer arises.  In so finding the  judge
    makes  a  material  misdirection  of  law  bearing  in  mind  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) makes it clear that the age of the child to be considered
    is at the  date  of  application.   Thereafter  it  is  appropriate  to
    consider the reasonableness of the child's return to identify  powerful
    reasons why a child who has been in  the  UK  for  some  sixteen  years
    should be removed.  Subsequently I find that there are material  errors
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The Remaking of the Decision

15. There is no dispute over the findings of  fact  in  this  matter.   The
    facts remain clear.  There are findings that the  third  Appellant  has
    lived in this country for over sixteen years at date of application and
    to all intents and purposes she has lived all her formative  life  here
    being aged 2 at the time that she came to the UK.  There  is  no  doubt
    whatsoever that she has built up her family and private life in the  UK
    and the judge has made a finding that  she  has  emotional  ties  which
    would make it inappropriate for her to be separated from  her  parents.
    I totally endorse that conclusion.  The relevant date is  the  date  of
    application and it has also to be remembered that the  third  Appellant
    is an only  child  and  has  always  lived  with  her  parents  and  is
    financially and emotionally dependent upon them.

16. What is to be held against the first and second Appellants is that they
    are overstayers.  They have overstayed for many  years.   They  can  be
    highly criticised for that.  As of course can the Home Office.   It  is
    not as if these are people who have hidden beneath  the  radar.   Their
    position has been well-known to the Secretary of State for years.  They
    are not  involved  in  any  criminality  or  fraud.   They  are  merely
    overstayers.  And whilst this is a matter that the  Tribunal  needs  to
    take into consideration the position with regard to the third Appellant
    in this matter makes it clear that it would be inappropriate to  remove
    her from her parents, bearing  in  mind  the  emotional  and  financial
    support that is required, and that as she has lived her whole  life  in
    the UK.  I note she has been offered  places  at  university  to  study
    psychology, and that her principal language is English, I am  satisfied
    that the best interests of the third Appellant is to remain in  the  UK
    with her parents.  I put it  that  way  because  of  course  the  third
    Appellant has already won her appeal.  It is the appeal  by  the  first
    and second Appellants that is extant  before  me  today.   In  all  the
    circumstances I am consequently satisfied for  all  the  reasons  given
    above that the appeals of the first and second Appellants  succeed  and
    that it is reasonable and proportionate that family life be  maintained
    and continue in the UK.

Notice of Decision

The appeals of the first and second Appellant are allowed under  Article  8.
It is recorded that the appeal of the third Appellant  was  allowed  by  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge.  That decision is not the subject of  any  appeal
by the Secretary of State.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 29 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 29 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


