
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/15710/2016
                                                               HU/15711/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th January 2016                          | On 23rd January 2018         |


                                   Before

                      Deputy upper tribunal JUDGE Kelly


                                   Between

                                   1) PHB
                                   2) IOB
                            (anonymity directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr John Waithe, Counsel instructed by Greenland
Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Jerromes, promulgated on the 31st July 2017, to dismiss  their  appeals
    against refusal of their applications for entry clearance in  order  to
    join their mother, who is now a British citizen, in the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellants are citizens of Jamaica who were both minors at the date
    of the respondent's decision and were being cared for in  that  country
    by their maternal uncle and his wife.

 3. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Clarke did not dispute that the
    judge was in error in supposing that his consideration of  the  appeals
    was restricted to the circumstances appertaining at  the  date  of  the
    respondent's refusal of the applications in question. That has not been
    the position since the amendments to section  85  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2014, which came into force on the 5th April
    2015. The current position is that the Tribunal  is  entitled  to  have
    regard  to  any  circumstances  that  are  material  to  the  decision,
    including  those  arising  after  the  date  of  the  refusal  of   the
    applications. The judge was led into this error by  his  reliance  upon
    Gurung v The Entry Clearance Officer, New Dehli  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  358
    (7th April 2016) without apparently having noted that this concerned an
    appeal that had been decided in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  before  the
    amendments to section 85 came into force.

 4.  The  remaining  grounds  argue  that  the  judge  undertook  a  flawed
    assessment of the question  of  whether  the  appellants  had  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

 5.  Firstly, it is said that the judge was wrong to focus upon whether the
    sponsor had "sole responsibility" for the appellants' upbringing  given
    that their father is also resident in the United Kingdom and  has  been
    for some 15 years. Whilst there is some force in this criticism insofar
    as it relates to the  technicalities  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the
    reality is that the level  of  the  sponsor's  responsibility  for  her
    children's upbringing was highly relevant to the Tribunal's  assessment
    of their case under Article 8. The error was thus one  of  form  rather
    than of substance. I therefore conclude that it was immaterial  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.

 6. Secondly, it is said that in assessing the question  of  whether  there
    were  (for  the  purposes  of  the  Immigration  Rules)  "serious   and
    compelling circumstances" rendering the appellants' exclusion from  the
    UK "undesirable", the judge failed to  have  regard  to  the  sponsor's
    claim that their current carers were planning to emigrate from  Jamaica
    to the USA on a date in September 2017;  that  is  to  say,  about  two
    months after the date of the hearing.  There  is  also  force  in  this
    argument.  However,  given  that  meeting  the  requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules is not generally determinative of an  appeal  brought
    on grounds under Article 8, I  propose  to  consider  this  within  the
    context of whether the judge's error in restricting the  scope  of  the
    circumstances to which he was entitled  to  have  regard  warrants  the
    setting aside of his decision.

 7. I therefore return  to  the  undoubted  error  of  law  concerning  the
    relevant date for determining the facts of the appeal.  In  considering
    the materiality of that error, I note that  Mr  Waithe  was  unable  to
    identify any particular facts or circumstances arising after  the  date
    upon which the applications had been refused that weighed in favour  of
    admitting the appellants to the United Kingdom.  That  may  be  because
    there does not appear to have been any.  Indeed,  the  changes  in  the
    appellants' circumstances since the decision seem to me to  weigh  even
    more heavily against admitting them to the  UK  than  those  that  were
    appertaining at the date of the respondent's decision.  The  appellants
    were aged 17 years and 15 years on the  date  their  applications  were
    refused, whereas at the date of the hearing they had attained the  ages
    of 19 years and 17  years  respectively.  They  had  moreover  spent  a
    further two years residing in the country where they were born and  had
    spent the entirety of their lives. By the date of the hearing,  it  was
    thus at least questionable whether they would continue to require full-
    time carers following the departure of their  parental  uncle  and  his
    wife for the USA some two months' later. The changes in the appellants'
    circumstances thus fortified, rather than undermined, the reasons given
    by the judge at paragraph 36.4(ii) of his decision for concluding  that
    it was in the best interests of the appellants to  remain  in  Jamaica.
    Moreover, if and to the extent that the appellants continued to require
    parental care at the date of the hearing, there was no evidential basis
    upon which the judge could have concluded  that  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the sponsor providing such care by joining her
    children in Jamaica.

 8. I therefore conclude that whilst the  First-tier  Tribunal  undoubtedly
    made an error of law, it was not such as to  warrant  the  exercise  of
    discretion in favour of setting aside its decision.

Notice of Decision

 9. The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.  No  report   of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  him  or  any  member  of
their family. This direction applies  both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
court proceedings.


Judge Kelly                             Date: 17th January 2018.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

