
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/15378/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Determination & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 June 2019                          |On 10 June 2019                    |
|                                        |                                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                GBEMISOLA [R]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      None
For the respondent:     Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

       1. The appellant has appealed against a decision  of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal ('FTT') promulgated  on  18  March  2019  dismissing  her
          appeal on human rights grounds.




Immigration history

       2. The appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria  who  entered  the  United
          Kingdom ('UK') as a visitor in 2002. She overstayed her  visa  but
          in 2004 she applied for a residence card as the spouse of  an  EEA
          citizen.  This was granted until 6 March  2009.   Her  application
          for permanent residence was refused without a right of  appeal  on
          two occasions  in  2010  and  2011.   Her  third  application  for
          permanent residence was refused  in  2012  but  with  a  right  of
          appeal.  The  skeleton  argument  relied  upon  by  the  appellant
          before the FTT makes it clear that  the  respondent  withdrew  the
          2012 decision and replaced it with  a  further  refusal  in  2014.
          The appellant appealed against this to  an  earlier  FTT  but  her
          appeal was dismissed on 3 July 2015.  The appellant  then  applied
          to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of  her  human  rights  in  an
          application  dated  30  June  2017.   This  was  refused  by   the
          respondent in a decision dated 4 July 2018.  It is  this  decision
          that was appealed to the FTT.

Appellant's case before the FTT

       3. The appellant's case before the FTT is summarised  in  a  skeleton
          argument submitted on her behalf by Counsel.   This  submits  that
          the appellant has a strong relationship with her siblings  in  the
          UK and this constitutes family life; when that  is  combined  with
          her private life including her considerable mental  health  issues
          she would face very significant obstacles  in  reintegrating  into
          Nigeria and her removal would breach Article 8 of the ECHR.

FTT decision

       4. The FTT did not accept that the appellant  had  family  life  with
          her siblings for the purposes of Article 8.   This  has  not  been
          the subject of the grounds of appeal, and we  therefore  need  say
          no more about this.  The FTT then  turned  its  attention  to  the
          appellant's mental health  and  private  life  together  with  the
          factors set out at section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
          and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act'), before concluding  that  her
          removal would not breach Article 8 of the ECHR.

Grounds of appeal

       5. The grounds of appeal are twofold:


              i) The FTT made an error in proceeding on the basis  that  the
                 appellant had no leave to remain after 6  March  2009  when
                 she had an appeal pending before the FTT;


             ii) The FTT failed to properly take into account  the  risk  of
                 the appellant's mental health relapsing in Nigeria  in  the
                 light of the country background evidence that mental health
                 issues remain highly stigmatised in Nigeria.


       6. In a  decision  dated  24  April  2019  PJM  Hollingworth  granted
          permission to appeal on both grounds.

Hearing

       7. The appellant's solicitors emailed  the  Tribunal  shortly  before
          the hearing to  explain  they  were  no  longer  instructed.   The
          appellant did not attend the hearing nor provide any  reasons  for
          her failure to do so.


       8. Ms Everett  clarified  the  appellant's  immigration  history  and
          commended to us the history  set  out  in  the  skeleton  argument
          before the FTT.  She invited us to find that any  error  regarding
          the appellant's  immigration  history  was  not  material  to  the
          overall findings made.

       9. We reserved our decision, which we now give with reasons.

Error of law discussion

   1) Immigration history

      10. The FTT recorded the appellant's immigration history  at  [2]  and
          referred to it at [15] of its decision.  The FTT was  entitled  to
          observe that the appellant's residence card as a  spouse  did  not
          continue beyond 6 March 2009 and she had "no leave  to  remain  in
          the UK since that date".   There  was  no  basis  upon  which  the
          appellant could benefit from a statutory extension of  leave,  and
          in any event this was not argued on  her  behalf.   The  FTT  also
          observed  that  the  appellant's  private  life  has  been  formed
          "substantially during the  period  which  she  has  remained  here
          unlawfully".  We acknowledge that the appellant  was  pursuing  an
          appeal for part of the time after  the  expiry  of  her  residence
          card in 2009, and it would have been preferable  for  the  FTT  to
          have expressly referred to this.   However,  there  was  no  basis
          upon which the appellant could benefit from a statutory  extension
          of leave.  Although she made applications for permanent  residence
          in 2010, 2011 and 2013, these were  unsuccessful.   The  appellant
          had an appeal on EEA grounds pending from 9 August 2012 until  the
          appeal was dismissed nearly three years later in July 2015.    She
          then had a human rights  appeal  pending  between  July  2018  and
          February 2019.  It  follows  that  in  the  period  following  the
          expiry of the residence card from March 2009, the  appellant  only
          had a pending appeal for a period under four years.  The  FTT  was
          therefore entitled to observe that her  private  life  was  formed
          substantially when she remained in the UK unlawfully.   This  must
          be  read  alongside  the  FTT's   summary   of   the   appellant's
          immigration history at  [2]  wherein  reference  is  made  to  the
          appellant's  pending  appeals,  albeit  the  FTT  made  a  mistake
          regarding the date of the FTT's decision dismissing her appeal  on
          EEA grounds.  The appellant's own skeleton  argument  referred  to
          this as being in 2015 and not 2018.


      11. In any event, assuming that we are  wrong  and  the  previous  FTT
          appeal was not finally determined  until  2018,  this  would  have
          made no material difference to the outcome.  The (unnamed)  author
          of the grounds entirely fails to acknowledge  that  little  weight
          can be given to the appellant's private life, whether she  was  in
          the UK unlawfully or pending appeal i.e. on a precarious  basis  -
          see sub-sections 117B(4) and (5) of the 2002 Act  and  Rhuppiah  v
          SSHD [2018] UKSC 58  (14 November 2018).  For the purposes of sub-
          section 117B(5), anyone who, not being a UK citizen,  was  present
          in the UK and who had leave to reside there other than  to  do  so
          indefinitely had a precarious immigration status.   We  note  from
          the reasoning  in  Rhuppiah  that  the  phrase  "have  regard"  in
          section 117A(2) indicates that the general rule that  only  little
          weight should be accorded to private life when immigration  status
          was precarious may be overridden in  a  "truly  exceptional  case"
          with particularly  strong  features  of  private  life.   However,
          there was no submission before the FTT, and nor  could  there  be,
          that this case is  truly  exceptional  or  had  truly  exceptional
          features.

   2) Mental health evidence

      12. The grounds  of  appeal  entirely  omit  reference  to  the  FTT's
          summary  of  the  evidence  relevant  to  the  appellant's  mental
          health.  At [5] the FTT noted that notwithstanding  what  happened
          in 2004 and 2017 there "has  been  a  marked  improvement  in  the
          appellant's  mental  state".   The  FTT  was  well  aware  of  the
          appellant's case that "mental  health  issues  are  regarded  with
          suspicion and hostility" in Nigeria (see [6] of the decision)  and
          the country background evidence in support of this  (see  [9]  and
          [14] of the decision).  Contrary to the submission in the  grounds
          of appeal, the FTT adequately addressed the evidence  relied  upon
          by the appellant and was  entitled  to  find  there  would  be  no
          breach of Article 8.  This is  because,  having  acknowledged  the
          appellant's mental health history and in particular the events  in
          2004 and 2017, the FTT made a finding that the appellant's  mental
          health problems were now under control with medication (and  there
          was no evidence this could not be obtained in Nigeria).   The  FTT
          also found that the appellant would be able to gain employment  in
          Nigeria and / or be supported by her siblings from the  UK.   When
          the decision is read as a whole the FTT was clearly aware  of  the
          appellant's past mental health  history,  the  country  background
          evidence  on  mental  health  facilities.   These   matters   were
          factored in, alongside the relevant section 117B of the  2002  Act
          factors,  and  the  FTT  was  entitled  to   conclude   that   the
          appellant's removal would not lead to a breach  of  Article  8  of
          the ECHR.


      13. Although  the  FTT  failed  to  directly  address  276ADE  of  the
          Immigration Rules and in particular whether there  would  be  very
          significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's   re-integration   in
          Nigeria, this is not a material error of law.  The FTT's  findings
          of fact are such that  submissions  based  upon  276ADE  would  be
          bound to fail or cannot on any legitimate view have succeeded.

Decision


      14. The FTT decision did not involve the making of  a  material  error
          of law and is not set aside.






Signed:  UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
4 June 2019

