
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/15570/2017
                                                               HU/15574/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 11 July 2019                               |On 30 July 2019              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                         MISS M B (First Appellant)
                        MASTER A U (Second Appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellants are
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify them or any member of their family.  This direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr T Shah of Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are the approved record of the decision and written reasons which
    were given ex tempore at the end of the hearing on 11 July 2019.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J L Bristow (the FtT) promulgated on 25 March 2019, (the
    'Decision') by which he dismissed their appeal against the respondent's
    refusal of their human rights claims.   The  respondent's  decision  in
    turn refused the appellants' application for leave to remain, based  on
    a claim under article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    ('ECHR')

 3. In essence, the appellants' claim  as  minors,  aged  16  and  14,  who
    entered the United Kingdom ('UK') on 25 June  2014,  on  limited  visas
    involved the following  issues:  whether  the  appellant's  mother  had
    genuinely abandoned them into the care of their aunt and uncle  in  the
    UK; and whether the aunt and uncle were no longer in contact  with  the
    appellants' mother, nor was the mother in contact with the appellants.

 4. The FtT recorded the agreed issues in dispute  at  paragraphs  [11]  to
    [13] of the Decision limiting it to those central issues.  It is  worth
    briefly reciting what facts were agreed between the parties before  the
    FtT.  The agreed facts and issues were:-

      a) the appellants are both nationals of Bangladesh;

      b) the immigration histories are set out in the refusal letters;

      c) the appellants entered the UK on 25 June 2014;

      d) the first appellant was 12 years of age when she entered the UK;

      e) the second appellant was 9 years of age when he entered the UK;

      f) the appellants have lived continuously in the UK for four years and
         eight months;

      g) the appellants' father died on 18 June 2015;

      h) the appellants cannot succeed under Appendix FM to the  Immigration
         Rules;

      i) the  appellants  cannot  succeed  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
         Immigration Rules;

      j) the appellants' appeal is based on article 8 outside the Rules;

      k) if the FtT were to find it proved that the appellants'  mother  had
         abandoned them and that she has not been in contact with their aunt
         or them since  she  did  so  then  the  appellants  would  have  an
         'overwhelming' or 'exceptional' claim outside the Rules and the FtT
         would allow the appeal; and

      l) if the FtT were not to find it proved that the  appellants'  mother
         had abandoned them and that she had been in contact with  the  aunt
         and them, then the appellants would not have  the  overwhelming  or
         exceptional claim outside the Rules and the FtT would  dismiss  the
         appeal.

 5. Paragraph [13] of the Decision records  the  sole  remaining  issue  in
    dispute, namely whether the appellants' mother had abandoned  them  and
    had not contact with their aunt or them since she did so.

The FtT's Decision

 6. The  FtT  made  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  evidence  running  from
    paragraphs  [16]  to  [23]   of   the   Decision,   together   with   a
    proportionality assessment from paragraphs [24] to  [39],  including  a
    balance sheet assessment on proportionality.  The FtT was not impressed
    by various aspects of the evidence, finding that the appellants' mother
    was in fact in contact with both the aunt and the appellants  and  that
    their claimed desertion had been fabricated and that the Family Court's
    award of a special guardianship to  the  aunt  had  been  based  on  an
    account fabricated by the appellants' family.

 7. Having considered the evidence as  a  whole,  the  FtT  carried  out  a
    proportionality  exercise,   referring   itself   to   the   well-known
    authorities of Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 and R (Razgar)  v  SSHD
    [2004] HL 27 as well as section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 and concluded that on  balance,  refusal  was  both
    proportionate and that it was in the best interests of  the  appellants
    to be reunited with their mother in Bangladesh.

The Grounds of Appeal and Grant of Permission

 8. The appellants' grounds of appeal  are  essentially  that  unsuccessful
    attempts had been made to trace the appellants'  mother  and  too  much
    weight had been placed by the FtT on the lack  of  credibility  of  the
    appellants' aunt leading to an incorrect evaluation of the  appellants'
    best  interests.   The  FtT  had  also  applied  too  high  a  test  in
    considering the proportionality  of  the  refusal  on  'exceptionality'
    grounds when the appellants were minors; and  the  FtT  had  failed  to
    consider the impact of the appellants' removal on their aunt and uncle.



 9. First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson granted permission on  3  June  2019.
    She regarded it as arguable that the FtT had placed insufficient weight
    on the special guardianship  order  and  the  social  worker's  report,
    together with the critical stage at which the children  were  in  their
    education.  The grant of permission was not limited in its scope.

10. In the hearing before me the appellants' representative  accepted  that
    the conclusions around the aunt fabricating the account of estrangement
    were well-reasoned and there  was  no  challenge  to  that  finding  of
    fabrication.  Nevertheless, it remained in the best  interests  of  the
    appellants that they stay with their aunt and uncle in the  UK.   There
    was no evidence that the appellants' mother was  able  and  willing  to
    receive them in Bangladesh.  The aunt to her credit had taken  them  to
    social services when they had been left in her charge  in  the  UK  and
    there had been a  detailed  assessment  and  involvement  resulting  in
    special guardianship.  I should consider the analogous principles of KO
    (Nigeria) and Others v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53  and  consideration  of  the
    reasonableness of their return needed to be  done  without  considering
    the blameworthy conduct  of  any  of  their  adult  carers  or  mother.
    Indeed, the FtT itself reminded itself that the children had  not  been
    to blame.

11. I should also consider  that  the  appellants  were  now  in  full-time
    education at a crucial  stage  of  their  studies  and  the  well-known
    authority of EV Philippines & Others v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874  had
    given guidelines as to reasonableness of their return.  The  assessment
    conducted by social services as well as correspondence to which  I  was
    referred at page [90] of the appellants' bundle provided a detailed and
    professional assessment.  These assessments had been  given  no  weight
    when in fact they should have been give some weight by the FtT and that
    was an error.  It was also suggested that whilst the aunt's involvement
    in  fabricating  the  account  of  estrangement  was  not   challenged,
    nevertheless there was no indication that social services had been able
    to trace the appellants' mother.

12. In response Mr Melvin relied on the Rule 24 response  which  I  do  not
    recite in detail but in essence the gist of which was that the FtT  had
    considered carefully the evidence including that of the social  worker,
    the Family Court  documents  and  education  documents  and  had  given
    lengthy and considered conclusions for the finding that it remained  in
    the appellants' best interests, and indeed it  was  proportionate  that
    their application for leave to  remain  be  refused.   They  were  non-
    qualifying and so whilst there had been a delay so that they  had  been
    in the UK now for  four  years,  nevertheless  the  Decision  had  been
    adequately reasoned and the grounds disclosed no error of law.  The FtT
    had been entitled to conclude that the  children  could  reasonably  be
    expected to return to Bangladesh with their mother.

13. In terms of the law I considered section 117B of the 2002 Act  which  I
    do not recite in detail as well as the  authorities  to  which  I  have
    already been referred.  I also consider the authority of  KO,  although
    not  strictly  binding  because  the  appellants  are  not   qualifying
    children.

Decision on the Error of Law

14. I conclude that there are no errors of law in the Decision.  My reasons
    for this conclusion are as follows.

15. As  already  noted,  the  FtT  had  narrowed  down  the  agreed  issues
    substantially so that the central issue in this case was  the  question
    of the fabrication of estrangement between the appellants; their  aunt;
    and their mother.  Whilst Judge Simpson had  given  permission  on  the
    basis of an arguable error of law of insufficient weight on the special
    guardianship order and the social worker's  report,  it  is  noteworthy
    that in the Decision not only did the FtT consider and refer themselves
    to the case law at paragraphs [26] to [33], including a  balance  sheet
    approach endorsed by Hesham Ali at paragraph [32], but  indeed  carried
    out that balance sheet approach at paragraphs [36] to [39].

16. It has been suggested in the grounds that the FtT erred in  failing  to
    consider the appellants' best interests as  minors  separate  from  any
    blameworthy conduct of either their aunt  or  their  mother.   However,
    that is not an error into which on any view the FtT fell.   Indeed,  at
    paragraph [36] the FtT records:-

         "I make it clear here that I do not consider that the behaviour  of
         [the aunt] or the Appellants' mother adds any weight to the  public
         interest.  The Appellants are not to blame for that behaviour.  For
         the avoidance of doubt, I do also not consider that  the  behaviour
         of [the aunt] or the Appellants' mother subtracts any  weight  from
         the Appellants' Article 8 claims either."

17. The FtT then continued by noting the critical period in which they were
    in their education at paragraph [37].  Indeed the  FtT  noted  that  it
    would be in their best interests that their  education,  their  present
    living arrangements and their relationship with their aunt and uncle is
    not disrupted at this stage.  In what I regard is  a  careful  analysis
    the FtT nevertheless considered at paragraph  [38]  that  their  longer
    relationship was with their mother, and whilst the present  immigration
    situation of the appellants was disrupting this feature of  their  best
    interests, it had not been easy to decide which disruption should  take
    precedence, but ultimately the FtT decided that the factor which should
    take precedence was that they should live with their  mother  as  their
    surviving  parent.   In  doing  so  the  FtT  considered  the   special
    guardianship order.

18. I accept the submission that the FtT had plainly  considered  carefully
    the social services as well as  correspondence  at  page  [90]  of  the
    appellants' bundle, referred to at paragraph [20] of the  Decision,  as
    well as attempts to trace the appellants' mother.  Indeed, at paragraph
    [21] the writer of  the  report  and  the  local  authority  have  been
    dependent on the  account  of  information  provided  to  them  by  the
    appellant's  aunt  to  provide  an  opinion  on  the  location  of  the
    appellants' mother and to facilitate searches for her.  In essence, the
    difficulties that the local authorities will have had  in  tracing  the
    appellants' mother must have been caused substantially because  of  the
    aunt's reluctance in disclosing that she was in fact  in  contact  with
    the mother.  It follows that she is likely to know perfectly well where
    the mother is and to be in a position to make appropriate  arrangements
    in assisting social services with  the  reception  of  the  appellant's
    children.  This was not an  error  that  the  FtT  fell  into  in  when
    considering the article 8 assessment.

Notice of Decision

19. In conclusion, there are no errors of law in the Decision.  The FtT was
    entitled  to  reach  the  conclusions  he  did,  following  a   careful
    proportionality assessment on the evidence  before  him.   The  appeals
    fails and dismissed and the Decision is upheld.


Signed                                  Date     26 July 2019
J Keith
Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date     26 July 2019

J Keith
Upper Tribunal Judge Keith

