
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/15212/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester IAC                      |Decision & Reasons            |
|                                             |Promulgated:                  |
|On 8 March 2018                              |On 15 March 2018              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                                     WA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V. Jagadesham, counsel instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. I make an anonymity direction as  the  appeal  involves  a  British
         child.


      2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Pickup. I shall say immediately that  the  task
         of the Judge was made difficult because of two reasons. Firstly, he
         had dealt with the case as a 'float' case and  there  was  no  Home
         Office Presenting Officer to assist.  Secondly,  as  the  grant  of
         permission  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge   Jordan   highlights,   the
         Appellant's former legal advisers (Mamoon Solicitors  Ltd)  totally
         missed one of the most important basis  upon  which  the  Appellant
         could have appealed to the Tribunal.


      3. The Appellant had appealed against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
         refuse leave to remain on the basis of his private and family  life
         with his partner and her child.


      4. The Judge made very detailed findings against  the  Appellant.  The
         grounds of appeal drafted by the Appellant's former solicitors  are
         of a poor quality. As Upper Tribunal  Judge  Jordan  noted  though,
         there was more to the case because crucial elements were not noted.
         As I say, this may well have been because the  Respondent  was  not
         represented and the Appellant's former solicitors simply missed the
         pertinent points. In  any  event  though,  Judge  Jordan  said  the
         following when granting permission,

             "The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  made  some  scathing  remarks
             about the nature of the relationship between the appellant and
             his partner but I am doubtful whether those criticisms survive
             the   birth   of   their   child   (post   decision   but   in
             contemplation)."

   5. Mr Jagadesham informed me that despite seeking the file of papers from
      the Appellant's former solicitors, it has  still  not  been  provided.
      That is regrettable. In any event, I provided him  with  some  of  the
      papers from the Tribunal's file and I put the case back to enable  him
      to consider the case further.  Mr Jagadesham had  prepared  a  helpful
      skeleton argument in readiness for the hearing. The  submissions  were
      numerous, but in my judgment, it is abundantly clear that an error  of
      law is shown in the Judge's decision when one looks at  paragraphs  23
      and 24 of his decision.

   6. The argument being that the Judge  had  already  decided  against  the
      Appellant in respect of credibility issues up to paragraph 23 and then
      in conclusion at paragraph 23, but it was only thereafter at paragraph
      24 when  the  Judge  had  already  rejected  the  credibility  of  the
      Appellant that he went on to say,

             "...and I cannot take into account  a  child  as  yet  unborn,
             except  that  it  may  support  the  claim  of  a   subsisting
             relationship".

   7. The submission being that the  Judge  correctly  identified  that  the
      unborn child was indeed capable of being evidence  of  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship, but the Judge did not take that evidence into
      account when undertaking his assessment of the evidence  as  a  whole.
      The reason it is clear he had not have  taken  that  evidence  of  the
      unborn child into account was because the Judge  had  already  reached
      his conclusions as to the credibility of the Appellant and his claimed
      relationship in the paragraphs before. It is the "except that  it  may
      support the claim of subsisting  relationship"  which  speaks  of  the
      necessity for that  aspect  to  have  been  taken  into  account  when
      assessing credibility about the genuine and subsisting nature  of  the
      relationship.

   8. Mr McVeety explained he was not able to concede  the  appeal,  but  he
      noted that this was perhaps not a weak a case as some,  especially  in
      view of the pregnancy and other evidence.


   9. There is post hearing evidence of the child being born to  the  couple
      and that is obviously not relevant to the error of  law  hearing,  but
      the fact  that  the  Appellant's  claimed  partner  was  pregnant  and
      expecting a child was relevant. Added  to  that  was  the  Appellant's
      partner's other child whom the Appellant treated as  a  child  of  the
      family.


  10. It is abundantly clear that the Appellant did not  endear  himself  to
      the Judge, but I conclude that the matter relating  to  the  pregnancy
      was of such significance that it was essential for  it  to  have  been
      taken into account when assessing the evidence as a whole.


  11. I have been careful to ensure that I am not  merely  disagreeing  with
      the Judge who had had seen and heard the Appellant, but in my judgment
      it is not possible to overcome the deficiencies I have  identified  in
      the Judge's decision, particularly at paragraphs 23 and 24.  They  are
      of such a fundamental nature to undermine the decision as a whole.


  12. Both parties agreed that if I had found there to be an error  of  law,
      then the matter ought to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a
      re-hearing. I agree  with  those  submissions  so  as  to  enable  the
      Appellant to have a re-hearing on all  issues.  None  of  the  current
      findings shall stand.




DECISION

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
    and is set aside.
The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  re-hearing  on  all
    matters.

An anonymity direction is made.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: Abid Mahmood                    Date: 8 March 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
