
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
hu/15501/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |     Oral Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 28 November 2018                   |     On 7 January 2019                |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                            mr Jatheesan Sivarasa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R. Soloman of Counsel, Jein Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is another appeal where a decision was made by  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse the application for further leave on the basis that, in
    the past, an ETS certificate had been provided in support  of  a  prior
    application which had been demonstrated to be false.  I  need  not  set
    out the way in which these cases have been  approached  in  any  detail
    but, simply to say, that there is an initial evidential  burden  placed
    upon the Secretary of State which can then be the subject  of  comments
    by the appellant, such that on consideration of both the evidence which
    is provided by the Secretary of State and the evidence provided by  the
    appellant, the Secretary of State  either  succeeds  or  fails  in  his
    establishing the legal burden which is,  throughout,  placed  upon  the
    Secretary of State.

 2. In this case we have the generic evidence which is provided by  Rebecca
    Collings and Peter Millington and there  was,  in  addition,  Professor
    French's evidence which shows that the  likelihood  of  there  being  a
    mistake is very much reduced.  The crucial piece of material, which  is
    produced by the Secretary of State, which is the evidence of ETS, is in
    the form found at page E1 of the respondent's bundle.  It contains  two
    lines.  The first line refers to a record which  plainly  involves  the
    appellant.  It stated 'Jatheesan Sivarasa'.  It deals with his date  of
    birth, being 26 December 1989. It records his nationality as Sri Lankan
    but it also refers to a test that was conducted at the  London  College
    on 9 January 2013 which resulted  in  what  has  been  described  as  a
    'questionable' result.

 3. The second line  is  a  record  of  the  same  appellant,  a  different
    certificate number but the same date of birth.  However, it  shows  his
    nationality as being Swedish.  It records a result which was classified
    as being 'invalid'.  It refers to a test centre, the Westbridge  Centre
    and a test that was taken on 6 February 2013.  It is common ground that
    the first line of the certificate is wrong.  Although the appellant  is
    properly  identified  and  although  his  date  of  birth  is  properly
    identified and although his nationality is properly identified, he  did
    not sit a test on 9 January 2013 at the London College.   Consequently,
    whether  or  not  whoever  this  certificate  relates  to  produced   a
    questionable result, it was  not  this  appellant.   Consequently,  his
    score of 190 for the speaking score and 170 for the  writing  score  is
    immaterial.

 4. The second  deficiency  in  the  certificate  is  whether  or  not  the
    reference to Sweden as to the appellant's nationality (which is plainly
    incorrect) is merely a  quite  understandable  error  made  by  someone
    presumably using a drop down list of countries and pressing the scroll-
    down button inaccurately.  That is something of an  assumption  but  it
    seems that it is an assumption that could  properly  be  made.   In  my
    judgment, where one has to deal with the somewhat tenuous links between
    an individual and his acting dishonestly in going to a test  centre  or
    using a proxy to go to a test centre, one has to look very carefully at
    the spreadsheet which is provided.  It was submitted on behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State with some force that what  you  should  do  is  blue
    pencil those parts which are plainly wrong and that leaves  intact  the
    appellant, his name and the  invalidity  which  is  attributed  to  the
    results of the test centre at Westbridge on 6  February  2013.   In  my
    judgment that is a step too far.

 5. There has been a period of over a year in  which  it  would  have  been
    possible for the Secretary of State to have contacted ETS and  to  have
    simply asked them to submit a correct printout.  That is  the  sort  of
    thing that  would  happen,  I  suspect,  if  there  is  a  document  an
    individual receives that they know to be wrong so that if, for example,
    you receive a marriage certificate that does not bear your  right  name
    or if you receive a passport which does not  have  the  right  content,
    then you would simply write to the issuing authority and  say,  'Please
    submit to me a certificate which is accurate'.  This was  not  done  in
    this case and so the process by which the Secretary  of  State  has  to
    rely upon the 'blue-pencil effect' is one which is  made  significantly
    weaker by the fact that no  attempt  has  been  made  for  an  accurate
    printout to have been obtained.

 6. I am far from saying that a single error in relation to  one  of  these
    documents, possibly in the date of birth, possibly in  the  certificate
    number, possibly in the nationality, would alone be sufficient  to  set
    aside the reliability of the certificate.  But in this case, one has to
    apply a wholesale blue pencil to the entirety of the first line and  to
    the nationality part of the second line.  That is too  much  to  permit
    the respondent to establish an appropriate degree of reliability can be
    attached to this certificate.

 7. I entirely agree that matters  of  this  type  are  fact-sensitive  and
    therefore there will not always be  a  convergence  of  opinion  as  to
    whether  a  document  can  be  relied   upon.    That   might   require
    consideration of the other material to see whether it can  be  properly
    relied upon.  However, in this case, there were  a  number  of  matters
    upon which the appellant was able to rely.  They are mentioned  in  the
    grounds of appeal.  They raise the question  whether  this  is  a  case
    which is so open and shut that one can safely overlook the errors which
    are contained  in  the  printout.   We  know  that  the  appellant  has
    demonstrated a proficiency in English by giving evidence unassisted  by
    an interpreter.   We  know  that  he  has  previous  qualifications  in
    English, which were in the appeal bundle in relation to 2005.  We  know
    that there was an IELTS test in 2014  which  has  not  been  considered
    unreliable and we know that there are academic transcripts in  relation
    to the other qualifications that he has obtained, the courses for which
    were all conducted in English.  There  are  confirmatory  letters  from
    work in which he has been employed by well-known organisations.   I  do
    not pay any regard to the image that  appears  on  the  TOEIC  official
    score report because, if a scam is conducted, it is  conducted  by  the
    hearing centre.  Consequently one cannot say whether or not his picture
    on the certificate  can  be  treated  as  being  determinative  of  his
    presence at the test centre.

 8. Nevertheless, I have come to the  conclusion  that  the  ETS  print-out
    spread-sheet which was issued is so singularly lacking in accuracy that
    it cannot and should not be properly relied upon and that the  Tribunal
    ought to adopt a fairly stringent approach  where  the  errors  in  the
    spreadsheet are such as to undermine its  liability  in  a  significant
    way.  Accordingly, I find that there is an error of law.

 9. As far as the re-making is concerned, it is agreed that I should  allow
    the appeal having found that the  Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to
    discharge the initial evidential burden which is the first stage of the
    QM and Qadir  approach.   It  follows  that  I  do  not  need  to  deal
    specifically with the other grounds of appeal.

DECISION

          i) The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and I  set  aside
             its decision.




         ii) I allow the appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the
             Secretary of State.




                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                          DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                            17 December 2018
