
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15729/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 August 2019                    |On 28 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                  miss S S
                              (ANONYMITY MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Jorro, Counsel instructed by Waterstone
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an anonymity direction.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
    court directs otherwise no report of these proceedings  or  any  formal
    publication  thereof  shall  directly  or   indirectly   identify   the
    appellant.

 2. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lucas promulgated 18 April 2019  dismissing  her  appeal
    against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer  dated  30  October
    2017 to refuse her entry clearance application made on 8 June 2017. The
    appellant's father and sponsor is N S, a British citizen.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson granted permission to appeal on  30
    May 2019 on the basis that Article 8 had not been considered and  there
    needed to be a proportionality  assessment  outside  the  Rules.   That
    judge also considered that the sole responsibility  findings  might  be
    sustainable. With  respect  and  for  the  reasons  set  out  below,  I
    disagree.

 4. At the error of law hearing on 8.7.19, I found, for the reasons  stated
    in my decision promulgated on 16.7.19, that there was an error  of  law
    in the making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to
    require it to be set aside and remade. I retained the remaking  of  the
    decision to myself in the Upper Tribunal. However, in the absence of an
    interpreter it was not possible to proceed immediately  to  remake  the
    decision and thus the  matter  was  adjourned  with  directions  for  a
    continuation hearing, which came back before me on 21.7.19.



The Error of Law

 5. The decision is peculiarly drafted,  with  bullet  points  rather  than
    numbered paragraphs, making it difficult to navigate and reference  the
    decision. That is not  in  itself  a  material  error.  However,  I  am
    satisfied that the judge failed to adequately address the issue of sole
    responsibility and to engage adequately with the extent of the evidence
    submitted to the Tribunal.

 6. At the error of law hearing, Mr Jarvis,  representing  the  respondent,
    very fairly accepted that the judge had not entirely engaged  with  the
    evidence, in particular whether the evidence indicated that the  mother
    had abdicated responsibility and more importantly  whether  the  father
    had sole responsibility for the appellant.  The judge's findings appear
    to be focused in an odd way. The judge accepted the evidence  that  the
    sponsor had a parental role, evidenced in part by a number of visits to
    the appellant, but concluded that the responsibility  was  shared  with
    others. I found that the judge did not properly  consider  whether  the
    father could have retained sole responsibility but delegated the day-to-
    day care to his brother, the appellant's uncle.  The judge expressed  a
    number of concerns about the factual history of the case  and,  on  the
    penultimate page of the decision, stated that the factual scenario "did
    not add up," which was taken as to cast doubt on the  validity  of  the
    claim.  Included within that was the concern as to why the uncle  could
    not continue to look after the appellant when he was also looking after
    and would continue to look after her siblings. It is clear the decision
    is not properly structured and does not adequately address the evidence
    and the relevant issues.  I bear I mind  that  the  burden  is  on  the
    appellant, but on the facts  of  this  case  one  might  question  what
    further evidence could have adduced  to  demonstrate  that  her  father
    retained sole parental responsibility.  Of course, it is a matter for a
    judge as to what weight to be given as to  that  evidence  but  in  the
    relatively brief and  poorly-structured  decision  the  judge  has  not
    adequately engaged with that  evidence  or  resolved  all  the  crucial
    issues, as I  have  explained  above.   In  all  the  circumstances,  I
    concluded that the decision could not stand and must be set aside to be
    remade.



Remaking of the Decision

 7. I have today heard from the sponsor, through the Bengali interpreter. I
    have taken into account the oral evidence and submissions  as  well  as
    the appellant's revised bundle sent under cover of letter dated 5.8.19.
    A further bundle, including a skeleton argument and  case  authorities,
    as well as a revised index, was served  under  cover  of  letter  dated
    16.8.19, and this has also been carefully considered. I have considered
    the evidence in the round, as a whole, before reaching any findings  of
    fact or my conclusion in the appeal.

 8. The application dated 31.5.17, when the appellant was 17 years of  age,
    was for entry clearance pursuant to paragraph 297  of  the  Immigration
    Rules as the child of a parent settled in the UK. I bear in  mind  that
    the burden of proof in relation to meeting these requirements is on the
    appellant, on the balance of probabilities. However, as the only  right
    of appeal is on human rights grounds,  it  is  for  the  respondent  to
    demonstrate that the  decision  is  proportionate  to  the  family  and
    private life rights of the appellant and her sponsoring father  in  the
    UK, to the same standard of proof.  Following  Mostafa  (Article  8  in
    entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC), whilst the ability to satisfy
    the Immigration Rules is not the question to be determined in article 8
    appeals against refusal of entry clearance, it is capable  of  being  a
    weighty, though not determinative, factor when  deciding  whether  such
    refusal is proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing immigration
    control.

 9. The application was refused on the basis that as the parents are  still
    married  the  appellant's  mother  "bears  a  parental  responsibility"
    towards her and thus the father does not have sole  responsibility  for
    her  upbringing  and  welfare.  It  was  said  that  it  had  not  been
    demonstrated  that  the  father  regularly  visits  the  appellant  and
    provides for her financial needs and had not demonstrated that  he  had
    taken decision with regard to the  appellant's  education,  welfare  or
    health. Further, there was  nothing  to  demonstrate  that  the  monies
    forwarded by the father to his brother,  the  appellant's  uncle,  were
    used for the  appellant's  express  needs.  It  appears  to  have  been
    accepted in the refusal decision that since 2014 the appellant has been
    under the day to day care of her uncle. However, it was concluded  that
    the uncle and not the appellant's father who had  taken  the  important
    decisions about her upbringing since her mother stated in 2014 that she
    could not longer cope with her parental  responsibilities  towards  the
    appellant and her three siblings.

10. The respondent also addressed the alternative  avenue  of  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which make exclusion  of  the
    child undesirable, pursuant to 297(f). In that  regard,  it  was  noted
    that she is in full-time education and has access to  basic  essentials
    and it was not demonstrated that her circumstances  were  difficult  in
    any way. Neither did  the  respondent  consider  that  there  were  any
    exceptional circumstances to justify granting entry  clearance  outside
    the Rules pursuant to article 8 ECHR on the basis that to refuse to  do
    so would have unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant or her
    family. Her best interests were also said to have  been  taken  account
    of.

11. The appellant's father came to the UK in 2005 as a work permit  holder,
    leaving his wife  and  children  behind  in  Bangladesh.  He  became  a
    naturalised British citizen in 2011. It is not dispute that until  2014
    the mother and father shared parental responsibility  and  it  was  not
    asserted in the refusal decision that he has at any time abandoned  his
    parental responsibility. If, as claimed, he was working to provide  for
    his family in Bangladesh,  that  would  be  evidence  going  towards  a
    continuing interest and responsibility for his wife and  children.  The
    appellant's case is that her mother has suffered from ill-health, as  a
    result of which in 2014 she abdicated her parental  responsibility  for
    the appellant and her siblings,  a  claim  supported  by  the  mother's
    affidavit and the medical evidence which  indicates  she  is  suffering
    from liver and kidney disease. In consequence,  the  sponsoring  father
    arranged for his brother, the appellant's uncle to take over day to day
    care of the appellant and her siblings, although it  appears  that  the
    children continue to live  in  the  same  home  as  their  mother.  The
    evidence before the tribunal was that until 2017 the uncle  also  lived
    in the same house, but has now moved to a property 100 yards away.

12. The sponsor's evidence was not entirely clear but I  found  him  honest
    and straightforward in those matters he could answer. He confirmed that
    he used to send money to his brother for looking  after  the  sponsor's
    family in Bangladesh. He said that in 2017 he stopped sending money but
    when asked about 2017 remittals said that he now sends less.  Elsewhere
    in his evidence he explained that he now sends money  directly  to  the
    appellant. However, as he is ill and unable to work, he doesn't send as
    much as he used to. He is 54 years of age. He maintained  that  despite
    his reduced  circumstances,  he  continues  to  support  the  appellant
    financially and would be able to adequate accommodate and maintain  her
    in the UK, though those issues were not taken in the refusal decision.

13. There was some confusion whether the appellant was still  in  study  or
    school as the sponsor suggested. The documents from the school  suggest
    that she passed her final exams in 2017. However, the sponsor said that
    she is taking further study and wants to pursue a career as  a  teacher
    in the UK. He said he alone paid the �30 monthly school fees.

14. Mr Avery pursued whether things had changed since the application  made
    in June 2017. The appellant is now 20  years  of  age  and  the  father
    accepted that she looks after her younger siblings, saying  that  there
    was no one else to do so. She was unable to look after her mother,  who
    sometimes lives with them and sometimes with her own  brother,  because
    of her studies. It was not explained who would  look  after  the  other
    children if the appellant came to the  UK  but  that  is  not  directly
    relevant to the issues in the appeal.

15. In summary, it is asserted  that  the  father  has  maintained  a  sole
    parental responsibility from 2014 whilst delegating the day to day care
    and control to the uncle. This is supported  by  documentary  evidence,
    including the letter at C16 from the school indicating  that  in  March
    2014 the father met with the appellant's head teacher, explaining  that
    he would be taking sole responsibility  for  her,  and  introduced  his
    brother. It is confirmed that from time to time the sponsor  maintained
    regular contact with her, through  the  appellant's  mobile  phone,  to
    gather information about her instruction and study, and  did  so  until
    she passed her final exam in February 2017. It is said that  the  uncle
    attended school meetings and makes contact on behalf of the father.  On
    the sponsor's evidence, it appears that the uncle no longer  plays  the
    day to day care role he did from 2014.  Given  that  the  appellant  is
    herself now 20 years of age may explain that.

16. That the father has made and continues to  make  remittances  of  money
    from the UK to his  brother  in  Bangladesh  is  not  in  dispute.  The
    respondent challenged whether the monies are actually expended for  the
    appellant's benefit. On the evidence there would seem to  be  no  other
    reason why he would send money other than the support of his family, to
    include the appellant.

17. The issue of sole responsibility was considered by the  Upper  Tribunal
    in TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT
    00049, where it was held to be a factual matter to be decided upon  all
    the  evidence.  Where  one  parent  is  not  involved  in  the  child's
    upbringing because he or she has abandoned or abdicated responsibility,
    the issue may arise between the remaining parent and  others  who  have
    day-to-day care of the child abroad. "The test is  whether  the  parent
    has continuing control  and  direction  over  the  child's  upbringing,
    including making all the important decisions in the child's life."

18. I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities, there being no evidence
    to the contrary, that even if the appellant continues to  live  in  the
    same house as her mother, the mother has  abandoned  or  abdicated  her
    parental responsibility for the appellant, as well as for her siblings.
    In this regard, it is noteworthy that  the  refusal  decision  did  not
    challenge that the uncle has had day to day care of the appellant since
    2014.

19. I find that the evidence, taken as a whole, demonstrates to a degree at
    least satisfying the standard of proof of a  balance  of  probabilities
    that the  father  had  had  sole  responsibility  for  the  appellant's
    upbringing, notwithstanding that the day to day  care  and  control  is
    delegated to her uncle. The claim is more than adequately supported  by
    the oral evidence and documentary support. As I suggested in the  error
    of law decision, it is difficult to see what more the  appellant  could
    adduce to demonstrate that she meets the requirements of the Rules.

20. As the appeal is on article 8 family life human  rights  grounds  only,
    the ultimate issue is whether the decision to refuse entry clearance is
    proportionate, taking into account the degree to  which  the  appellant
    has demonstrated that she meets the requirements  of  the  Rules.  This
    comes down to  a  balancing  exercise  between  on  the  one  hand  the
    legitimate aim  to  protect  the  well-being  of  the  UK  through  the
    enforcement of immigration control and on the  other  the  family  life
    rights of the appellant and her  father  in  the  UK,  it  having  been
    established that article 8 is engaged on the facts of this case.  There
    is no other relevant public interest consideration and  it  is  not  in
    dispute that the father will be able to  provide  for  maintenance  and
    accommodation of the appellant on entry to the UK.

21. An issue arose at the hearing as to whether the tribunal  was  required
    to consider the circumstances at  the  date  of  decision,  or  whether
    because it is a human rights  appeal  I  should  take  account  of  the
    appellant's present circumstances,  where  she  is  now  20  years  of,
    probably looking after her siblings, and less dependent on the sponsor.
    I first note that paragraph 27 of the Immigration Rules  provides  that
    an application for entry clearance is to be decided in the light of the
    circumstances existing at the time of the decision and entry  clearance
    will not be refused solely on account of the applicant  having  reached
    the age of 18 between receipt of his application and the  date  of  the
    decision on it, which  is  what  happened  in  this  case.  I  am  also
    satisfied, notwithstanding Mr Avery's suggestion to the contrary,  that
    the appeal on human rights grounds should also be decided on the  basis
    of the circumstances at the date of decision. It is an  appeal  against
    the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer refusing entry clearance in
    2017. I conclude that it would be unfair  to  say  the  least  for  the
    respondent to now rely on a change of circumstances when I am satisfied
    that the father did have sole responsibility at the date  of  decision.
    Mr Jorro made another point, suggesting that  as  the  wording  of  297
    includes the phrase "has had," it must  relate  to  the  past  and  not
    necessarily the present. If that it is right, it  may  not  matter  how
    long the father had sole responsibility and whether or not he still had
    it at the date of application. I am not persuaded by this  argument  as
    if the  father  did  not  have  sole  responsibility  at  the  date  of
    application and decision and only had it at sometime in  the  past,  it
    would make a nonsense of the purpose of the Rule. However, on the facts
    of this case the resolution of that argument is not determinative as  I
    am satisfied  that  at  the  date  of  decision  the  father  had  sole
    responsibility between at least 2014 and the date of decision in  2017,
    and that he merely delegated the day to day  care  to  his  brother  in
    Bangladesh, providing regular funds for the support of his family.

22. On the Razgar stepped approach, including the proportionality balancing
    exercise, and on an assessment of the evidence as a whole, I reach  the
    clear conclusion that the decision refusing entry clearance created  an
    interference with the family life established between the  sponsor  and
    the appellant so as to engage article 8. Whilst  the  decision  was  in
    pursuit of the legitimate aim of protecting the UK through  immigration
    control,  the  application  should  have  been  allowed  on  the   true
    determination of the facts of this case. That fact is  highly  relevant
    to the proportionality balancing exercise. It follows that even  though
    circumstances may have changed in the lengthy intervening period, I  am
    satisfied that the decision was clearly disproportionate to family life
    rights; the balance comes down firmly in the  appellant's  favour.  Her
    application should have been granted.





Notice of Decision

23. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that it needs to be set aside

                    I set aside the decision.

                    I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

     [pic]
                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 21 August 2019



To the Respondent
Fee Award

In the light of my decision I make no  fee  award.  The  appellant  has  now
adduced  sufficient  evidence  to  demonstrate  quite   clearly   that   the
application should have been granted. However, much of that  evidence  post-
dates the application and decision I am not satisfied that there can be  any
criticism of the respondent in refusing  the  application  on  the  decision
made on the available evidence.




                  Signed

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 21 August 2019


