
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/15076/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21st February 2019                   | On 13th March 2019                 |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               Amarjeet singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Harris instructed by ATM Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  O'Malley
    made following a hearing at Taylor House on 20th November 2018.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India born on  31st  December  1989.   He
    came to the UK on a Tier 4 (General) Student  visa  on  22nd  September
    2010 with leave to 28th January 2013.  He made  a  further  application
    for leave valid until 30th April 2014, but this was curtailed with  the
    cancellation of the licence of the education provider.   The  appellant
    made a further application for leave to remain in the UK as  a  student
    on 2nd February 2014 and was refused on 9th June 2014 with no right  of
    appeal.  Thereafter the  appellant  remained  without  leave  until  he
    applied on 14th October 2016 for leave on the basis of his relationship
    with his British  citizen  partner,  Sharon  Kaur,  and  their  British
    citizen child born on 13th February 2016.

 3. His application was refused on the basis  that  he  did  not  meet  the
    suitability requirements because of  a  fraudulent  TOEIC  certificate.
    The respondent was therefore not satisfied that the appellant  met  the
    suitability requirements of Appendix FM.  The  judge  agreed  with  the
    respondent and concluded that the appellant had indeed been party to  a
    fraud. She  concluded,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  that  the
    respondent had discharged the burden of proof of showing that the TOEIC
    certificate produced by the appellant to obtain an  extension  of  stay
    was validly cancelled by ETS.

 4. The judge accepted that the appellant's relationship with  his  partner
    was genuine and subsisting and that they enjoyed family life.  She  was
    also satisfied that he enjoyed a genuine parental relationship with his
    daughter.  His wife is now pregnant again and their second child is due
    in May 2019.

 5. The judge wrote as follows:-

         "I find that it would not be reasonable to expect a British Citizen
         child of a British Citizen parent to leave the UK and it would  not
         be in her best interests but that this child would not be  expected
         to do so as she has another parent on whom  she  is  dependent  who
         will remain in the UK and can  continue  care  in  the  UK.   I  am
         satisfied that this is in the best interests of the  child,  taking
         into account  that  communication  can  continue  by  technological
         means; she can visit India with her mother and that her needs  will
         be met by her mother and the remainder of  her  family  in  the  UK
         which  the  appellant  identifies  as  including  grandparents  and
         uncles."

 6. The judge then cited Section 117B(6) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 and concluded as follows:-

         "The statute sets  out  in  the  plainest  terms  that  the  public
         interest does not require removal where there is a qualifying child
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.
          I rely on my earlier finding that neither the appellant's  partner
         nor his child would leave the UK.  I also rely on FZ (China) v SSHD
         [2015] EWCA Civ 550 where the Court of Appeal dismissed the  appeal
         in circumstances where if the Claimant's wife was herself compelled
         to leave, the child would be compelled to go with  her,  but  there
         was no compulsion on the wife  and,  in  those  circumstances,  the
         child could not be said  to  be  compelled  either.   I  find  this
         consistent with KO (Nigeria)".

 7. On that basis she dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on two grounds.

 9. In respect of Ground 1 the appellant argued that the judge  had  failed
    to properly apply the correct burden and standard of proof in  relation
    to the TOEIC aspect of the case.  She accurately found that the initial
    evidential burden had been met by the Secretary of State as per SM  and
    Qadir,  and  then  went  on  to  assess  the  appellant's  explanation.
    However, at this stage there was  only  an  evidential  burden  on  the
    appellant, i.e. a requirement that the appellant raise  a  prima  facie
    case with a minimum level of plausibility that he did in fact take  the
    test.  The judge  wrongly  assessed  the  appellant's  account  on  the
    balance of probabilities.

10.  In  relation  to  Ground  2  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant's
    relationship with his British daughter was genuine and  subsisting  and
    that it would not be reasonable to expect her to leave the  UK  and  it
    would not be in her best interests.  However, in dismissing the appeal,
    she had not had  regard  to  the  fact  that  Section  117B(6)  applies
    irrespective of whether the child would in practical terms be compelled
    to leave at any point.  117B(6) explains that the public interest  does
    not require the appellant's removal where it would not be reasonable to
    expect the child to leave the UK.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Hodgkinson limited to  Ground
    2.

12. Prior to the hearing the appellant  sought  to  argue  that  permission
    ought to have been granted in relation to Ground 1.  At the hearing  Mr
    Avery did not seek to argue that in fact Judge  Hodgkinson's  grant  of
    permission included Grounds 1 and 2 since  he had said at the  head  of
    his decision that permission to appeal was granted (as per the decision
    in Safi & ors (permission to appeal decisions [2018] UKUT 388).

The Appellant's Submissions

13. Miss Harris relied on her Grounds.

14. Mr Avery  submitted  that  there  was  no  error  in  relation  to  the
    suitability  decision.   So  far  as  the  Section  117B(6)  point  was
    concerned he submitted that the factual  reality  was  that  the  child
    would stay with her mother and since she would not  leave  the  UK  the
    judge was entitled to conclude that there would be no breach of Article
    8.

Findings and Conclusions

The TOEIC Decision

15. The evidence before the judge was that the appellant had taken his test
    with Premier Language in Gants Hill.  He had been recommended to do  so
    by a person whom he believed to be a solicitor.  He had paid him and he
    had then paid for the test.  He said that the test took  place  a  long
    time ago and he could not remember much detail.  He did not contact ETS
    or the consultant about the test because he did not know there had been
    a problem.

16. The judge recorded that the data from Premier Language was that 75%  of
    the tests were invalidated and the remainder  were  questionable.   ETS
    had not released any of the results.  The appellant had been  aware  of
    the curtailment of his leave because he had made  a  fresh  application
    for leave as a Tier 4 Student and had been informed in June  2014  that
    his application had been refused without a right of appeal.  The  judge
    was therefore, reasonably, not satisfied that the appellant was unaware
    of the allegations of fraud.  She was  entitled  to  conclude  that  by
    March 2015 he was aware that the TOEIC had been found to  be  deficient
    and that was the reason for the refusal of his claim  to  remain.   His
    oral evidence that his tests had been organised through  an  agent  was
    not the evidence given in his appeal or witness statement.  Whilst  she
    accepted that some time had passed since the date of the  test  it  was
    open to her to find that there was no explanation for  the  significant
    lack of recall and not to be satisfied that the appellant had  provided
    a coherent account of actual events.

17. The judge set out the law and said that the initial  evidential  burden
    had been met by the Secretary of State on the documents.  She then  had
    to go on to consider whether the  appellant  was  able  to  provide  an
    innocent explanation.  She was not so satisfied.

18. At paragraph 84 she said:-

         "I am not satisfied that there is  an  innocent  explanation  which
         meets the burden on the appellant.  I am  mindful  of  the  serious
         consequences of such a finding but  I  am  not  persuaded,  on  the
         balance of probabilities, that the appellant was present  and  took
         the TOEIC exams in October 2012".

19. I do not accept that the judge erred in applying the wrong standard  of
    proof.  Paragraph 84  is silent.  In a detailed judgment the judge  set
    out the evidence and the appellant's explanation at  some  length,  and
    gave proper reasons for concluding  that  there  was  not  an  innocent
    explanation.

20. She concluded at paragraph 85 by saying:-

         "I accept the information in the respondent's skeleton argument and
         I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the  respondent
         has discharged the burden  of  proof  of  showing  that  the  TOEIC
         certificate produced by the appellant to  obtain  an  extension  of
         stay was validly cancelled by ETS."

    That is a correct recitation of the legal burden and  standard  on  the
    respondent.

21. The judge did not err in law;  her reasoning is detailed and extensive.



22. Section 117B(6) states that in the case of a person who is  not  liable
    to deportation the  public  interest  does  not  require  the  person's
    removal where -

      a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with
         a qualifying child; and

      b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

23. The case of SZ cited by the judge is a deportation  case,  and  has  no
    relevance to this one.




24. I consider Mr Avery's interpretation of paragraph 117B(6) to be  simply
    wrong.  In SR (subsisting parental relationship  -  s117B(6))  Pakistan
    [2018] UKUT 00334 (IAC) at paragraph 55 the Tribunal said:-





      a) "The proper application of section  117B(6)  when  resolved  in  an
         individual's   favour   is   determinative   of   the   issue    of
         proportionality.  As Sales LJ made clear in Rhuppiah v SSHD  [2016]
         EWCA Civ 803, [2016] 1 WLR 4204 at [45], sections 117A-117D of  the
         2002 Act provide  a  structured  approach  to  the  application  of
         Article 8 which produces in all cases a 'final  result'  compatible
         with Article 8.  Where Parliament  has  declared  that  the  public
         interest  does  not  require  a  person's  removal   in   specified
         circumstances, and those circumstances are present, that is the end
         of the matter."




25. In this case the unchallenged conclusion of the Immigration  Judge  was
    that it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK..
    No argument has been made to the  contrary   Paragraph  117B(6)  states
    that in these circumstances the public interest does  not  require  the
    person's removal.

Notice of decision

26. The original judge erred in law.  His decision is  set  aside.   It  is
    remade as follows.  The appellant's appeal  is  allowed  on  Article  8
    grounds.

27. No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]

Signed                              Date 10 March 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

