
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15222/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 April 2019                             |On 3 May 2019                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                           Syed Kazim Haider Rizvi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. D. Revill, Counsel instructed by Elaahi & Co.
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cohen, promulgated on  11  January  2019,  in  which  he
    refused the Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse leave to remain on human rights grounds.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:-

         "It is arguable that the judge erred in finding that respondent had
         discharged   the   initial   evidential   burden    notwithstanding
         difficulties with the ETS spreadsheet information  provided  (which
         was seemingly  the  only  non-generic  evidence  relied  on).   All
         grounds are arguable."

 3. The Appellant attended the hearing.

 4. It was accepted by Mr. Walker on behalf  of  the  Respondent  that  the
    decision involved the making of a material error of law in relation  to
    the Judge's consideration of the evidence provided by the Respondent to
    show that the Appellant had used deception.

 5. Given this, I stated that I found the decision involved the making of a
    material error of law.  I set  the  decision  aside.   I  remitted  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.

Error of Law

 6. It was submitted at ground 1 that the Judge had failed to  address  the
    submissions made by the Appellant regarding the  evidence  provided  by
    the Respondent to support his allegation of fraud.  In  particular,  he
    had failed to address the fact that the tests were said  to  have  been
    taken in October and November 2011, but used by  the  Appellant  in  an
    application in June 2011.  He had failed  to  address  the  point  that
    there was no certificate, and therefore no evidence to  show  that  the
    certificate numbers were connected to the Appellant.  Thirdly,  he  had
    failed to address the fact that there  was  nothing  from  ETS  to  say
    whether the Appellant fell into the category of those who had  used  an
    imposter, or those whose tests were invalid due to test  administration
    irregularity.


 7. It was accepted by  Mr.  Walker  that  the  evidence  provided  by  the
    Secretary of State was lacking insofar as the dates  did  not  seem  to
    correlate.  The Appellant's appeal had been dismissed  largely  due  to
    the fact that the Judge found that the evidential burden had  been  met
    by the Respondent.  This was on the  basis  of  reliance  on  documents
    which Mr. Walker accepted were not clear, and which may  be  flawed  in
    showing that the Appellant had used deception.

 8. I find  that  the  submissions  set  out  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,
    summarised at [6] above, were not properly taken into  account  by  the
    Judge.  He accepted at [27] that  the  Respondent  had  satisfied  "the
    higher burden of proof which applies to an allegation of fraud".  There
    is no reference at [24] to [26], when the Judge refers to the  evidence
    provided by  the  Respondent,  to  the  fact  that  the  dates  do  not
    correlate.  Neither  is  there  any  reference  to  the  fact  that  no
    certificate was provided so as to show that the numbers referred to  on
    the ETS spreadsheet referred to the Appellant.  There  is  no  detailed
    consideration of the evidence provided by the Respondent.

 9. I find that insufficient  reasons  have  been  given  for  the  Judge's
    finding that the Respondent had provided  evidence  to  show  that  the
    initial burden of proof had been met, such that  the  burden  of  proof
    shifted to the Appellant.  I find that this is a material error of law.

10. In relation to the other grounds, it was accepted by Mr. Walker, as had
    been stated by Judge Pickup in his decision of 23 January 2019 refusing
    permission to appeal from the First-tier Tribunal, that the  Judge  had
    made a further error of law in  referring  to  evidence  that  was  not
    before him, and made assumptions based on that evidence.  This  related
    to his statement at [27] where he referred to "evidence given to me  in
    previous appeals" (ground 2).

11. Ground 3 refers to the  failure  to  consider  relevant  material  when
    considering the evidence of the Appellant, after the  Judge  had  found
    that the burden of proof shifted to him.  I do  not  need  to  consider
    this any further, as I have found that there was a  material  error  of
    law in the Judge's finding that the burden had so shifted.

12. I have found that the decision involves the making of a material  error
    of law.  I have taken  account  of  the  Practice  Statement  dated  10
    February 2010, paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the  error  has
    been to deprive a party  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair
    hearing or other opportunity for the party's case  to  be  put  to  and
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent  of
    the fact-finding necessary to enable this appeal to be  remade,  having
    regard to the overriding objective, I find that it  is  appropriate  to
    remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.

13. I thanked Mr. Walker for his approach to the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

14. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and I set the decision aside.   No  findings  are
    preserved.

15. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


16. No anonymity direction is made.

Directions

      1. It emerged at the  hearing  that  neither  the  Appellant  nor  the
         Respondent had a copy of the supplementary bundle  which  had  been
         served by the Respondent on the day of the hearing  in  the  First-
         tier Tribunal, although there was a  copy  on  the  Tribunal  file.
         This contained additional material relating to the ETS  test.   The
         Respondent is to serve this bundle on  the  Appellant  as  soon  as
         possible, and in any event at least fourteen days in advance of the
         hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

      2. The appeal is to be listed at Taylor House.

      3. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Cohen.


Signed                                  Date 1 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
