
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/15147/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London             | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 September 2017                     |On 18 September 2017              |
|                                         | Given orally on 13 September 2017|
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                THE PRESIDENT, THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

                                   Between

                                ISAAC OPPONG
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:          Mr M Moriarty, of Luqmani Thompson and Partners


For the Respondent:         Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                                  DECISION

 1. The  Appellant,  a  national  of  Ghana  now  aged  47  years,  applied
    unsuccessfully to the Respondent, the Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department (the "Secretary of State"),  for  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis that  he  is  a  stateless  person.   By  a
    decision made on behalf of the Secretary of  State  dated  13  February
    2015, this application  was  refused.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  (the
    "FtT") dismissed  the  ensuing  appeal.   The  Appellant  appeals  with
    permission to this Tribunal.


 2. The most significant milestones in the history of these proceedings are
    the following:

   a) On 16 September 2003 the Appellant was notified of  the  Secretary  of
      State's refusal to accept his postal human rights  and  asylum  claim,
      being informed of the need to make the claim in person.  This elicited
      no response.


   b) On 24 September 2003 the Appellant married a Dutch citizen  -  a  mere
      marriage of convenience the Secretary of State would hold.


   c) By a fortuitous encounter the Appellant  was  discovered  to  be  over
      staying in the United Kingdom on 24 February 2004.


   d) This prompted an application for  a  residency  permit  based  on  his
      marriage, on 25 February 2004.


   e) On 03 March 2004 this application was  refused  on  the  basis  of  an
      assessment that the marriage was one of mere convenience.


   f) On 05 July 2004  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  this  refusal  was
      dismissed.


   g) On 20 October 2006 the Appellant became appeals rights exhausted.


   h) On 05 January 2007 the Secretary of  State  made  directions  for  the
      removal of the Appellant to Ghana.  In response the Appellant,  on  15
      January 2007, claimed asylum.


   i) On 27 January 2007 the Appellant's asylum claim was set aside  clearly
      unfounded.


   j) Directions for the  removal  of  the  Appellant  to  Ghana,  dated  02
      February 2007,  were  not  implemented  following  intimation  by  the
      Ghanaian  High  Commission  that  the  Appellant's  asserted  Ghanaian
      nationality was disputed.


   k) As the Appellant had also claimed to be a citizen  of  Niger,  further
      directions for his removal to that country were  issued  on  06  April
      2007.   However, on 17 April 2007 the Appellant was refused  entry  to
      Niger.


   l) On 02 August 2007 the  Appellant  was  convicted  of  the  offence  of
      securing the avoidance,  postponement  or  revocation  of  enforcement
      action by means including deception, contrary to  Section  24  of  the
      Immigration  Act  1971.   He  was  sentenced   to   imprisonment   and
      deportation was recommended.


   m) In due course, on 06 December 2007, a Deportation Order was made.


   n)   Following   intermittent   legal   proceedings    and    substantial
      correspondence involving the Appellant's legal representatives, on  09
      September 2014 the Secretary of State agreed to revoke the decision to
      refuse limited leave to remain as a stateless person and to treat  the
      Appellant's further leave to remain application as one to  revoke  the
      deportation order.


   o) On 13 February 2015 the Secretary of State  made  a  further  decision
      refusing  the  Appellant  statelessness  application  and  issuing   a
      certificate under section 94B of the 2002 Act.


   p) On 17 March 2016, following a judicial  review  challenge,  a  consent
      order was made the terms whereof required the Secretary  of  State  to
      withdraw the last mentioned decision and to reconsider the Appellant's
      representations.




 3. The last mentioned step was the impetus for the  impugned  decision  of
    the Secretary of State giving rise to the successive appeals which have
    followed.


 4. For the reasons proffered in the  decision  letter,  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision maker concluded that the Appellant is  a  national  of
    Ghana.  The following passage is also noteworthy:


         "....  Your sole objective, having arrived in the UK in 2003, is to
         remain here by whatever means possible ....  You have willingly and
         purposely lied about your nationality and  other  relevant  details
         whenever you felt it would benefit or  help  achieve  your  aim  of
         remaining in the UK - which has to date been successful as you have
         remained here illegally for some 12 years."




    The decision maker then considered, and rejected,  various  claims  and
    assertions by the Appellant relating to relationships  and  involvement
    with two named female persons.  This is considered to  be  evidence  of
    the continuing use of deception by the Appellant.




 5. The decision letter continues:


         "Your deportation is conducive to the public good and in the public
         interest because you have been convicted of an  offence  which  has
         caused serious harm ....


         Therefore, in accordance with  paragraph  398  of  the  Immigration
         Rules, the public interest  requires  your  deportation  unless  an
         exception to deportation applies."




    This is  followed  by  a  detailed  consideration  of  the  Appellant's
    parental relationship with four children  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    their  circumstances,  followed  by  a  conclusion  that  none  of  the
    exceptions in paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules applies.
    Article 8 ECHR was then considered in a free-standing way, giving  rise
    to the following conclusion:
         "Full consideration has been given to the best  interests  of  your
         children and  these  can  be  made  [sic]  by  your  family  united
         relocating to Ghana.  It has  been  explained  at  length  in  this
         letter why it is believed that both you and [Ms R] and  your  three
         younger children are citizens of Ghana who have no leave in the  UK
         and are all therefore liable to be removed to Ghana, with the  onus
         on you and your partner to decide if [I]  will  relocate  with  the
         family unit.  It is therefore considered that your family unit  can
         continue in Ghana. In addition, your three Ghanaian  children  will
         be free to enjoy the social and cultural benefits that they have an
         unquestionable right to as Ghanaian citizens and [I] would also  be
         free to enjoy the  benefits  of  his  Ghanaian  cultural  heritage.
         Should there be disruption to your family life, such as your  being
         removed ahead of your family members, then this would not amount to
         a very compelling circumstance either."




    Thus it was concluded that no very compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above those  identified  in  paragraphs  399  and  399A  of  the  Rules
    outweighing the public interest in the Appellant's deportation had been
    demonstrated.




 6. Finally, the Secretary of State rejected the Appellant's claim that  he
    is a stateless person, reiterating the assessment that he is a  citizen
    of  Ghana.   This  entailed  disbelieving  the   Appellant's   discrete
    assertion that the  copy  Ghanaian  passport  which  has  been  in  his
    possession at all material times had not been issued properly.


 7. The grant of permission to  appeal  to  this  Tribunal  identifies  two
    arguable errors of law infecting the decision of the FtT:


         "It is an arguable error of law that the Judge may  have  erred  in
         stating that there was no right of appeal against the decision that
         the Appellant is stateless ....


         Further, it is arguable that in respect of the Article 8 claim, the
         Judge did not take into account when coming to his conclusions  the
         fact that a child had been living in  the  United  Kingdom  for  12
         years and the impact that removal would have on that child."




    The Appellant's representatives have applied for permission  to  adduce
    further evidence under Rule 15(2A) of the 2008 Rules.  This consists of
    a decision dated 05 June 2017  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  grant
    indefinite leave  to  remain  outside  the  Rules.   The  four  persons
    concerned are all stated to be nationals of the Ivory Coast.  They  are
    the three aforementioned children of the Appellant and a lady  aged  35
    years.  All have been granted limited leave to remain until 04 December
    2019.  In the case of the adult lady, the determining factor is  stated
    to be the best interests of the first child noted above, namely I,  her
    son.




 8. Mr Wilding, on behalf of the Secretary of State properly addressed  the
    Tribunal first.  He acknowledged that there was a failure by the FtT to
    make necessary findings on the issue  of  statelessness.   The  correct
    analysis is that findings on the issues  bearing  on  the  question  of
    statelessness have the potential to be material considerations  in  the
    Article 8  ECHR  balancing  exercise.   Whether  they  have  any  other
    function is a matter which I  do  not  have  to  decide.   It  suffices
    therefore for me to record without deciding, the  intimation  that  the
    Secretary  of  State  will  make  the  case  that  (i)  the  FtT  lacks
    jurisdiction to decide the question of statelessness as a matter of law
    and (ii) ultimately a favourable outcome to the Appellant  would  avail
    him nothing on account of the deportation order.  These  are  issues  I
    leave to the FtT.

 9. I turn to the materiality of the acknowledged error  of  law.   It  was
    incumbent upon the FtT to properly prepare the scales in the Article  8
    proportionality balancing exercise.  The failure to  make  findings  on
    issues bearing upon the statelessness question render the  decision  of
    the FtT unsustainable in law because  of  a  failure  to  identify  all
    material facts and considerations.

10. My preference would be to retain the case in the  forum  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal having  regard  to  the  protracted  history  of  the  affair.
    However the nature of the failings on the part of the FtT is such  that
    remittal is appropriate.  A clean slate is required in order to  induce
    a sustainable  judicial  decision.   Thus  remittal  to  a  differently
    constituted judicial panel is ordered.

11. I formally admit the new evidence which the Appellant seeks  to  adduce
    in the application made to this Tribunal under Rule 15(2A) of the Upper
    Tribunal Rules.  No findings are preserved.

12. I draw attention to the desirability of early consideration being given
    to the formation of a panel of two senior judges.



                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                    Date:  13 September 2017

