
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/15893/2016
     HU/17192/2016, HU/17194/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th April 2018                            |On 26th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     RBD
                                     MR
                                     RRB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr H Kannangara of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a decision of Judge Juss  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 8th March 2017.

 2. The Appellants are Sri Lankan nationals.  The first Appellant born 18th
    September 1985 is the husband of the second Appellant, who was born  on
    10th July 1986, and the father of the third Appellant who was  born  in
    the UK on 13th October 2015.

 3. The first Appellant entered the UK as a student on 18th December  2009.
    His leave to remain was subsequently extended until  19th  April  2015.
    The first and second Appellants have not had leave to remain in the  UK
    since 19th April 2015.  The third Appellant  has  never  had  leave  to
    remain in the UK.

 4. On 23rd December 2015 the Appellants applied for leave to remain in the
    UK, relying upon Article 8 of the 1950  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights (the 1950 Convention) outside the Immigration rules.  The  basis
    of the application was the medical condition of the third Appellant.

 5. The applications were refused on  3rd  June  2016  and  the  Appellants
    appealed to the FTT.

 6. The FTT dismissed the appeal which caused the Appellants to  apply  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 7. The grounds seeking permission are summarised below.

 8. The main argument in the appeal  before  the  FTT  was  that  the  best
    interests of the third Appellant, who was a child, would be  served  by
    allowing her to stay in the UK due to the multi-organisational  support
    she is currently receiving.  The third Appellant suffered brain  damage
    at birth.

 9. The FTT made reference to a medical  report  prepared  by  Dr  Johnson,
    noting that it was stated of the third Appellant "she has progressed in
    so many areas of development" and "things are in a steady state".   The
    FTT noted that a follow up appointment was made in May 2018,  and  that
    medication was available in Sri Lanka.

10. It was contended that the  FTT  was  wrong  in  its  assessment  of  Dr
    Johnson's  report,  and  that  Dr  Johnson  referred  to   the   multi-
    organisational support that the Appellant was  receiving  in  order  to
    make progress, and it was clear that the support work was not yet at an
    end.  The third Appellant has complex physical needs.  There is a  need
    for multi-organisational support.  It was submitted that  the  FTT  had
    failed to consider the reason that Dr  Johnson  was  referring  to  the
    progress that the child was making.

11. It was submitted that the FTT was wrong in finding  that  a  follow  up
    appointment was not needed until May  2018,  and  the  appointment  was
    required in May 2017.

12. It was accepted  that  medication  taken  by  the  third  Appellant  in
    relation to seizures was available in Sri Lanka, but the main point was
    that the multi-organisational support available in the UK would not  be
    available in Sri Lanka.

13. The case law referred to by the FTT related to Article 3 medical cases,
    not Article 8 cases.  The appropriate test was proportionality.  It was
    submitted that the FTT decision lacked adequate reasoning and  the  FTT
    failed to properly consider the evidence.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge G  A  Black  and  I  set  out
    below, in part, the grant of permission;

         "2.  The grounds assert that the FTJ erred in failing  to  properly
             assess where the best interests of the child lie having regard
             to expert evidence of Dr N Johnson which set out  the  medical
             and developmental progress made by the child who had  suffered
             brain   damage   at   birth   and   who   benefited   from   a
             multidisciplinary approach.

         3.   The decision and reasons makes clear that the FTJ had in  mind
             the need to  consider  section  55  Borders,  Citizenship  and
             Immigration Act 2009 [9].  However  the  FTJ's  focus  in  the
             assessment was on the medical evidence rather than  the  wider
             interests of the child.  It is argued that the appeal was  put
             on the basis that the overall development of the  child  would
             suffer if she were to be returned to Sri Lanka.  The FTJ  took
             into account the  medical  report  dated  23rd  November  2016
             however it is arguable that the FTJ  failed  to  consider  the
             wider best interests of  the  child  in  the  context  of  her
             development  following  a  multi-disciplinary  approach.   All
             grounds are arguable."

15. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary it was contended that the grounds seeking  permission
    to appeal had no merit, and amounted to a disagreement with the adverse
    outcome of the appeal.  It was submitted that the  FTT  considered  all
    the evidence and had not erred in law.

16. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FTT had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

The Oral Submissions

17. Mr Kannangara relied upon the grounds contained within the  application
    for permission to appeal.  He submitted that the best interests of  the
    child would be to remain in the UK where she currently has support from
    a number of organisations, and the same support would not be  available
    in Sri Lanka.  It was submitted that Dr Johnson was  in  fact  not  the
    only paediatrician involved in her care.

18. While it was accepted that medication taken by the third Appellant  was
    available in Sri Lanka, the main point, not appreciated by the FTT, was
    that the level of  support  in  the  UK  would  be  much  greater  than
    available in Sri Lanka.

19. On behalf of the Respondent Mrs Aboni relied upon the rule 24 response.
     She submitted that although the decision of the FTT was fairly  brief,
    the FTT engaged with the evidence, and considered the care needs of the
    third Appellant.  The FTT made findings open to it on the evidence, and
    concluded that the best interests of the third Appellant as a child, do
    not outweigh other considerations such as the public interest.

20. By way of response, Mr  Kannangara  submitted  that  the  FTT  had  not
    considered all the evidence.

21. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

22. The challenge made on behalf of the Appellants, is that the FTT did not
    adequately consider the best interests of  the  third  Appellant  as  a
    child.  It is well-established that the best interests of a child are a
    primary consideration, but not a paramount consideration  and  not  the
    only consideration.  The best interests of a child  can,  depending  on
    the circumstances, be outweighed by other considerations.

23. It was accepted by the Appellants  that  they  could  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of the Immigration rules.  That of course  does  not  mean
    that the appeal must be dismissed.  The Supreme Court in  paragraph  48
    of Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 confirmed the principle that if an  Appellant
    could not succeed by relying upon  Article  8  within  the  Immigration
    rules, but refusal would result in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences,
    such that refusal would not be  proportionate,  then  leave  should  be
    granted outside the rules on  the  basis  that  there  are  exceptional
    circumstances.

24. In this case I do not accept that the FTT  did  not  consider  all  the
    evidence.  The FTT set out in  paragraph  9  the  submissions  made  on
    behalf of the Appellants, and made reference  to  the  evidence  relied
    upon, in relation to the medical  condition  of  the  third  Appellant.
    There is specific  reference  to  the  submission  that  a  multiagency
    approach is important and would be absent in Sri Lanka.   The  FTT  set
    out the submission that the issue "is not just availability of  medical
    treatment per se but the overall development prospects  of  this  child
    that is in issue.  It is in that  context  that  the  section  55  duty
    should be evaluated."

25. The FTT referred to Dr Johnson's report as being  dated  28th  February
    2017 which in my view is a mistake, as it  is  clear  that  the  report
    referred to is in fact the report typed on 16th December 2016.  The FTT
    was therefore wrong to refer to a follow up appointment being  arranged
    in May 2018.  As the report was typed on 16th December 2016, the follow
    up appointment was to be in May 2017.  That however is not  a  material
    error of law.

26. The FTT was aware of the multi-agency approach,  and  did  not  err  in
    considering Dr Johnson's report.  The FTT recognised  that  Dr  Johnson
    recorded that the third Appellant had progressed in so  many  areas  of
    development, and was aware that there were other medical  professionals
    involved.

27. The FTT did not err in finding at paragraph 13 that "there is  evidence
    of availability of treatment in Sri  Lanka."   The  FTT  made  specific
    reference to the Respondent's refusal  decision  dated  3rd  June  2016
    which set out the availability of medical treatment, and  was  entitled
    to find that the Appellants had not submitted  evidence  to  show  that
    treatment would not be available.

28. The FTT found that the best interests of the third Appellant  would  be
    to remain with her parents, and my reading of the decision is that  the
    FTT took the view that although medical treatment would be of a  higher
    standard in the UK, it would not  be  disproportionate  for  the  third
    Appellant to return to Sri Lanka where  treatment  was  available,  and
    therefore applied the correct test, which is  considering  whether  the
    Respondent's decision was proportionate.

29. The FTT did not specifically refer to section 117B of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  which  contains  considerations  that
    must be taken into  account  when  considering  Article  8,  but  I  am
    satisfied that  the  FTT  had  in  mind  the  considerations  contained
    therein.  There is specific reference at paragraph 13 to the  "economic
    wellbeing of the country".  The first and second Appellants have had no
    leave to remain in the UK since April 2015.  The public interest has to
    be considered, the  third  Appellant  has  had  considerable  treatment
    provided by the NHS, funded by the British tax payer.

30. I therefore conclude that the FTT applied the correct  principles,  and
    did not find that removal of the Appellants to Sri Lanka,  the  country
    of which  they  are  citizens,  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences, given the availability of medical treatment for the third
    Appellant.  Therefore the FTT found that the Respondent's decision  was
    proportionate and I find no material error of law within  the  decision
    of the FTT.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FTT did  not  involve  the  making  of  an
error of law such that the decision must be set aside.  I do not  set  aside
the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

I make an anonymity direction because this appeal involved  considering  the
best interests of a child.  Unless and until a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise, the  Appellants  are  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them.  Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is made pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed                              Date 16th April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 16th April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

