
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/15998/2019

                                                           HU/16004/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 May 2021                     |On 3 June 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                             MOHAMMAD ALI IZADI

                             ROBAB SEIF KASHANI

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr S Hingora of Counsel, instructed by R  Spio  &  Co
                    Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


 1. The appellants, who are Iranian nationals with dates of birth given  as
    21.3.37 and 5.7.48 respectively, have appealed with permission  to  the
    Upper  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    promulgated 2.12.20  (Judge  Wood),  dismissing  their  linked  appeals
    against the decisions of the Secretary  of  State,  dated  27.8.19,  to
    refuse their applications made on 17.5.19 for entry clearance to the UK
    as adult dependent relatives to join their son present and  settled  in
    the UK, pursuant to ECDR 2.4 and 2.5 of Appendix FM of the  Immigration
    Rules.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Resident First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Zucker on 20.1.21, considering it "arguable that the judge erred in law
    in going behind a concession. The Upper Tribunal  may  be  assisted  by
    consideration of the guidance in NR (Jamaica) [2009] EWCA Civ 856."

 3. The Upper Tribunal has received the respondent's Rule  24  rely,  dated
    29.1.21.

 4. Also received is the appellant's application to admit further  evidence
    under Rule 15(2A) together with a letter  to  the  Home  Office,  dated
    19.4.21. However, as I explained to Mr Hingora, at this stage I am only
    concerned with the materials before the First-tier Tribunal when making
    the impugned decision.

 5. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 6. Mr Hingora relied on the grounds  as  drafted  in  his  document  dated
    29.12.20 and made extensive further submissions, referring  me  to  the
    evidence in the appellant's two bundles, the second of  which  was  not
    with the Tribunal's file and was emailed to me at  the  outset  of  the
    hearing.

 7. Mr Hingora's primary submission is  that  the  judge  went  behind  the
    respondent's concession set out in the refusal decision that the  first
    appellant met the requirements of E-ECDR 2.4, in that he requires "long
    term personal care to perform everyday tasks." However, the  respondent
    considered that such care was readily available in Iran stating, "There
    is nothing in your application to suggest that with the  practical  and
    financial help of the sponsor you are unable to  access  the  level  of
    care that you require in Iran."

 8. Mr Hingora argued that despite the judge specifically stating  at  [44]
    that  he  did  not  go  behind  the  concession,  which  is  referenced
    repeatedly in the decision, including at [3], [24] and [27], by stating
    at [43], "However, it was my opinion that this did not bring an end  to
    this issue," the judge did go behind  the  concession,  as  Mr  Hingora
    maintained  was  demonstrated  in  the  succeeding  paragraphs  of  the
    decision.

 9. Although I repeatedly indicated to Mr  Hingora  that  I  accepted  that
    there had been a concession regarding E-ECDR 2.4 and that if the  judge
    had gone behind the concession that would amount to an error of law, he
    spent a good part of his submissions in labouring the point that such a
    concession was made by the respondent. I have no doubt and  accept  the
    point being made that the judge should not  have  gone  behind  such  a
    concession without affording the parties the opportunity to address it,
    which point was not at all challenged by Mr McVeety.

10. However, I am satisfied that, as the Rule 24 reply suggest, this  first
    and primary ground is based on a misunderstanding of the decision.  The
    judge did not go  behind  the  concession  made.  The  judge  was  also
    accurate to state that the concession was not the end of the matter. E-
    ECDR 2.5 requires the applicant to also demonstrate  that  he  must  be
    unable, even with the practical and financial help of the  sponsor,  to
    obtain the required level of care in the country where they are living,
    because (a) it is not available and there is no other  person  in  that
    country who can reasonably provide it; or (b) it  is  not  affordable."
    The Rule 24  response  states,  as  Mr  McVeety  also  submitted,  "The
    question the judge was considering was the exact nature of  the  health
    issues  faced  by  the  first  appellant  and  this  was  required  for
    consideration of Para E-ECDR 2.5, specifically what help the  appellant
    needed and it's availability."

11. I am satisfied that it would have been  impossible  for  the  judge  to
    assess whether the required level of care could be met in Iran  without
    first  knowing  what  level  of  care  was  in  fact  required,   which
    necessitated consideration of the available evidence on that  issue.  I
    reject as nonsensical Mr Hingora's submission which was to  the  effect
    that once the 2.4 concession was made, the judge  was  prohibited  from
    further considering the need for care. To put it another way, the  fact
    that personal care to perform everyday tasks  was  needed  was  not  in
    dispute. What was in issue was whether the  care  the  first  appellant
    needs could be provided in Iran.  It was in  relation  to  this  second
    issue that the judge found the evidence woefully  inadequate,  for  the
    reasons explained in the decision, and which necessitated  the  judge's
    own enquiries of the sponsor, as set out at [46]  of  the  decision.  I
    reject as clearly ill-founded the submission that  in  considering  the
    evidence the judge in any way went behind the concession.

12. I listened with care to Mr Hingora's  further  submissions  as  to  the
    medical evidence, in particular the so-called independent evidence,  to
    which he referred me as set out in the appellant's  bundles.  I  accept
    that  in  general  terms  there  are  difficulties  and  challenges  in
    providing certain types of  care  in  Iran,  including  home  care.  He
    complained that this had not be referenced either adequately or at  all
    in the First-tier Tribunal decision. As the judge noted at [44], he was
    "given no further medical  evidence  as  to  the  likely  care  needs."
    However, it is clear from the  decision  that  the  judge  found  that,
    despite the difficulties, the first appellant's needs  did  not  extend
    beyond personal care at home, which the judge concluded his  wife,  the
    second appellant, could continue to provide. It follows  that  evidence
    about the quality of care in care homes or hospitals was  not  directly
    relevant.

13. In summary, the judge found,  with  justification,  that  the  evidence
    failed to elevate the first appellant's care needs beyond  those  which
    could be provided at home by his wife. It follows that I find no  merit
    in the second and  third  grounds  that  the  judge  failed  to  record
    critical  matters  and/or  gave  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    independent evidence as to residential care in Iran.  The  evidence  Mr
    Hingora took me to related to the provision of specialist medical care.
    That evidence was no longer relevant once the judge concluded that  the
    first appellant did not need specialist care and that care needs  could
    be met at home without such specialist care provision. I  am  satisfied
    that such a conclusion was open to the judge on the evidence.

14. In the alternative, for the reasons set out at [50]  of  the  decision,
    the judge found that  home  care  by  the  second  appellant  could  be
    supplemented by assistance  from  external  carers.  In  reaching  that
    conclusion, at [51] the judge rejected the claim that a carer could not
    be found, finding the sponsor "not candid" in evidence on  this  point.
    It was noted that one way or another care was being provided  and  that
    at some time in the past the  appellants  had  had  private  care.  The
    suggestion in the documentary evidence that the appellants  had  had  a
    "bad experience" with private care is not determinative of that  issue.
    It is an obvious point that a prior 'bad experience' with private  care
    does not preclude all and any future private  care  provision.  I  also
    bear in mind the evidential requirements of FM-SE paragraph  35,  which
    requires the appellant to demonstrate that  the  applicant  is  unable,
    even with the practical and financial help of the sponsor in the UK  to
    obtain the required level of care in Iran and that evidence has to come
    from a central or local health  authority,  a  local  authority,  or  a
    doctor or other health professional. Although the professional evidence
    relied  on  outlined  difficulties  in  providing  care,  it  fails  to
    demonstrate that the appellant would be "unable" to obtain the required
    level of care with the sponsor's assistance. In the premises, I  reject
    these grounds as without merit  and  unfounded  when  the  decision  is
    properly considered as a whole.

15. The fourth ground as advanced in submissions by Mr Hingora amounts to a
    complaint that the judge relied on his own research as to  whether  the
    sponsor was prohibited in law from sending money to  Iran,  because  of
    sanctions. Complaint is also made that the judge's suggestion that  the
    sponsor could draw money from his account to send to Iran through money
    transfer services had no legal or evidential basis. However, a  reading
    of the decision between [59] to [61]  reveals  that  whilst  the  judge
    considered the sponsor to be  wrong  in  law  on  this  point,  it  was
    accepted at [60] that because of banking policy, the sponsor would  not
    be able to transfer funds directly from his bank. It  follows  that  if
    there was an error on the part of the judge by researching the  matter,
    it was not material. The suggestion at [61]  of  withdrawing  cash  and
    sending it by  money  transfer  services  was  no  more  than  that,  a
    suggestion. The important point was that the judge  concluded  at  [62]
    that one way or another, the sponsor  would  be  able  to  continue  to
    financially support his parents. I do not accept that  such  a  finding
    required positive evidence to that effect and note that  there  was  no
    adequate evidence  that  the  sponsor  was  prevented  from  doing  so,
    regardless of his alleged and somewhat speculative fears of  doing  so,
    the burden  of  demonstrating  that  being  on  the  appellants.  I  am
    satisfied that the judge was entitled to conclude as indicated  in  the
    decision and that adequate and cogent reasoning for that conclusion has
    been provided.

16. It may be that further evidence, including that contained in  the  Rule
    15(2A) application may have been sufficient to meet the requirements of
    the Rules and it may be that the appellants will  be  able  to  make  a
    further application. However, on the evidence that was before the First-
    tier Tribunal the judge was entitled to conclude that the  requirements
    of the Rules were not met. The judge went on to  assess  the  claim  on
    article 8 ECHR grounds. The grounds at [22] to [24] also challenge  the
    article 8 assessment but they are little more than a disagreement  with
    the findings and depend almost entirely on the earlier grounds relating
    to the adult dependent relative requirements.  It  follows  that  these
    ground also disclose no material error of law in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

17. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

    The appeal of each appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands so that  the  appeal  of
    each appellant remains dismissed.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       24 May 2021



