
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15343/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 January 2021                            |On 09 February 2021           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                SAAD MOHAMMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan born 29 December 1990, appeals  to
    the Upper Tribunal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which
    was promulgated on 28 November 2019.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Rothwell) dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the
    Secretary of State dated 3 September 2019  refusing  his  human  rights
    claim (private life).

 2. Mr Diwnycz, a senior Presenting Officer, appeared for the Secretary  of
    State at the initial hearing held remotely on 27  January  2021.  There
    was no appearance by the appellant or his representatives,  Expert  Law
    Solicitors.

 3. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed by  legal
    error and should be set aside. My reasons for  reaching  that  decision
    are as follows. The appellant had lost an appeal against a refusal of a
    claim for international  protection  to  an  Immigration  Judge  (Judge
    Khawar) in March 2006. Judge Rothwell relied upon the findings  of  the
    previous Tribunal as a starting point for his own  decision  under  the
    principles of Devasseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702*. At [26], Judge  Rothwell
    records that 'Judge Khawar found that [the appellant] had  submitted  a
    false birth certificate and there is nothing before me that goes behind
    this finding of fact.' At [28], he wrote, 'Therefore, my starting point
    on my consideration of the appellant's case is that he is  someone  who
    has been found not to be telling the truth and who has submitted  false
    documents.' [my emphasis]

 4. The judge was correct in seeking to  apply  Devasseelan.  However,  the
    finding of Judge Khawar concerning the birth certificate is by no means
    as clear or unequivocal as it should be or as Judge Rothwell  seems  to
    have believed it to be. At [15(ii)] of his determination, Judge  Khawar
    wrote:

         I  do  not  find  the  production  of  this  birth  certificate  as
         persuasive given the ease with which such documents  are  available
         in Pakistan. It is relatively easy to obtain  fraudulent  documents
         or documents which are fraudulent  but  authenticated  by  apparent
         bona fide stamps for a given fee. Consequently, the  appellant  has
         not produced any evidence to  rebut  the  allegation  made  by  the
         screening officer in this  case.  The  appellant  could  well  have
         simply done so by  appearing  at  court  and  giving  evidence.  In
         consequence thereof, I do not accept that the appellant  is  merely
         15 years of age.

 5. It is unhelpful when judges seek to  cast  doubt  on  evidence  without
    making unequivocal findings of fact. To suggest that  evidence  may  be
    false ('not persuasive...') and to refer in general terms to  the  ease
    with which false documents might be obtained is not same  as  making  a
    clear and unambiguous finding that a particular document is  false.  As
    for the screening officer, it seems from [15(i)]  that  he/she  'having
    regard to the appellant's physical appearance, took the view  that  the
    appellant was over 18.' The respondent in the earlier appeal  does  not
    seem to have  alleged  that  the  birth  certificate  produced  by  the
    appellant was fraudulent but only that the appellant appeared to be  an
    adult. I am aware of the danger of  entertaining  a  collateral  appeal
    against a determination promulgated more than nearly 15 years ago;  the
    outcome of that appeal and  the  findings  of  the  judge  must  stand.
    However, if a subsequent Tribunal seeks to rely on such findings,  then
    it needs to look very carefully at precisely what has been found  as  a
    fact. Judge Khawar did  not  find  in  terms  that  the  appellant  had
    produced a fraudulent birth certificate but only that  the  certificate
    was of insufficient probative value to rebut  the  screening  officer's
    opinion that the appellant was an adult as it had been  issued  in  the
    country where false documents are commonplace. For  Judge  Rothwell  to
    proceed on the basis that the appellant was a person who 'has submitted
    false documents' was, in my opinion, wrong in law.

 6. The error of law in this case has infected the entirety  of  the  fact-
    finding exercise. There will need to be fresh fact-finding and that  is
    better conducted in the First-tier Tribunal  to  which  the  appeal  is
    returned to remake the decision following a hearing de novo.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision following  a  hearing
    de novo. (Taylor House; not Judges Khawar or Rothwell;  1.5  hours;  No
    interpreter; first available date;  First-tier  Tribunal  to  determine
    whether face to face or remote hearing)


Signed                                                            Date    27
January 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane












