
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/15093/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|By Microsoft Teams                |                                  |
|On 19 May 2021                    |On 23 August 2021                 |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                            MR SENESIE ISSA KAKAY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:           Ms Revell, Counsel instructed by Sunrise
Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Ms Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone born on 12  November  1972.
      He appeals with permission against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Callow sent on 11 March 2020 dismissing  his appeal  against  a
      decision dated 20 August  2018  to  refuse  his  human  rights  claim.
      Permission to appeal to this Tribunal was granted on 22 July  2020  by
      Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson.

   2. There were some connectivity issues during the hearing. At  first  the
      appellant was not able to obtain a visual but he remedied this so that
      he and his partner could be seen when they were giving evidence. Later
      there were connectivity issues.  Ms  Cunha  complained  that  she  was
      receiving messages from her department throughout the hearing but  did
      not  ask  for  an  adjournment.   Nevertheless   with   patience   and
      determination, both witnesses were able to give their  evidence  to  a
      satisfactory standard and  both  representatives  were  able  to  make
      submissions. At the end of the hearing both parties confirmed that  it
      had been a fair hearing.

Appellant's Background

   3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 4 July 2004 illegally.  He
      claimed asylum on 20 December 2010. His claim was refused, and he  was
      excluded from the protection of the Refugee Convention on 20 May  2011
      because of his claimed involvement with the Revolutionary United Front
      ("RUF"). His appeal against this decision was  dismissed  on  18  July
      2011.  He then remained unlawfully in the UK. On  16  March  2017  the
      appellant made  a  human  rights  application  based  on  his Article
      8 ECHR family and private life in the United Kingdom as the parent of
      a British citizen child.  The application was  refused  on  22  August
      2019.

Appellant's case

   4. The appellant claims that he lied about his involvement with the  RUF.
      His family were not murdered. His mother is alive, remains  in  Sierra
      Leone and visited the UK the previous year. He had a relationship with
      a British national who became pregnant with his child. He asserts that
      he has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a  British
      child. His daughter was born in the UK on 5 June 2016 and at the  date
      of the application she was living with her mother and 3 half siblings.
      The appellant visited  his  daughter  regularly  and  shared  parental
      responsibility for her. It is not reasonable for the  child  to  leave
      the UK. He can  meet  the  requirements  of  section  117B(6)  of  the
      Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  It  would   be   a
      disproportionate breach of his family life to remove him from the UK.

The decision of the respondent.

   5. The respondent relied on the decision of the previous judge in 2011 as
      a starting point. The appellant was excluded from  the  protection  of
      the refugee convention because it was  found  that  he  had  committed
      crimes against humanity and war crimes  because  he  had  admitted  to
      being  a  member  of  the  RUF.  The  appellant  does  not  meet   the
      requirements of the immigration rules in respect of parents because he
      does not meet the suitability or relationship requirements. He is  not
      the sole carer of his child.  There are no very significant  obstacles
      to the appellant returning to Sierra Leone. There are  no  exceptional
      circumstances which would result in  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
      rules. No consideration is given to section  117B(6)  in  the  refusal
      decision.

First-tier Tribunal Decision

   6. FtT Judge Callow took into account that the appellant had a  chequered
      immigration history and had put forward various different versions  of
      events in Sierra Leone. He noted that the appellant initially  claimed
      to be a member of the RUF but did not attend his asylum appeal in 2011
      which was decided in his absence. He took into  account  that  in  his
      grounds of appeal, the appellant stated that he was forced to join the
      RUF and that his family had been murdered by rebels and  that  in  his
      amended grounds of appeal, he asserted that  he  had  lied  about  his
      claim and that his mother was in fact alive in Sierra Leone.

   7. The appellant, his ex -partner and his sister gave oral evidence. Both
      representatives made submissions on section 117B(6).

   8. The judge found that  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship  with  his  daughter  who  lived  with  her  mother   and
      stepfather. The judge took into  account  the  appellant's  precarious
      immigration  status.  The  judge  then  turned  to  the  authority  of
      KO(Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 and quoted various passages.

   9. The judge concluded that the appellant has no right to be in  the  UK.
      He has never had lawful  leave.  His  family  and  private  life  were
      established in precarious circumstances. The  best  interests  of  the
      child would be for the child to remain with her mother in the UK.  The
      judge concluded that it is reasonable for the appellant to  leave  the
      UK and apply for leave  to  enter  under  the  immigration  rules.  He
      concluded that it would not be a disproportionate breach of Article  8
      ECHR for the appellant leave the United Kingdom.

Grounds of Appeal

  10. It is  asserted  that  the judge misdirected  herself  in law  when
      considering section 117B(6). The judge did not consider whether it was
      reasonable for the British child to leave the United  Kingdom  in  the
      real-world scenario where the child lived with her mother who was  her
      primary carer who would not permit her to leave the UK and relocate to
      Sierra Leone with her father.

  11. The judge wrongly relied on the reasoning in KO because the  situation
      of the appellants in KO  was  materially  different  to  that  of  the
      appellant, in that in KO all members of the family would be  returning
      together as a family unit.

  12. A third ground of appeal was that the judge had  wrongly  applied  the
      suitability criteria applied  to  the  appellant  given  that  he  had
      produced evidence that he was not in fact involved with  the  RUF  and
      had not committed war crimes.



Concession

  13. At the outset of the  appeal, after  a  short  discussion, Ms  Cunha
      accepted that the judge had misapplied the law in that the  judge  had
      not made a best interests assessment in respect of the child and  also
      had failed to make  a  finding  on  whether  section  117B(6)  applied
      because the judge failed to consider whether it was reasonable for the
      child to leave the UK.  She conceded that ground 1 was made out.

Decision on error of law

  14. I am in agreement the judge manifestly misapplied the law  by  failing
      to make a finding on whether section  117B(6)  applied.  Having  found
      that the appellant was not subject to deportation proceedings and that
      he had a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  child,  it  was
      incumbent on the judge to decide whether it  was  reasonable  for  the
      child to leave the UK against the real-world situation  in  which  the
      child found herself which is fact sensitive. The judge did not address
      this issue. The judge simply stated that the child could remain in the
      UK with her mother and stepfather and then went onto consider  whether
      it was reasonable for the appellant to leave the UK  focusing  on  the
      appellant's negative immigration history. This is manifestly  not  the
      correct test in line with the guidance in SSHD v AB  (Jamaica)  [2019]
      EWCA Civ 661 and Runa v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 514. I refer to  [36]  of
      Runa where it is said by Lord Justice Singh;

           "I would  emphasis  again,  as  the  Supreme  Court  did  in  KO
           (Nigeria) and this Court did in MA (Pakistan) and  AB  (Jamaica)
           that once all the  relevant  facts  have  been  found  the  only
           question which arises under section 117(6)(b) is whether or  not
           it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  The
           focus has to be on the child".

  15. In these circumstances there was  no  need  for  me  to  consider  the
      remaining grounds. I indicated that I would set aside the decision  of
      the judge and re-make the decision. I  indicated  that  the  following
      findings were preserved.

Preserved Findings

        i. The appellant is the biological father of M.

       ii. M is a British citizen and a "qualifying child".

      iii. The appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with his
           daughter.

       iv. At the date of the previous hearing the appellant did  not  live
           with his daughter but had regular contact with her

        v.  The  appellant  cannot  satisfy  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of  the
           immigration rules

Re-making

  16. I indicated to the parties that I would hear further evidence in order
      to re-make the appeal. In respect of the remaking, Ms Revell indicated
      that she intended to call  the  appellant  and  his  partner  to  give
      evidence. She produced a new bundle of  evidence  with  the  requisite
      rule 15(2A) notices as well as a skeleton argument. She submitted that
      the evidence post-dated the hearing and was relevant to the Article  8
      ECHR assessment.  Ms Cunha indicated that she had received the bundles
      on Monday but that she had not had  sight  of  them.  I  gave  her  30
      minutes to consider the new evidence which she accepted was sufficient
      time to read the documentation. She did  not  object  to  the  further
      evidence being adduced. I decided to admit  the  evidence  because  it
      post-dated the previous appeal  and  was  relevant  to  the  issue  of
      whether it was reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK and  any
      Article 8 ECHR assessment.

  17. The evidence before  me  comprised  of  the  new  58-page  appellant's
      bundle, the previous 115 page  appellant's  bundle,  the  rule  15(2A)
      notices and  the  new  skeleton  argument  as  well  as  the  original
      respondent's bundle.

Evidence

  18. The appellant gave his evidence by video link from  his  living  room.
      His partner who is the mother of M (who I will refer  to  as  A)  also
      gave oral evidence from the same living  room,  and  they  took  turns
      holding M. Given the medical evidence before  me  of  the  appellant's
      partner's vulnerability, I indicated that  I  would  treat  her  as  a
      vulnerable witness. I explained to her that  she  would  not  have  to
      answer distressing questions and that she  could  ask  for  breaks.  I
      reminded Ms Cunha of the approach towards vulnerable witnesses and  at
      one point stopped her from asking a direct question about her  abusive
      ex-partner. The witness' oral evidence is set out  in  the  record  of
      proceedings.

  19. Both representatives made submissions. Ms Revell  submitted  that  the
      appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  his
      daughter who is a qualifying child and it is not reasonable for her to
      leave the UK. The appellant falls within section 117B(6) and  this  is
      determinative of the Article 8 ECHR appeal.

  20. Ms Cunha submitted  that  the  appellant  does  not  have  a  parental
      relationship with his child, and  that  family  life  is  not  engaged
      between the appellant  and  his  daughter.  Further  the  respondent's
      position is that it is not accepted that the appellant lives with  his
      partner nor that she has initiated divorce proceedings against her ex-
      husband. She also submitted that it is not reasonable  to  expect  the
      child to leave the UK.





Legal Framework

  21. It is not asserted that the appellant can meet any of the requirements
      of the immigration rules. He does not meet  the  partner  requirements
      because he is not married to his partner and has not been  co-habiting
      with her for over years. He does  not  meet  the  parent  requirements
      because he does not meet the requisite relationship requirements.

  22. The appellant did not assert that  there  would  be  very  significant
      obstacles to his  integration  to  Sierra  Leone  in  accordance  with
      paragraph 276ADE(vi). Judge Callow made findings on this  issue  which
      were not challenged by the appellant and it is settled that  paragraph
      276ADE(vi) is not met.

  23. The appeal turns on whether it would be a disproportionate  breach  of
      Article 8 ECHR to remove the appellant from the UK.

           Section 117B(6) states;

           In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the
           public interest does not require the person's removal where-

           (a) the child has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
           with a qualifying child and

           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
           UK.

           A  qualifying  child  is  one  who  is  British  or  has   lived
           continuously in the UK for seven years or more (s117D(1)).

  24. Where Article 8 ECHR is engaged and s117B(6) is satisfied,  this  will
      be determinative of the Article 8 ECHR proportionality balance in  the
      appellant's favour in accordance with R  (on  the  application  of  MA
      (Pakistan)  and  others  v  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
      Chamber) [2016] at  EWCA Civ 705 at [17] which states;

           "Subsection (6) falls into a different category again.  It  does
           not simply identify factors which bear upon the public  interest
           question. It resolves that question in the context of article  8
           applications which satisfy the conditions in paragraphs (a)  and
           (b). It does so by stipulating that once  those  conditions  are
           satisfied, the public interest will not require the  applicant's
           removal. Since the interference with the  right  to  private  or
           family life under article 8(1) can only be justified where there
           is a sufficiently strong countervailing public interest  falling
           within article 8(2), if the public  interest  does  not  require
           removal, there is no other  basis  on  which  removal  could  be
           justified. It follows, in my judgment,  that  there  can  be  no
           doubt that section 117B(6) must  be  read  as  a  self-contained
           provision in the sense that Parliament has stipulated that where
           the conditions specified in the sub-section are  satisfied,  the
           public interest will not justify removal. It is  not  legitimate
           to have regard to public interest considerations unless that  is
           permitted, either explicitly or implicitly,  by  the  subsection
           itself".

  25. In SSHD v AB(Jamaica) and AO (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 661,  Singh  LJ
      rejected the Secretary of State's  argument  that  the  reasonableness
      test plays no role where the child in question will  not  in  practice
      leave the UK. His Lordship stated at [75];

           "It is clear in my view that  the  question  which  the  statute
           requires to be addressed is a single question; is it  reasonable
           to expect the child to leave the UK? It does not consist of  two
           questions, as suggested by the Secretary of State. If the answer
           to the single question is obvious, because it is  common  ground
           that the child will not be expected to leave the UK,  that  does
           not mean that the question does not have to be asked; it  merely
           means that the answer to the question is: No".

  26. In Runa v SSHD [2020] EWCA  Civ  514  Singh  LJ  emphasised  that  the
      correct question is not whether it is  reasonable  for  the  child  to
      remain in the UK with their other parent but whether it is  reasonable
      for them to leave with the appellant. This question must  be  answered
      against the background of the relevant  facts  including  whether  the
      other parent is likely to accompany the appellant abroad.

Facts

  27. The circumstances had changed  since  the  hearing  before  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Callow. The mother of the appellant's daughter and  ex-
      partner had separated from her husband due to domestic  violence.  The
      ex partner had been evicted from the home by  the  police  and  social
      services had been involved. She has now instituted divorce proceedings
      against him.  She previously worked full time as  a  team  lead  in  a
      Dementia care home but gave up her job when her PTSD symptoms  started
      at the end of 2019.  The appellant has now moved in with her  and  his
      daughter.  The appellant's partner now has a  support  worker  and  is
      under the mental health team.

  28. At no point did Ms Cunha raise the issue of a 'new  matter'.  Further,
      in my view the essential question to be asked in this appeal  was  the
      same as in the previous appeal which is whether the  appellant  has  a
      genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his qualifying child
      and whether it is reasonable for the child to leave the UK.

  29. In this appeal the following facts are not in dispute:

     A. The appellant is the biological father of M. He has been living  in
        the UK for 17 years since 2004. He is a Sierra Leone  national  and
        until March 2020 had been living with his sister.

     B. M is a British citizen, born in the UK on 5 June 2016. At the  date
        of the appeal hearing, she was five years old.

     C. The appellant's partner  is  a  British  citizen  of  Sierra  Leone
        origin. She has three other children, H, V and M2 who are M's older
        brothers. At the date of the appeal hearing, they were aged 18,  17
        and 6. They also live in  the  family  home  with  the  appellant's
        partner and M. The two eldest have settled status and  the  younger
        boy is a British citizen. H is  currently  studying  light  vehicle
        maintenance and repair at B College and V is at BDB school.

     D. The appellant's mother continues  to  live  in  Sierra  Leone.  His
        father died some time ago. He has siblings  in  Sierra  Leone  with
        whom he is in contact.  They are in work.

     E. I have also preserved Judge Callow's finding that the appellant has
        a genuine and subsisting relationship with his daughter.

Facts in dispute

  30. Ms Cunha submitted that the evidence of A's mental health difficulties
      was not sufficient, there was no evidence that her previous partner
      was abusive and no evidence that she is divorcing her partner.  She
      disputed whether the appellant was living with his partner. She
      submitted that the relationship that the appellant has with his
      daughter is more akin to that of a childminder and is not a parental
      relationship.

  31. I had before me a witness statement from M's mother A who is now aged
      33. Her evidence is that she has post-traumatic stress disorder,
      depression and back pain. Her health has deteriorated since 2019. She
      does not feel safe to leave the house. She has difficulty sleeping and
      sleeps a lot in the daytime. She is anxious and has stopped working.
      She is struggling to look after the children. She takes medication for
      her depression and anxiety. Both of her parents are deceased and her
      sister in the UK has her own responsibilities as a mother. In her oral
      evidence she stated that she has a support worker as well as help from
      the mental health team. Her two oldest children are from the same
      father and her third child is from a different father.

  32. In her previous witness statement, she described being the victim of
      domestic violence since 2009. Her ex-husband frequently beat her and
      forced himself on her. When she was pregnant with M2 in 2013 her ex-
      husband beat her until she started bleeding and she went into a
      refugee centre for her safety. Later she reunited with her husband,
      but the abuse continued. She was frequently beaten, called names and
      left unconscious. The police were frequently called. On 29 July 2019
      he beat her so badly she was left with a fractured left eye socket.

  33. The appellant also gave evidence of his partner's poor mental health.
      His evidence is that her physical and mental health has got
      progressively worse since December 2019. A feels anxious and worried
      to leave the house and sometimes her bed. She has had to give up work
      because of this. She is heavily dependent on the appellant to assist
      with the housework and childcare particularly with the two younger
      children. The older son H also helps out. A has counselling telephone
      calls every Friday.

  34. Supporting evidence of A's poor mental health included a letter from
      her GP Dr Alliya Mohamed dated 21 March 2021. This confirms that the
      appellant has been registered with the GP since May 2018 and that she
      is under the care of the community mental health team recovery
      service. The GP confirms that A has diagnoses of post-traumatic stress
      disorder (PTSD) and moderate-severity depression with possible
      paranoid psychotic features. She is suffering from significant back
      pain and episodic shivering and coldness episodes.  The GP also
      confirms that the illnesses lead to difficulty sleeping and anxiety
      about leaving the house. This evidence is consistent with that of the
      appellant and of A herself. I place weight on the evidence of the GP
      who has known the appellant in a professional capacity for over a
      period of three years.

  35. There was a further letter before me from Dr Sidra Shaheed MRCPsych
      from Woking CMHRS. Dr Shaheed confirmed that A was first referred to
      mental health services in December 2019 and that prior to March 2021
      her mood has deteriorated. She is said to be tearful most of the time
      and is worse when she is on her own in the daytime. She cannot sleep
      at night. Her appetite is erratic, and she does not want to eat. She
      feels very low and constantly exhausted. She has poor concentration.
      She has no motivation to leave home. She does not have any social
      contacts or friends.

  36. Dr Shaheed refers to the symptoms of flashbacks, nightmares and hyper-
      vigilance improving, but her mood symptoms deteriorating. A reports
      hearing voices and seeing people around the house and hearing
      footsteps. She feels as if she is being followed and smells things. Dr
      Shaheed also refers to previous assessments and that it is well
      documented that A has experienced several trauma across her life span.
      Dr Shaheed states that she did not explore this in the current
      assessment because the traumatic events had already been documented in
      detail and it would be distressing for A to go over them again. Dr
      Shaheed confirms that A has been on medication and that she has had
      trauma based psychological input from CMHRS which she has found
      useful.

  37. A was described as being tearful during the assessment, and I also
      noted that she was tearful when giving her oral evidence which I
      limited for this reason because she became very upset.

  38. I give great weight to the evidence from Dr Shaeed because she
      examined A at her home, clearly has detailed knowledge of A's history
      and completed a mental state examination independently of these
      immigration proceedings. She manifestly has the relevant
      qualifications. I accept her opinion that A has very prominent
      features of depressive symptoms including low mood, anhedonia, limited
      energy level, biological symptoms of depression with diurnal mood,
      insomnia and psychotic symptoms and also that her symptoms of PTSD
      (nightmares, flashbacks and hypervigilance) have improved. Following
      this examination the plan was to gradually stop sertraline, cross
      taper with duloxetine and increase quetiapine as well as give A
      further tests, refer her to EIP, give her a follow up appointment and
      details of a crisis helpline.

  39. Having considered all of this evidence, I am satisfied on the balance
      of probabilities that A has significant mental health problems, is
      currently very unstable and that she is receiving a high level of
      input from mental health services. I also find that her mental health
      problems are impacting on her ability to work, to leave the house, to
      function properly and to carry out basic tasks such as shopping and
      housework and that her poor mental health restricts her ability to
      look after her children.

  40. Ms Cunah then submitted that there was no evidence that A's previous
      partner was abusive.

  41. It has consistently been A's evidence that her previous partner was
      abusive. She stated this at her last appeal indeed she provided a
      detailed witness statement in this respect. In her oral evidence she
      stated that she had previously been offered sheltered accommodation in
      a women's refuge. First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow accepted her
      evidence as credible. Dr Shaheed also refers to the previous well
      documented trauma that she has suffered. She has PTSD and low mood and
      is afraid to go out which is consistent with suffering trauma.
      Although there was a lack of evidence from, for instance, the police
      or local authority there was sufficient consistent evidence before me
      from A, the appellant and in the medical evidence to persuade me on
      the balance of probabilities that A was subject to prolonged and
      intense domestic abuse from her previous partner and that she has
      separated from him because of domestic violence.

  42. Ms Cunah also submitted that there was no evidence of a divorce. There
      was in the bundle at page 19 a receipt from Gov.uk confirming that A
      has instituted divorce proceedings against her ex-husband and this
      together with the oral evidence of the witnesses which is consistent
      with the evidence in their witness statements and my findings that A
      has suffered domestic violence is sufficient for me to find that she
      has initiated divorce proceedings.

      Article 8 ECHR

      Family life

  43. Ms Cunha attempted to argue that the appellant does not have family
      life with his daughter. I have no hesitation on the basis of the
      preserved finding that there is a genuine and subsisting relationship
      between the appellant and his five year old daughter which is on-going
      that family life exists between this father and his minor child. I
      find that Article 8 (1) is engaged.

Genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

  44. Judge Callow at [13] of his decision made the following finding  which
      has been preserved.

           "Nonetheless a consideration of all the  evidence  reveals  that
           that it has been established on a balance of probabilities  that
           he is the father of M, a  British  child,  who  lives  with  her
           mother married to Boateng Darkwah and with whom he  has  regular
           contact.  The  contact  is  such  that  he  has  a  genuine  and
           subsisting relationship with M"

  45. At the outset of the remaking, I indicated that I would preserve  this
      finding. However, Ms Cunha still  persisted  in  submitting  that  the
      relationship is not a "parental" relationship because the  appellant's
      role was more akin  to  a  'caretaker'  or  'childminder'.   She  also
      submitted that the respondent's position is that  the  appellant  does
      not have a relationship with A.

  46. Ms Revill submitted that the finding that the appellant had a  genuine
      and subsisting relationship with his child had not been cross appealed
      in a rule 24 response - indeed no response had been served and that Ms
      Cunha had made no objection when I indicated  that  I  would  preserve
      this finding. She submitted that Ms Cunha was attempting to relitigate
      this point. I was in agreement with Ms Revell that it was now not open
      to Ms Cunha in the re-making hearing to seek  to  go  behind  findings
      that had been preserved,  although  strictly  speaking  the  preserved
      finding  is  that  the  appellant  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting
      relationship with the child not a genuine  and  subsisting  "parental"
      relationship.

  47.  Dealing  firstly  with  the  appellant's  relationship  with  A.  The
      witnesses gave compelling and consistent  evidence.  They  both  claim
      that  the  appellant  moved  in  with  A  after  her   mental   health
      deteriorated and  there  is  significant  independent  evidence  of  a
      significant deterioration in her mental health.   The  witnesses  both
      gave their evidence from a  domestic  setting  where  they  were  both
      taking turns to look after their child. The school  records  that  the
      appellant is regularly taking his child to school from which  I  infer
      that he is taking the child from her home which is in Woking.  I  note
      that the report from Dr Shaheed does not  mention  the  appellant  and
      that this is a slightly strange omission for which the  appellant  had
      no explanation. However, the evidence before me is that the  appellant
      and A have a biological child together and are living together to  try
      and work things out and have resumed their relationship. In any  event
      the material issue is not whether the appellant is in  a  relationship
      with  A  but  whether  he  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
      relationship with his daughter.

  48. Turning to the relationship between the appellant and his daughter, it
      was not very clear how it could be rationally argued that this is  not
      a  parental  relationship  when  the  previous  judge  made  preserved
      findings that the appellant had regular and  meaningful  contact  with
      his daughter describing the relationships as  genuine  and  subsisting
      and the child is the appellant's biological  daughter.   I  also  note
      that this issue was not raised in any response by the respondent.

  49. Nevertheless, to  dispel  any  doubt,  I  have  had  regard  to  those
      authorities that deal with the issue of what constitutes a  "parental"
      relationship.

  50. The authority of R (on the application of  RK)  (s.117B(6);  "parental
      relationship" (IJR) [2016] UKUT 00031, was approved by  the  Court  of
      Appeal in AB (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 661 in which it was said;

         "89.     Like UTJ Plimmer I also have found helpful the judgment of
             UTJ Grubb in  R  (RK)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2016] UKUT 00031 (IAC).   Although  the  facts  of
             that case were quite different as they concerned a grandmother
             and whether she needed to have parental responsibility  for  a
             child, what UTJ Grubb said at paras.  42  to  43  contains  an
             analysis of the concept of parental relationship with which  I
             would respectfully agree:

                  '42. Whether a person is in a parental relationship with a
                      child must, necessarily,  depend  on  the  individual
                      circumstances.  Those circumstances will include what
                      role they actually play  in  caring  for  and  making
                      decisions in relation to the child.  That  is  likely
                      to be a most significant factor.   However,  it  will
                      also include whether that relationship arises because
                      of their legal obligations as a parent or in lieu  of
                      a  parent  under  a  court  order  or   other   legal
                      obligation.  I accept that it is not necessary for an
                      individual to have parental responsibility in law for
                      there to be a relevant factor.  What is important  is
                      that the individual  can  establish  that  they  have
                      taken on the role that a 'parent'  usually  plays  in
                      the life of their child.

                  43.  I agree  with  Mr  Mandalia's  formulation  that,  in
                      effect, an individual must 'step into the shoes of  a
                      parent'   in   order   to   establish   a   'parental
                      relationship'.  If the role they play, whether  as  a
                      relative or friend of the  family,  is  as  a  caring
                      relative or friend but not so as to take on the  role
                      of a parent then it cannot be said that they  have  a
                      'parental  relationship'  with  the  child.   It   is
                      perhaps obvious to state that 'carers' are not per se
                      parents.  A child may have carers  who  do  not  step
                      into the shoes of their parents but  look  after  the
                      child for specific periods of time (for example where
                      the parents are travelling abroad for  a  holiday  or
                      family visit).  Those carers  may  be  professionally
                      employed; they may  be  relatives;  or  they  may  be
                      friends.  In all those cases, it may properly be said
                      that there is an element of  dependency  between  the
                      child and his or her  carers.   However,  that  alone
                      would not, in my judgment, give rise to  a  'parental
                      relationship.'

         90.      Returning to the  case  of  SR  (Pakistan)  I  would  also
             respectfully agree with  what  was  said  by  UTJ  Plimmer  at
             paragraph 39:

                  'There are likely to be many cases in which  both  parents
                  play an important role in their child's life and therefore
                  both  have  subsisting  parental  relationships  with  the
                  child, even though the child resides with one  parent  and
                  not the other.  There are also cases where the nature  and
                  extent of contact and any break in contact  is  such  that
                  although  there  is   contact,   a   subsisting   parental
                  relationship cannot be said to  have  been  formed.   Each
                  case turns on its own facts.'

         91.      On the facts  of  SR  (Pakistan),  at  paragraph  40,  UTJ
             Plimmer concluded that SR did  have  a  parental  relationship
             with the child  in  question  and  that  it  was  genuine  and
             subsisting for the purposes of  Section  117B(6)(a).   It  may
             have been a limited parental relationship  but  that  did  not
             mean that it was not genuine or subsisting."

  51. I take from the authorities of AB(Jamaica)  and  from  SR  (subsisting
      parental relationship, Pakistan s117B(6))  [2018]  UKUT  00334  (IAC),
      much of  which  was  approved  in  AB,  that  whether  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship exists between a parent and child is intensely
      fact-sensitive and will depend on the relationship between parent  and
      child. The words 'genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship,  are
      ordinary English words which should be given their plain  meaning  and
      there should be no future gloss on them. I must look  at  the  quality
      and the nature of the relationship.

  52. The evidence at the previous hearing was that the  child  always  knew
      that the appellant was her father and her step-father did not take  on
      that role. There was evidence before Judge Callow that  the  appellant
      visited his daughter on a very regular basis travelling from London to
      Woking to see her including the witness  statements,  photographs  and
      tickets. The judge was satisfied that the child  had  regular  contact
      with her father.

  53. There was also a brief letter before me from B  Primary  school  which
      confirms that the appellant  regularly  drops  off  and  collects  his
      daughter from school. The letter was written by  the  headteacher  and
      was dated 23 February 2021. I give weight to this letter.  There  were
      also numerous photographs of the appellant not only with his  daughter
      M but with her brother M2 as well.

  54. The evidence before me was consistent in that both the  appellant  and
      his partner live with the child and that because  of  A's  significant
      health problems, he is heavily involved  with  both  the  two  younger
      children and is at present carrying  out  much  of  the  childcare.  A
      describes the appellant as also assisting the older children by  going
      to football with them at weekends and taking them cycling  and  taking
      their child to school. A also refers to the  very  close  relationship
      between the appellant and her daughter which is described as loving.

  55. It is difficult to see how a biological  father  who  lives  with  his
      child  on  a  full-time  basis  because  of   his   partner's   health
      difficulties and assists to bring her up  by  looking  after  her  and
      taking her to school regularly could be said to be a "childminder"  as
      opposed  to  a  father  with  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
      relationship with his own child.

  56. Having considered the facts of this appeal and having  regard  to  the
      authorities above I find that the appellant has an important  role  in
      his daughter's life, he takes her to school, looks after  her,  spends
      time with her  and has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
      with her.

   Is it reasonable for M to leave the UK?

  57. Ms Cunha then submitted that it is not reasonable for the child to
      leave the UK which was somewhat confusing as it appears that this is
      the issue on which the re-making exercise turned in the first place.
      This appeared to be a concession in favour of the appellant. Ms Cunha
      did not make any detailed submissions why it would be reasonable to
      expect the child to go to Sierra Leone, she focused on the issue of
      whether the appellant has a genuine parental relationship with his
      child.

  58. Nevertheless, for the avoidance of doubt and since First-tier Judge
      Callow did not make findings on this issue, I will give it full
      consideration.

  59. I note in this respect that the respondent in making the decision in
      respect of the appellant has not made any detailed assessment in
      respect of the best interests of M. There is no s55 consideration.

  60. Ms Cunha's submission was that it is in the best interests of the
      child to remain in the UK with her mother who has always been her
      primary carer. She submitted that if the appellant is not there the
      local authority has the power to intervene if the child is not stable
      and can take over the primary responsibility. I do not understand this
      submission. She referred to the best interests assessment being
      carried out in the immigration context rather than the family court
      context and spoke of a "three way" relationship.

  61. When making this assessment, I must firstly take into consideration
      the welfare of any child affected by the decision under appeal in
      accordance with ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [2011] UKSC 4, which is a primary but not determinative
      consideration.  I consider the authorities and guidance on the welfare
      and wellbeing of the child in accordance with Section 55 of the
      Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the numerous
      relevant factors set out in the various authorities.  I also take into
      account the guidance in KO (Nigeria) & Ors v Secretary of State for
      the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 in which it is clarified that the
      assessment of the child's best interests is to be made without
      reference to the parent's immigration status but that in general the
      best interests of a child is that they remain with their parents
      wherever their parents are expected to be.

  62. In general, it is settled law that it is in the best interests of all
      children to grow up and have a meaningful relationship with both
      parents and in normal circumstances the best interests of a child will
      lie in remaining with their parents and going to where they are going.



  63. In the case of M, she has always lived with her mother who is her
      primary carer and who is a British citizen. She has also lived with
      her older three step-brothers aged 19,17 and 7 respectively. Like her
      7-year-old brother M2, she is a British citizen. She previously lived
      with her stepfather until 2019 but he left after a history of domestic
      violence. It is only since March 2020 that she has been living in a
      family unit with both her mother, father and her half siblings. She
      has experienced domestic violence in the household and also her
      mother's physical and mental health problems.  I find that it is not
      in M's best interests to be separated from her mother and half-
      siblings with whom she has a close relationship and with whom she has
      resided all of her life. Indeed, Ms Cunha's submission was that it was
      in her best interests to remain with her mother.  Nor do I find that
      it is in her best interests to be separated from her father with whom
      she also has a very close bond and who is providing the family unit
      with support and security. I find that, in common with most children,
      it is in her best interests to grow up having a meaningful and good
      quality relationship with both of her parents.

  64. I also find that it is in her best interests to remain in the United
      Kingdom. She has always resided in the UK as have her older brothers.
      She is in the UK education system attending primary school. I
      recognised that at the age of 5, she will not have many ties outside
      of her immediate family and that she is not in a crucial stage of her
      education. Nevertheless, there has already been considerable
      instability in her family with prolonged domestic violence, her
      stepfather moving out, her mother giving up work and becoming very ill
      and her father moving in and I find that a move to Sierra Leone would
      be another significant change.  In the UK, she has entitlement to free
      education and health care. She has a secure home and income and some
      extended family in that her maternal aunt and her paternal aunt both
      life in the UK. Her mother is adamant that she would not return to
      Sierra Leone. Her mother is receiving support from the NHS, is under
      the care of the community mental health recovery service and is
      receiving treatment and support. I have no hesitation in finding that
      it is in her best interests to remain in the UK with both of her
      parents and her half-siblings.

  65. I also find that it is in the best interests of M's two older brothers
      that they continue to live in the UK where they have settled status
      and are at crucial stages in their education and that it is in their
      best interests to remain with their mother. Neither live independently
      and they are both in full time education. I also find that it is in
      M2's best interests to remain living with his mother in the UK. He is
      British. He was born in the UK and has lived in the UK for 7 years. He
      is said to have special needs although there was limited evidence of
      the extent of his needs. I accept that he is subject to an Education,
      Health and Care plan on the basis of a letter before me from Surrey
      County Council dated 22 April 2021 which is at least indicative that
      he requires additional support.

  66. It is in the best interests of all four children that their mother
      continues to receive treatment and support for her mental and physical
      health difficulties and that her health improves so that she is able
      to function better.

  67. Ms Cunha sought to bring up the Exclusion issue. She claimed that the
      appellant previously admitted to raping and murdering women and was
      found to be excluded from the refugee convention. She submitted that
      we do not know if social services are aware of this. It is impossible
      to assess whether the appellant should be having contact with his
      child.

  68. Ms Revill pointed to the fact that the appellant had admitted lying in
      his original asylum claim at his last appeal and Judge Callow had
      accepted this and relied on the appellant's lies as a reason for why
      it would not be disproportionate for the appellant to leave the UK. I
      take into account that Judge Callow had before him statements and
      affadavits from the appellant's sister, mother and various persons of
      standing in the community all of whom set out the appellant's early
      life and the circumstances in which he grew up as well as confirmation
      from the Sierra Leone authorities that he is not on the list of wanted
      individuals.  I am satisfied that Judge Callow accepted at [13] that
      the appellant had lied in his asylum claim and that the respondent had
      not cross-appealed by asserting that this finding was unlawful. There
      was no evidence before me that any professionals have any concerns
      about the appellant's involvement with his daughter.

  69. What is in M's best interests is important but not determinative of
      the issue of whether it is reasonable for M to leave the UK. When
      carrying out this exercise, I need to ask the statutory question
      against the facts as I have found them above.

  70. M was born in the UK and attends B primary school. She has always
      lived with her mother and three older brothers and until 2019 lived
      with her stepfather who I accept was violent. She is now aged 5. She
      does not speak the local language in Sierra Leone.  Her next brother
      is two years older than her. He is 7.

  71. It is her mother's evidence that she will not relocate to Sierra Leone
      because she has been living in the UK for 13 years and is a British
      citizen. She no longer has close ties to Sierra Leone.  She does not
      consider that it is in the best interests of her three older children
      nor indeed M to relocate to Sierra Leone. Her two oldest children are
      in full time education at crucial stages. Neither have any contact
      with their own fathers. Her second son is undertaking a college course
      and her 7-year-old British child has an Education Health and Care
      Plan. Additionally, her mental health is very poor. She has PTSD, very
      low mood and episodes of psychosis. She is suffering from depression
      and also has physical health problems including significant back pain
      for which she has been referred to a specialist. She is under the care
      of a specialist psychologist, and she would not be able to replicate
      this treatment and support in Sierra Leone. She has been a long-
      standing victim of domestic abuse. She does not wish to be separated
      from her daughter or her children to be separated from each other.

  72. Against this background it is not reasonable to expect M to leave the
      UK because she would be separated from her mother and half-siblings
      with whom she has lived all of her life and who cannot be expected to
      abandon their life in the UK to travel to Sierra Leone with an
      individual who is not their father.

  73. I consider the scenario in which A does go to Sierra Leone with her
      mother and father. As a matter of common sense, given that A cannot
      cope in the UK and is not functioning well on a basic level, her
      health is unlikely to improve in a country that she has little recent
      connection with and does not wish to return to and when she is
      separated from her older children. She has complex health problems and
      requires specialist treatment. Given her poor health, I find that she
      would not be able to work in Sierra Leone. I find on the evidence
      before me that were M to go to Sierra Leone with her two parents and
      potentially her youngest brother her mother's health would deteriorate
      further which would have a negative impact on her. I have also found
      that it would not be in the best interests of M to have further change
      after so much instability in her young life.  I also find that she
      would be separated from her two eldest brothers who would not
      relocate. There was little evidence about how the family would be
      living in Sierra Leone but given that the appellant was formerly a
      diamond trader and has half siblings in Sierra Leone, although he has
      been absent from the country for 17 years, I find that he would
      eventually be able to find some kind of employment and accommodation
      for the family.

  74. However this is not a situation where the family is a self-contained
      unit, none of whom have citizenship or status in the UK, a move to
      Sierra Leone would involve separating members of the family either in
      terms of A being separated from her elder sons, or M being separated
      from either her mother or father or her siblings and would involve the
      break-up of the family where although there has been a poor
      immigration history there has been no criminality.

  75. Having considered all the factors in the round, giving weight to the
      best interests of the child as a primary but not determinative
      consideration and having given particular weight to M's mother's
      mental  and physical health, her history of domestic violence and the
      fact that her three half-brothers have grown up in the UK, the current
      intensive support her mother is receiving from the mental health team
      and the likely instability of her future life in Sierra Leone, I find
      that it is not reasonable for M to leave the UK.

  76. In accordance with AB and Runa since I have found that section 117B(6)
      applies, I find that this is dispositive of the appeal. I am satisfied
      that it would be a disproportionate breach of Article 8 ECHR to remove
      the appellant from the UK.



Notice of Decision

  77. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

  78. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside with the findings
      at [11] preserved.

  79. The appeal is re-made.

  80. The appeal is allowed on Article 8 ECHR human rights grounds.






Signed      R J Owens

Upper Tribunal Judge Owens   Date 4 August 2021

