
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15445/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated:      |
|by Skype for Business                |On 04 March 2021                     |
|On 24 February 2021                  |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                             Syed Alauddin Ripon
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Taj Uddin Shah, solicitor with Taj Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on 3 September 2019 to refuse him leave to remain on private and family
    life grounds pursuant to Article 8 ECHR and  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended). The appellant is  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh.

Background

 2. The appellant was born in Bangladesh on 16 December 1976 and is now  44
    years old.  He has four sisters, all living in London, but two of  them
    have been estranged from him for years.  He is close to the  other  two
    sisters and their children.  He has a brother in Dubai, and another who
    still lives in Bangladesh. The appellant has  two  ex-partners  in  the
    United Kingdom, both British citizens.

 3. In 2004, the appellant married his first wife in Bangladesh, and  on  6
    January 2006, he entered the United Kingdom with leave to remain as her
    spouse, valid from 28 September 2005 to 28  September  2007.   Allowing
    for the delay in his arrival, he was in the United Kingdom  with  valid
    leave for 21 months, ending on 28 September 2007.

 4. The first marriage failed before the expiry of that  period  of  leave,
    but the appellant did not embark for  Bangladesh,  as  he  should  have
    done.  The couple continued to  live  together,  with  the  first  wife
    performing household  duties  such  as  cooking  and  ironing  for  the
    appellant, while he continued to support her financially,  hoping  that
    it would be possible to reconcile over time.  In  2012,  the  appellant
    accepted that the marriage  had  irretrievably  broken  down,  and  the
    couple divorced.

 5. The appellant went to live with one of his  sisters,  and  visited  the
    other sister with whom he is in contact, about twice a week.  He got to
    know his nephews and nieces well and they are fond of him, as he is  of
    them.

 6. On 28 December 2014, the appellant and his second partner went  through
    an Islamic marriage in the United Kingdom.  He had no leave  to  remain
    at the time.  His second partner had children by her previous marriage,
    and her ex-husband visited their home regularly to  see  the  children.
    It was around this time that his relationship with two of  his  London-
    based  sisters  broke  down.   The  appellant's  case   is   that   his
    relationship with his mother in Bangladesh is also strained.

 7. On 6 February 2015, the appellant applied for leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of that relationship.  On 5  October  2016,
    the respondent granted him 30 months' leave to remain,  expiring  on  5
    April 2019.     On  28  March  2019,  before  his  leave  expired,  the
    appellant made an application for further leave to remain.

 8. Unfortunately, the appellant's second partner resumed her  relationship
    with her former husband and on 17 July 2019, the  marriage  broke  down
    and he was ejected from the matrimonial home, returning  to  live  with
    his sister and her family.  The  appellant's  second  partner  and  her
    children returned to live with  her  first  husband  and  there  is  no
    contact or relationship now. Again, the appellant  did  not  return  to
    Bangladesh when his second relationship failed.

 9. The appellant is supported financially in the United Kingdom by friends
    and family.  He remains close to his two sisters, and  to  his  nephews
    and nieces in both their families.

10. On 3 September 2019, the respondent refused the application  for  leave
    to remain. She had made an enquiry of the appellant about  whether  his
    second relationship subsisted.

11. The bundle of evidence for the  First-tier  Tribunal  included  letters
    from the appellant's nephews and nieces, in which they say what a  good
    uncle he is, and  how  much  they  will  miss  him  if  he  returns  to
    Bangladesh.  There are letters from his two sisters,  his  brothers-in-
    law and from friends, to similar effect.

First-tier Tribunal decision

12. The  First-tier  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal.    She  summarised  the
    appellant's circumstances  at  [3]  and  in  relation  to  the  present
    application, she said this:

         "4.  On 28 March 2019, he applied for leave to remain on the  basis
         of family life with  his  partner,  Mrs  Sayeda  Shanzida  and  her
         children.  In a letter  dated  5  August  2019,  responding  to  an
         enquiry of the respondent about the current  residence  of  one  of
         [Mrs Shanzida's] children, the appellant said his circumstances had
         changed and he now lived with his sister.  The named child lived in
         Newcastle at his University hostel."

13. In relation to private life, which is all that is now in issue in  this
    appeal, the judge said this:

         "18. The starting point in a human rights appeal is compliance with
         the  Immigration  Rules.   The  appellant   does   not   meet   the
         requirements for leave to remain on family life grounds  under  the
         Immigration Rules.  ...

         19.  As regards private life under paragraph 276ADE(1), I find that
         there    are    no    very    significant    obstacles    to    the
         appellant...returning  to  Bangladesh.   He  has  lived  there  the
         majority of his life.  He has family there.  It  is  reasonable  to
         expect that he has retained  good  knowledge  of  the  culture  and
         lifestyle.  He is familiar with the language and gave  evidence  in
         Bengali. ... I am satisfied that on the balance  of  probabilities,
         there are no obstacles to his return and the appellant  being  able
         to readjust and reintegrate in his home country. ... "

14. Those elements of the First-tier Judge's reasoning are now  undisputed,
    as  Mr  Shah  confirmed  at  today's  hearing.   It  is   the   judge's
    consideration of proportionality overall which he challenges.  At [20]-
    [22], the First-tier Judge said this:

         "20. The Article 8  submission  did  not  rely  on  any  additional
         factors.   I  have  regard  to  the  Article  8   public   interest
         considerations  set  out  in  section  117  of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) ('the 2002 Act')  that
         immigration control is in the public interest.  I accept  that  the
         appellant entered the United Kingdom lawfully, however,  his  leave
         expired 18 months later.  As his relationship [had] broken down  by
         then, he would have had an expectation that  he  could  not  remain
         permanently in the United Kingdom.  His subsequent relationship was
         formed at a time when he did not have leave,  and  his  immigration
         status was always precarious.  He has been without  leave  for  the
         majority of his time in the United Kingdom.

         21.  I do not find any compelling circumstances in the  appellant's
         case.  He has no partner  or  qualifying  children  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  The issue of the appellant's nephews and nieces has  been
         raised.  However, there is nothing in the evidence to suggest  that
         there would be any negative impact on their welfare  if  the  uncle
         returns to Bangladesh.  Their best interests are to be  with  their
         parents.  The appellant is not the primary carer.  There  would  be
         no change in their circumstances.

         22.  Much of the appellant's private life in the United Kingdom has
         been established while his status has been unlawful.   The  absence
         of [a] criminal conviction is a neutral factor.  The  appellant  is
         able  to  make  new  friendships  in  Bangladesh,  renew  old  ones
         including with his siblings, and retain  contact  with  family  and
         friends  in  the  United  Kingdom  through  the  modern  means   of
         communication and visits.  I find that  in  the  circumstances  the
         decision is proportionate and does not violate Article 8 ECHR."

15. The First-tier Judge dismissed the appeal and the appellant appealed to
    the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

16. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  on  the
    following basis:

         "1.   The  First-tier  Judge  (Judge  Bart-Stewart)  dismissed  the
         appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse his Article 8 claim
         based upon his private and family life in the United Kingdom.

         2.   It is arguable that the judge  misunderstood  the  appellant's
         immigration status between October 2016 and  April  2019  when  the
         appellant had been granted a second period of leave  as  a  spouse.
         Although the judge states this at [3], in [16]  when  reaching  her
         findings, she states contradictorily that he  did  not  have  leave
         between September 2007 (when his first spousal leave  expired)  and
         April 2019.  That  may  have  affected  the  weight  she  gave  the
         appellant's private life in the United Kingdom  as  she  states  at
         [20], he only had leave for 18 months and he has been in the United
         Kingdom without leave for the majority of his time.  She also  adds
         that much of his private life was established whilst he was in  the
         United Kingdom unlawfully ([22]).  That is  inconsistent  with  the
         facts, including as set out by the judge at [3].  It will  need  to
         be established that any error was material.

         3.   The other grounds  are  less  meritorious,  but  I  would  not
         exclude consideration of them.  For these  reasons,  permission  to
         appeal is granted on all grounds."

Rule 24 Reply

17. Ms Rhona Petterson for the respondent  filed  a  Rule  24  Reply.   She
    contended that any error as to the period the appellant  spent  in  the
    United Kingdom without leave was immaterial, as the correct period  was
    9 years which was still a substantial  period.   The  case  was  to  be
    considered at the date of hearing  and  there  was  a  three  year  gap
    between  the  appellant's  divorce  from  his  first  wife,   and   the
    application for leave to remain based  on  his  relationship  with  his
    second partner in 2015.

18. The rest of the Reply responds point by point to the grounds of appeal,
    explaining why  each  point  is  not  material  to  the  outcome.   The
    respondent submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  decision  should  be
    upheld.

Triage directions

19.  On  28  August  2020,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Norton-Taylor  made   a
    provisional order for hearing by Skype for Business and gave  a  number
    of other directions.

20. That is the basis on which this appeal comes before the Upper  Tribunal
    today.

Submissions

21. At the hearing, Mr Shah confirmed that appellant does not  now  contend
    that he can show Kugathas family life with his London-based sisters and
    their children.   His appeal succeeds, if  at  all,  on  the  basis  of
    private life in the United Kingdom.   Mr Shah also accepted that  there
    would  be  no  very  significant  obstacles  for   the   appellant   in
    reintegration in Bangladesh if he were to return there.

22. Mr Shah's oral argument focused on the weight given to the relationship
    between the appellant and his nephews and nieces.  He took  me  to  the
    letters from the children, which emphasise what a good uncle  and  good
    man the appellant is and how fond they are  of  him.    The  copies  of
    passports supplied were all expired, suggesting  that  they  would  not
    travel to Bangladesh if the appellant were removed.

23. Mr Shah said that the appellant had come to the United Kingdom lawfully
    to live with his British citizen first wife.  He had  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom after his first marriage failed, in the  hope  that  she
    would change her mind and take him back. Although he had  entered  into
    his relationship with his second partner while here unlawfully, he  had
    regularised his situation  and  it  was  unfortunate  that  the  second
    marriage had also failed.  A  man  really  could  not  be  expected  to
    continue a relationship with a woman who had resumed  her  relationship
    with her former husband while living in the matrimonial home with him.

24. Mr Shah asked me to set the decision aside and allow the appeal.

25. For the respondent, Mr Melvin said the decision should  be  maintained.
    There was nothing in the appellant's arguments  and  he  relied  on  Ms
    Petterson's written argument.  The evidence from the sisters'  children
    was not material to the outcome of the appeal.

26.  Despite  the  appellant's  matrimonial  difficulties,  the   arguments
    advanced did not come close to Article 8 outside the Rules.  There were
    no compelling or compassionate circumstances and the appeal  should  be
    dismissed.

Analysis

27. The First-tier Judge did not err in finding that the  majority  of  the
    appellant's time in the United Kingdom was when he was here unlawfully.
     He had valid leave from 6 January 2006 until 28  September  2007,  and
    then again from 6 October 2016 until 5 April 2019, a total of  4  years
    and 3 months, but by the time his appeal was heard on 12 March 2020  in
    the First-tier Tribunal, he had been here for  14  years,  of  which  9
    years and 9 months were unlawful residence.

28. The judge was required to give little weight to the private life  which
    the appellant formed during his two periods of unlawful residence:  see
    section 117B(4)(a) of the 2002 Act.   His initial  residence  until  28
    September 2007 was precarious and again, applying section 117B(5),  the
    judge was required to give that little weight.

29. The appellant's relationship with his second partner, with whom he  has
    not undergone a civil marriage ceremony, was formed at a time  when  he
    was here unlawfully applying section 117B(4)(b), it can be given little
    weight.  Alternatively, for the 30 months when the appellant had  leave
    by reason of his relationship akin to marriage with his second partner,
    he was in the United Kingdom precariously and the relationship  can  be
    given little weight by reason of section 117B(5).

30. As regards Article 8 outside the Rules, the section  55  duty  and  the
    appellant's closeness to his nephews and nieces, it is not  argued  now
    that the appellant has Kugathas family life with them.   There  are  no
    compelling compassionate or  exceptional  circumstances,  although  the
    judge  acknowledged  the  warmth   and   strength   of   these   family
    relationships.

31. As Mr Shah recognised, there was no Kugathas-level dependency,  despite
    his close relationship with his sisters and  their  children.   I  have
    considered the contents of the  letters  from  the  sisters  and  their
    children and I am satisfied that there  is  nothing  in  those  letters
    which indicates that the  children's  best  interests  do  not  lie  in
    remaining with their parents.  The First-tier Judge's assessment of the
    children's ties to the appellant was fair and was accurately set out in
    the decision.

32. I remind myself of the narrow circumstances in which it is  appropriate
    to interfere with a finding of fact by a First-tier Judge who has heard
    the parties give oral evidence: see AA (Nigeria) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1296 and R (Iran)  &  Others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at  [90]
    in the judgment of Lord Justice Brooke, with whom Lord Justice Chadwick
    and Lord Justice Maurice Kay agreed.  The First-tier  Judge's  findings
    are properly, intelligibly and adequately reasoned and the standard for
    interference is not reached.

33. I uphold the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  dismiss  the
    appeal.

DECISION


34. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     24 February
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



