
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15502/2017



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Manchester    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 16th November 2018  On 18 December 2018



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                               MR. QI YING XIE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr R O'Ryan, Counsel, instructed by Ashraf Law
For the respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of the People's Republic of China born on
      23 December 1952. He has been given permission to appeal the decision
      of First-tier Tribunal Judge Warren who, in a decision promulgated on
      4th September 2018, dismissed his appeal against the respondent's
      decision to refuse to grant him leave to remain based on long
      residence.

   2. He applied on 23 April 2017 for leave to remain. His application was
      refused on 7 November 2017.His immigration history was set out in the
      refusal. He entered the United Kingdom on 9 October 1994 and was
      granted temporary admission. He made a claim for asylum which was
      unsuccessful.

   3.  On 24 June 2010 he made a long residency application which was
      refused with no right of appeal. Then, on 23 October 2014 he applied
      for leave to remain on the basis of his family and private life which
      was refused. He then made a series of applications on the same basis
      which were refused. He was arrested on 21 January 2017 and
      subsequently made the present application.

   4. His application had been considered under paragraph 276 ADE of the
      immigration rules, with the respondent concluding he had failed to
      demonstrate 20 years continuous residence. He had presented evidence
      spanning the 20 years but had not demonstrated continuous residence
      throughout that time.

   5. The respondent did not find very significant obstacles to his
      reintegration into life in the People's Republic of China. Appendix FM
      was considered but the appellant did not have a partner or any
      dependent children. He did have an adult daughter and a granddaughter
      here. No other circumstances were found to justify the grant of leave
      outside the rules.

The First tier Tribunal

   6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Warren found the appellant's evidence to be
      inconsistent and did not him credible. He had said that his wife and
      two sons remained in China, as did his parents. He suggested his wife
      had remarried whereas his daughter said she had not been married but
      was living with her parents in China. He claimed to know little about
      his family in China. His daughter's evidence was that she was in
      regular contact with her mother and brothers. The judge did not find
      it credible with this level of contact that the appellant would know
      as little as he claimed.

   7. The judge accepted that since 2012 the appellant had been living with
      his daughter, Ms. Weimin Xie and her daughter in Manchester. His
      daughter's evidence was that the appellant had not been back to China
      because he did not have a passport, his original passport having been
      retained by the respondent.

   8. The judge heard evidence from a Mrs Wing Fou Yong who stated that the
      appellant moved into her home in 1999 where he remained until he moved
      in with his daughter in 2012. Mrs Wing Fou Yong said that she owned
      the property where the appellant and his daughter and granddaughter
      now lived. The judge did not accept her evidence about the appellant
      pre-2012.

   9. The judge then heard from a Ms Yingying Yang who said she met the
      appellant in London in 1995 and they would meet periodically between
      then and 1999. In cross-examination her evidence of contact was
      different and the judge found the evidence to be unreliable.

  10. The judge then heard from a Ms Sui Mei Wu who had lived in the United
      Kingdom 45 years. She stated that she had known the appellant since
      2009 and as far she was aware, he had been living here with his
      family. The judge said this contradicted the appellant's evidence that
      he moved in with his family in 2012 and before that had been living
      with Mrs Yong.

  11. The judge then refers to the documentary evidence provided about
      residence. The judge question how the appellant had been able to live
      from 1999 to 2018 without apparently working, paying tax or claiming
      benefits. He had accepted that between 1994 and 1999 he had been
      working illegally.

  12. The judge concluded the appellant had not demonstrated he had resided
      continuously in the United Kingdom since 1994. The judge accepted he
      had provided evidence of his presence on certain dates namely in 1994;
      2002; 2006 and from 2008 onwards. However, the judge was not satisfied
      the residence had been continuous.

The Upper Tribunal

  13. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable that the
      judge should have adjourned the hearing if there were problems with
      interpretation.

  14. The grounds contended that the judge failed to explain why the
      evidence of the appellant's daughter and granddaughter about his
      absence from China since 1994 was not accepted if the judge found them
      to be credible witnesses. At the permission little merit was seen on
      this ground because their evidence only related to his presence from
      2008.

  15. It was also contended that the judge failed to attach appropriate
      weight to the documentary evidence, including the letters of support
      provided. However the permission granted stated it amounted to little
      more than a disagreement with the judge's findings.

  16. It was also argued the judge failed to consider paragraph 322 of the
      immigration rules which is concerned with grounds on which leave to
      remain is to be refused. It includes consideration of the person's
      conduct. This was also found to lack merit on the basis it had not
      been argued at the hearing.

  17. At hearing, Mr O'Ryan pursued the argument that the judge did not
      adequately consider the documents submitted to show his presence. To
      this end he had prepared a supplementary ground, albeit he suggested
      this with covered in the grounds already pleaded.

  18.  He said the judge had accepted from the evidence the appellant was
      here in 1994, 2002, 2006, and 2008 onwards. However, the judge
      questioned the continuity, particularly in the earlier period.

  19. Mr O'Ryan referred me to a letter from the respondent dated 21 March
      2017 at B7 of the appellant's bundle confirming that the appellant's
      passport had been held at Heathrow airport since 2002. I was referred
      to other documents said to show the appellant was present in the
      United Kingdom.

  20.  There was a notice of hearing dated 27 November 1995 about the
      appellant's asylum claim. In order to appeal Mr O' Ryan submitted he
      would need to have had to been present to instruct his
      representatives. I was then referred to a letter from his solicitors
      dated 21 May 1996 advising the Home Office of his change of address.
      Following this, the Home Office wrote to the appellant granting him
      temporary admission. There was another letter from the Home Office
      dated 24 October 2016 again relating to temporary admission. He
      submitted that all of these suggested the appellant was present in
      1994 through to 1996.I was then referred to a legacy questionnaire
      dated 7 February 2008 at D8 and D9 of the appellant's bundle.

  21. I was also referred to statutory declarations from the appellant's
      friends as to his presence here. Whilst the judge commented on the
      oral evidence from friends he did not deal with this written evidence.

  22. The appellant's daughter arrived as the spouse of a British citizen in
      2012. Mr O' Ryan referred me to paragraph's 14 and 24 of the decision
      where the judge accepts their evidence that the appellant live with
      them since 2012. He refers at paragraph 24 to the credible evidence of
      his granddaughter and daughter of him residing in the United Kingdom.
      Mr O'Ryan argue that having found them credible witnesses the judge
      should also have accepted their evidence that they were unaware of the
      appellant having return to China when they lived there.

  23. Mr O 'Ryan then turned to the interpreting issue. The judge recorded
      the interpreter had expressed difficulties following the appellant.
      Cantonese was used and the interpreter expressed problems as he spoke
      in a thick accent; mumbled and spoke quickly. Mr O 'Ryan submitted the
      problem manifested itself at paragraph 8 of the decision in relation
      to the appellant's evidence about whether or not his wife had
      remarried. He submitted that the judge should have adjourned the
      proceedings of his own volition given the difficulties being
      experienced.

  24. The final point made was that someone in the appellant's situation
      would have limited documentation, particularly in their early years.
      It was contended that the judge placed too high a standard of proof
      upon the appellant in the circumstance.

  25. Mr Bates, in response, dealt with the interpretation issue firstly. He
      acknowledged that this ground went to fairness issues. However, he
      made the point that the appellant was represented by Counsel and if
      there were some major problem this should have been raised at the
      hearing. The decision refers to problems of accent, with the appellant
      mumbling and speaking quickly. There was no suggestion there were any
      dialect issues and had this been the case then Counsel who appeared
      could have prepared a statement of what occurred for use in the Upper
      Tribunal. The appellant had been asked on a number of occasions to
      slow his evidence down and Mr Bates submitted that is difficult to see
      how any other interpreter could have fared any better.

  26. Regarding the other grounds raised, Mr C Bates made the point that
      ultimately the burden of proof is upon the appellant to show 20 years
      continuous residence. It was not for the Secretary of State to
      speculate where he was, if not here. The fact the Secretary of State
      had possession of the appellant's passport would not have prevented
      him approaching the Chinese Embassy for a replacement. Furthermore,
      his claim for protection had failed and there was a suggestion
      therefore he was an economic migrant. It was within the realms of
      possibility that with the ebbs and flows of the economy he might enter
      another European country illegally for a time in search of work. He
      referred to the porous Borders and suggested, for instance, the
      appellant might have travelled to France or caught a ferry to Northern
      Ireland and then crossed the unmanned land frontier with the Republic.

  27. I was referred to the evidence of Ms Wing Fou Young, as recorded at
      paragraph 18 of the decision. She said the appellant lived with her
      since 1999 until he moved out to live with his daughter in 2012.
      However, the judge noted she was unable to explain where the gas bill
      was in the name of Mrs Xie alone at one stage and confirmed he did not
      pay rent. She could not explain how he maintained himself. The judge
      did not find her account to be credible. Mr Bates referred to the
      significant unaccounted for periods.

  28. He acknowledged that in recent times it has been more and more
      difficult for someone here illegally to obtain documentation but this
      was not the case when the appellant 1st arrived. He had been able to
      produce, for instance, documentation from the NHS. Like the
      respondent, the judge does not need to speculate where else the
      appellant may have been. Rather, the issue for the judge is whether
      the appellant has demonstrated continuous presence here for 20 years.

  29. I was referred to paragraph 17 where the judge referred to the non-
      family witnesses who gave evidence in support. The judge did not
      distinguish between those it gave oral evidence and those whose
      evidence was in the form of statutory declarations. He questioned why
      the judge would have afforded greater weight to the untested
      documentary evidence in the statements compared with that of the
      witnesses who attended.

  30. Regarding the evidence of his daughter that he had not returned to
      China since 1994, Mr Bates pointed out the size of China and the
      possibility she may not have known where he was. He submitted the
      height of her evidence was that he was saying he had never visited her
      in China. In any event he submitted if the appellant left China for
      economic betterment it was improbable he would return there but might
      see what his fortune would bring elsewhere in Europe.

  31. He also made the point that the fact the respondent or the tribunal
      wrote to the appellant did not establish that he was actually in the
      country.

  32. No argument had been advanced that the judge should have looked at
      matters beyond the immigration rules. There was no argument for
      instance that he was dependent upon his daughter and it was pointed
      out they had been apart for many years. There was passing reference at
      paragraph 26 and 27 to this. Section 117 B was not raised but in any
      event the factors there would have been of no assisted the appellant.
      The private life he had established he was whilst he had a precarious
      immigration situation. There was no evidence a wider integration or of
      command of the English language or economic independence.

Consideration

  33. I start by considering the interpretation issue which has been raised.
      The 1st observation I would make is that the appellant gave evidence
      in Cantonese and the decision records that the interpreter was also a
      Cantonese speaker. Consequently, it was not the case that interpreter
      was using a 2nd language. There was nothing to suggest that the
      interpreter engaged was not able or skilled for the task in hand. The
      issue appears to be more that the appellant had a strong accident,
      spoke quickly and also mumbled. There is nothing to suggest there were
      any linguistic issues.

  34. There clearly was some difficulty as the interpreter had indicated it
      was hard for her to interpret what he was saying. The decision records
      he was told repeatedly to slow down. It has to be remembered that the
      appellant already had a pre-prepared statement which sets out his
      evidence.

  35. At paragraph 8 the judge referred to serious inconsistencies in the
      evidence. The appellant's evidence was that his wife had run away with
      another man and had remarried. It was later suggested that the
      interpreter had misinterpreted this and he meant to say `maybe'.
      However, this appears a relatively minor point. There were
      inconsistencies arising in cross-examination over a girlfriend. The
      appellant then sought to explain this again by issues of
      interpretation. It has to be borne in mind that a person whose
      evidence is contradictory in cross-examination may unjustifiably seek
      to explain this by linguistic issues.

  36. Paragraph 8 of the decision indicates it was possible to obtain a
      substantial amount of evidence from the appellant at the hearing.
      Cross-examination was carried out and the appellant was able to give
      evidence about his parents and children in China and gave an account
      of an absence of contact. This contrasted with the evidence of his
      daughter whose evidence was that she was in regular contact with her
      mother and brothers. The judge did not accept his account of having no
      information about his family in China given his daughter's evidence.
      Although the decision does not record the fact the normal practice
      would be for his daughter to have remained outside whilst he gave
      evidence.

  37. I do not find any evidence of unfairness occurring because of
      linguistic issues which would justify setting aside the decision.

  38. I then turned to the suggestion that the judge was inconsistent in
      finding the appellant's daughter credible and yet not applying her
      evidence that until she came to the United Kingdom in 2008 her father
      had not been back to China. However, the judge was not making a
      blanket finding of credibility about all of his daughter's evidence.
      The judge heard from her and also from her daughter who at that stage
      was 19 years of age. The appellant's evidence was that he lived with
      his daughter and granddaughter in Manchester since 2012. It was this
      aspect of the evidence that the judge was accepting.

  39. There are two other aspects of her evidence that I will comment upon.
      His daughter's evidence was that the appellant had not been back to
      China. In support of their she states that he does not have his
      passport any more. There is evidence that his original passport is
      with the Home Office. However, as Mr Bates points out, he could well
      have obtained a replacement passport. Another point made by the
      presenting officer was that just because his daughter's evidence was
      that she had not seen the appellant in China did not mean he had not
      been to China. Against this, the appellant's representative made the
      point that if he returned to China where else would he call but to his
      family.

  40.  A stronger point made by the presenting officer is on the basis the
      appellant left China as an economic migrant he was hardly likely to
      return to China in search of work. Rather, he was more likely to go to
      another European country.

  41. My conclusion is that there is no material error of law arising in the
      way the judge dealt with his daughter's evidence. The judge accepted
      her account that he had lived with her in Manchester since 2012. This
      however still did not resolve the gaps in the evidence about his
      presence before that.

  42. The appellant's representative seeks to fault the judge for not
      setting out in detail conclusions on the various statutory
      declarations provided and correspondence. Those declarations and
      documents are contained in the appeal bundle. The probative weight of
      the declarations is limited particularly as the makers did not give
      evidence. The statements are very general and simply refer to
      occasional encounters and the description of his personality.

  43. The judge did analyse in detail the evidence of the witnesses that
      were called. No specific challenge has been made in the judge's
      conclusions which essentially, apart from the evidence of his daughter
      and granddaughter, rejected their evidence. The presenting officer
      made the valid point in that it was difficult to see how untested
      testimonials could have influenced the outcome when the tested
      evidence of support was rejected. Paragraph 17 of the decision refers
      to the nonfamily witnesses and can be read as alluding to these
      testimonials. I do not find the correspondence referred to is adequate
      to fill in the gaps.

  44. When I consider the decision in the round is apparent there were some
      difficulties in relation to the appellant's oral evidence. The judge
      concluded he was inconsistent. It is difficult to know if the problems
      with the appellant's delivery were on purpose but whatever the reason
      the areas in contention were not central to the appeal. It is clear
      that the judge was able to obtain adequate evidence from the appellant
      about his claim. Thereafter the judge carefully analysed that evidence
      and the evidence of the other witnesses that were called.

  45. The judge gave good reasons for finding the evidence of Mrs Wing Fou
      Yong, Ms Yingying and Ms Sui Mei Wu unreliable. No challenge to this
      has been made and there were no linguistic issues here. A clear
      example is given in relation to Ms Sui Mei Wu. She said she has known
      the appellant since 2009 when she met his daughter at her doctor's
      surgery and that he had always lived in the United Kingdom with his
      family. This contradicted the appellant's evidence that he had been
      living with Mrs Young until 2012.

  46. The judge then had regard to the documentary evidence but this still
      did not fill in the gaps in the evidence. Ultimately, it was for the
      appellant to prove his case.

  47. Overall, this is a clear carefully prepared decision and having regard
      to the points made on behalf of the appellant I find no material error
      of law established.

Decision

No material error of law has been established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Warren. Consequently, that decision dismissing the
appellant's appeal shall stand.


Francis J Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

