
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15151/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 February 2021                  |On 9 March 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                             HASNAIN AKRAM AWAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Miah, Counsel on behalf of the appellant.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Clarke (hereinafter referred  to  as  the
         "FtTJ")  promulgated  on  the  5  February  2020,  in   which   the
         appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse his human  rights
         application dated 3 October 2017 was dismissed.


      2. The FtTJ did not make an anonymity order  and  no  application  was
         made for such an order before the Upper Tribunal.

      3. The hearing took place on 26 February 2021, by means of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not object1d  to  by  the
         parties. A face- to- face hearing was not held because it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing. The advocates attended remotely via
         video as did the appellant  who  was  able  to  see  and  hear  the
         proceedings being conducted. There were no issues regarding  sound,
         and no technical problems were encountered during the hearing and I
         am satisfied both advocates were  able  to  make  their  respective
         cases by the chosen means.

      4. I am grateful to Mr Miah  and  Mr  Diwnycz  for  their  clear  oral
         submissions.


Background:

      5. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  The decision of the  FtTJ
         did not set out his immigration history  but  is  relevant  to  the
         facts of this appeal.


      6. He entered the United Kingdom  on  27  September  2007  with  entry
         clearance as a Tier 4 student  valid until  28 February 2009.   The
         decision letter and the  FtTJ's  decision  refer  to  the  date  of
         arrival as 27 August 2007  but  Mr  Miah  has  confirmed  that  the
         correct date is the 27 September 2007.

      7. On 3 March 2019, he made an application for leave to  remain  as  a
         student which was granted on 12 June 2009 until 31 January 2010.

      8. On 29 June 2009, he made an application for leave remain as a  Tier
         1 Highly Skilled Post Study Migrant which was granted on 20  August
         2009 until 20 August 2011.

      9. On 10 March 2011 he made an  in-  time  application  for  leave  to
         remain as a Tier 1 General Migrant which was granted  on  29  March
         2011 until 29 March 2013.

     10. On 12 April 2016 he made  an  in-time  application  for  indefinite
         leave to remain as a Tier 1 General Migrant which was refused on 22
         September 2017.

     11. On 3 October 2017 he made an application for  indefinite  leave  to
         remain on the basis of 10 years long residence.

     12. On 27 August 2019, the respondent refused his application  for  ILR
         on the basis of completing 10 years continuous long residence.

     13. The decision letter set out the appellant's immigration history. It
         stated, "consideration is being given to your application and it is
         noted that whilst you had 10 years of continuous residence  in  the
         United Kingdom you fall under the  general  grounds  for  refusal".
         Reference was then made to a previous  application  for  indefinite
         leave to remain as a Tier 1 General migrant which had been made  on
         12 April 2016 but was refused on 22 September 2017.

     14. The decision letter recited an extract from that previous  decision
         (dated 22 September 2017) relating  to  Paragraph  322(5).  It  was
         stated that within the application dated 25 March 2013 for leave to
         remain as a Tier  1  (General)  Migrant  the  Home  Office  records
         concerning  his  previous  earnings  from  employment   and   self-
         employment were inconsistent with the cheques made  by  HM  revenue
         and Customs (full details were set out in the decision letter).

     15.  The  respondent  acknowledged  that  Paragraph  322  (5)  of   the
         Immigration Rules was not a mandatory  refusal,  but  the  evidence
         submitted by the appellant did not demonstrate that the failure  to
         declare to the HMRC at the time the self-employed earnings and  the
         dividends declared in the previous application for leave to  remain
         in the  United  Kingdom  was  a  genuine  error.  In  essence,  the
         Secretary of State considered that the evidence  demonstrated  that
         he had been deceitful or dishonest in his dealings  with  the  HMRC
         and/or UKVI.

     16. As a result, his application for leave  to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom on the basis of 10 years lawful  and  continuous  residence
         was refused under paragraph 276D of the immigration  rules  as  the
         appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  276B  (ii)
         with reference to paragraph 322 (5) of the Immigration Rules.

     17. The decision letter stated that it had been considered  whether  it
         was appropriate for discretion to be exercised with regard  to  the
         reason  why  the  application  fell  for  refusal  however  it  was
         considered that given the reasons  why  the  application  had  been
         refused, it was not  appropriate  that  any  discretion  should  be
         exercised.

     18. The decision letter and then went on to  consider  the  application
         under the private life rules under Paragraph 276ADE noting that his
         application fell for refusal on grounds of suitability in section S-
         LTR 1.6 (character and conduct) that his presence was not conducive
         to the public good because he  was  dishonest  in  his  application
         leave to remain on 25 March 2013. Furthermore paragraph  S-LTR  4.2
         applied (false  representation  of  failure  to  disclose  material
         facts) relating to the previous income earned.

     19. Further consideration was given to his  length  of  residence,  and
         whether there were any significant  obstacles  to  his  integration
         into Pakistan but concluded that he could  not  satisfy  the  rules
         under paragraph 276ADE.

     20. The respondent also considered whether there were any  "exceptional
         circumstances" which would render refusal a  breach  of  Article  8
         because it would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for the
         appellant but having considered the evidence, that  the  respondent
         did not consider there were any such circumstances for a  grant  of
         leave to be made.

     21. Thus the application was refused.



The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal:

     22. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to  refuse
         leave came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Clarke) on the  15
         January 2020.

     23. In a determination promulgated on the 5  February  2020,  the  FtTJ
         dismissed the appeal on human  rights  grounds,  having  considered
         that issue in the light of  the  appellant's  compliance  with  the
         Immigration Rule in question and on Article 8 grounds.

     24. The FtTJ considered  the  evidence  relating  to  the  issue  under
         Paragraph 322  (5)  at  paragraphs  [7]-[22]  and  carried  out  an
         analysis of that evidence in the context of the  evidence  and  the
         explanations  provided  by  the  appellant.   At  [20]  the   judge
         concluded that having carefully considered  the  evidence  and  the
         facts of the case that the appellant had made "an innocent  error".
         The judge went on to state that  he  accepted  that  the  appellant
         acted under the instructions  of  his  accountants  and  that  two-
         irregular set of accounts were prepared by  unqualified  staff  but
         that the  corporation  tax  had  been  properly  paid.  Whilst  the
         appellant's own income tax had not been properly paid at the  time,
         an explanation had been provided as to what drew his  attention  to
         the irregularity. The judge took into  account  the  appellant  had
         written to HMRC drawing their attention  to  the  irregularity  and
         only some months later made  the  first  application  in  time  for
         indefinite leave to remain.

     25. At [22] the judge finally concluded "that the  respondent  has  not
         discharged the burden of proof on a balance of  probabilities  that
         the appellant has been deceitful and dishonest in his tax affairs."

     26. As to whether the appellant could satisfy paragraph 276B  based  on
         his long residence the judge stated at [6] "there is at  least  one
         gap in the immigration history" and that the  appellant  could  not
         show 10 years continuous residence  because  there  were  "gaps  of
         leave of  one day between the previous grants of leave expiring  on
         application for further leave  to  remain  ."  At  [23]  the  judge
         confirmed that the appellant could not meet  the  requirements  for
         indefinite  leave to remain and that whilst the appellant may  have
         resided in the UK since he arrived on 27 August 2007 (which  is  in
         fact the wrong date) that not all of the applications for leave  to
         remain were made in time. "They were all granted but for  12  April
         2016 application."

     27. At [23] the judge considered whether the appellant could  meet  the
         private life rules under paragraph 276ADE, and noted the concession
         made that it was accepted  that  there  were  no  very  significant
         obstacles to his return to Pakistan.  The  judge  also  found  that
         there were no "exceptional circumstances"  in  his  case  and  that
         while the appellant had lawful leave in the UK his stay was  always
         precarious; he had formed a company and had contributed to  the  UK
         society and worked and not relied on public funds but that he could
         return to Pakistan and form another company there. When considering
         the section 117B  public  interest  considerations,  and  the  need
         immigration control, the judge found that "the appellant  does  not
         fall within the immigration rules and there is no reason why  leave
         should be granted to enable him to remain in the UK, I dismiss  the
         appeal."

     28. The FtTJ therefore dismissed the appeal.



     29. Permission to appeal was issued and on 16 April 2020, permission to
         appeal was granted by  FtTJ Osbourne  stating:-

         "The grounds assert that the judge erred in law for  the  following
         reasons: failed to provide adequate reasons for the decision: found
         at [20] at the appellant had made an innocent  error  and  at  [21]
         that the respondent did not establish that the appellant  had  been
         dishonest but at [22] found that the appellant had used deceit  and
         had been dishonest: failed to adequately consider the  Home  Office
         policy on continuous residence.


         In an otherwise careful decision, it is at least arguable that  the
         judge materially erred when having found  that  the  appellant  was
         innocent of dishonesty went on to find that the appellant had  been
         dishonest and used deceit.
         This arguably material error of law having been identified, all the
         grounds are arguable."



The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     30. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions on the 15 June 2020, inter alia, indicating that it  was
         provisionally of the view that the error  of  law  issue  could  be
         determined  without  a  face-  to-  face  hearing.  Following   the
         appellant submitting his written submissions on 29  June  2020  but
         with no compliance on behalf of the respondent  further  directions
         were given by UTJ Finch. On 17 November  2020  UTJ  Rintoul  issued
         directions for a remote hearing to take place and that  this  could
         take place via Skype. Both parties have indicated  that  they  were
         content for the hearing to proceed by this method.  Therefore,  the
         Tribunal listed the hearing to enable oral submissions to be  given
         by each of the parties with the assistance of their advocates.

     31. Mr Miah on behalf of the appellant relied upon the written  grounds
         of appeal and the written submissions dated 29 June 2020.

     32. There  has  been  no  written  response  filed  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent.

     33. I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am  grateful
         for their  assistance  and  their  clear  oral  submissions.  After
         hearing the submissions made by Mr Miah, Mr Diwncyz confirmed  that
         the FtTJ had found the appellant not to have used any deception  or
         deceit and therefore paragraph 322(5) did not apply and that  there
         was no cross-appeal mounted on behalf of the respondent. He further
         confirmed that he accepted the submissions made by Mr Miah and that
         the application made in 2017 fell within the period of 14 days  and
         thus the decision made by the judge was erroneous. It was therefore
         accepted that the decision reached by the judge involved the making
         of an error on a point of law and should  be  set  aside  and  when
         considering  the  issue  of  long  residence  and   that   in   the
         circumstances the appeal should be remade and allowed under Article
         8.

Discussion:

     34. As set out above, the advocates are in agreement that the  decision
         of the FtTJ involved the making of an error on a point of law,  and
         further agree that if that  error  had  not  been  made,  the  only
         outcome would have been to allow the appeal under Article 8 of  the
         ECHR. Consequently both parties invite me to remake the decision by
         allowing the appeal.

     35. In the light of the agreement reached, it is only necessary for  me
         to set out in brief terms why I agree with that approach.

     36. The appellant's application for ILR (made on 3  October  2017)  was
         made under para 276B on the basis of ten years'  lawful  continuous
         residence. So far as relevant, para 276B provides as follows:

         "276B The requirements to be met by  an  applicant  for  indefinite
         leave to remain on the ground  of  long  residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom are that:

         (i) (a) he has had at least 10 years' continuous  lawful  residence
         in the United Kingdom.

         (ii) Having regard to the public interest there are no reasons  why
         it would be undesirable for him to be  given  indefinite  leave  to
         remain on the ground of long residence, taking into account his:

         (a) age; and

         (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and

         (c) personal history, including character,  conduct,  associations,
         and employment record; and

         (d) domestic circumstances; and

         (e) compassionate circumstances; and

         (f) any representations received on the person's behalf; and

         (iii) the applicant does not fall for  refusal  under  the  general
         grounds for refusal.

         .... ."

     37. As regards the general grounds of refusal, the  relevant  provision
         is para 322(5) which provides:

         "322(5) the undesirability of permitting the  person  concerned  to
         remain in the United Kingdom in the light of his conduct (including
         convictions which do not fall within paragraph 322(1C)),  character
         or associations ....;"

     38. That general ground of refusal is a ground on which  leave  "should
         normally be refused", consequently it  is  a  discretionary  rather
         than mandatory ground of refusal.

     39. The application made on 3 October  2017  for  indefinite  leave  to
         remain on the basis of  10  years  continuous  long  residence  was
         refused under paragraph 276B (ii)   and  paragraph  276B(iii)  with
         reference  to  paragraph  322(5)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
         decision letter clearly sets out that whilst it was noted  that  he
         had 10 years continuous residence in the  United  Kingdom  he  fell
         under the general grounds for refusal based on the reasons given in
         a previous decision dated  22  September  2017  that  he  had  used
         deception or had been dishonest in his declarations made as to  his
         tax affairs. As Mr Miah pointed out, the decision  letter  did  not
         dispute that he had had 10 years continuous residence  or  seek  to
         identify any breaks in  the  continuity  of  lawful  residence  but
         refused the application on the basis of his  undesirability  to  be
         granted leave under paragraph 276B (ii) and that the applicant fell
         for refusal under the general grounds of  refusal  (paragraph  276B
         (iii) based on paragraph 322(5)). Thus the reasons for refusing his
         application on long residence grounds were based on the  allegation
         made of his dishonesty.

     40. There is no dispute between the parties that the FtTJ gave adequate
         and sustainable reasons for reaching the conclusion  at  [22]  that
         the respondent had not discharged the  burden  of  proof  that  the
         appellant had been deceitful or dishonest in  his  tax  affairs.  I
         observe that the reasons given  for  the  grant  of  permission  at
         paragraph 2 appear to be in error. The judge appeared to state that
         the judge had made inconsistent findings on whether  the  appellant
         had been dishonest. Both parties agree that if that  was  what  the
         judge was referring to paragraph 2 of the grant of permission, that
         was plainly in error.

     41. As Mr Diwncyz confirmed, the respondent had not sought to challenge
         the findings of fact made by the FtTJ on the issue of dishonesty in
         his tax affairs. Therefore the FtTJ found that paragraph 322(5) did
         not apply. It must also follow that  based  on  those  unchallenged
         factual findings, the respondent's reliance on paragraph 276B  (ii)
         and (iii) also did not apply.

     42. Mr Miah submitted that having  found  there  was  no  deception  or
         dishonesty on the part of the appellant, the FtTJ erred in  law  by
         failing to consider how that finding should have  been  taken  into
         account when considering the appellant's application for indefinite
         leave to remain in the context of Article 8 ( this  being  a  human
         rights appeal). In the alternative, it was submitted that the  FtTJ
         erred in law by failing to give reasons as to why the appellant did
         not  meet  the  requirements  for  long  residence  and  that   the
         references at paragraph 6 of the decision failed  to  identify  any
         such gaps in his immigration history.

     43. The appellant's immigration history is relevant to the  outcome  of
         this  appeal.  I  observe  that  the  FtTJ  did  not  set  out  the
         appellant's immigration history and the only references made to his
         periods of leave in the United Kingdom were made at  paragraph  [6]
         and in summary at [23]. At paragraph [6], the  FtTJ  set  out  that
         there was "at least one gap  in  immigration  history".  The  judge
         therefore concluded that he  would  be  unable  to  show  10  years
         continuous residence because there were gaps of at  least  one  day
         between previous grants  of  leave  expiring  and  applications  of
         further leave to remain. It was on that basis that the judge  found
         that he could not meet the requirements  for  indefinite  leave  to
         remain under the Immigration Rules.

     44. Mr Miah submitted that whilst the FtTJ  referred  to  "gaps  of  at
         least one day"  none  had  been  identified  in  the  decision.  He
         submitted that there were no such  gaps  and  in  relation  to  the
         application made on 3 October 2017, the application was made within
         14 days of the refusal decision dated 22 September 2017, as set out
         in the respondent's policy.

     45. Mr Diwncyz submitted that the only possible gap could have been  in
         2009 when his leave as a student ended on 28 February 2009 and  the
         application was only made on 3 March  2009  although  he  submitted
         that he accepted Mr Miah's submission that there was no gap in  the
         leave thereafter by reference to the application made on 3  October
         2017.

     46. The Court of Appeal has  recently  considered  the  legal  position
         regarding lawfulness of stay where  there  is  an  application  for
         leave to remain made out of time in the case of Hoque and others  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1357  ("
         Hoque"). In those cases, the Court of  Appeal  drew  a  distinction
         between "open ended" or "current" overstaying on the one  hand  and
         "book-ended" or "previous" overstaying on the other when looking at
         the periods which fall to be disregarded when assessing the  period
         of lawful residence. In the case of "book-ended" overstaying  where
         there is a gap in  lawful  residence,  but  leave  is  subsequently
         granted, that gap is to be regarded as part of the lawful residence
         for assessing whether the requirement for a  continuous  period  of
         ten years is met whereas in the case of "open  ended"  overstaying,
         the period is not taken into account.

     47. When applied to the appellant's immigration history, there  was  no
         gap in his leave in 2009 therefore if this were the  gap  the  FtTJ
         was referring to, that would be in error.

     48. It is also important  to  take  into  account  the  nature  of  the
         application made by the appellant on 12 April 2016.  Prior to  that
         date the appellant had continuous lawful leave  from  27  September
         2007 and from 2009 as a Tier 1  Migrant.  On  12  April  2016,  the
         appellant submitted an application for indefinite leave  to  remain
         upon completion of 5 years as  a  Tier  1  (General)  Migrant.  The
         respondent refused that application  in  a  decision  taken  on  22
         September 2017. The reasons given for refusing his application  for
         indefinite   leave   to   remain   was    that    he    had    used
         dishonesty/deception when representing his income based on the  tax
         discrepancies and  therefore  his  application  was  refused  under
         Paragraph 322(5). It was not asserted on behalf of  the  respondent
         that he could not meet the five- year continuous  lawful  residence
         period and the refusal was based  on  the  tax  discrepancies.  His
         application made on 3 October 2017, this time under  the  10  years
         continuous lawful residence requirements, was again refused  solely
         on the basis of the previous decision made relating to his  alleged
         dishonesty.

     49. In the light of the factual findings made  by  the  FtTJ  that  the
         appellant had not used any deception or had been dishonest  in  his
         tax affairs, the reasons for refusing both applications fall  away.
         In particular, by reason of the factual  findings  the  application
         made on 12 April 2016 but not  decided  until  22  September  2017,
         would have led to the appellant being successful in his application
         for indefinite leave to remain as no other issues  were  identified
         on behalf of the respondent.  The FtTJ did not consider the  effect
         of  his  findings  of  fact  upon  the  decisions  reached  by  the
         respondent and therefore the judge erred in law when  reaching  his
         overall decision on Article 8.

     50. The recent decision of Patel (historic injustice: NIAA  Part  5A  )
         [2020] UKUT 351 is of relevance in this context. The headnote reads
         as follows:


         "...(2) Cases  that  may  be  described  as  involving  "historical
         injustice" are... where the Secretary of State forms a  view  about
         an individual's activities or behaviour, which leads to an  adverse
         immigration decision; but where her view turns out to  be  mistaken
         (e.g. Ahsan v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 2009). Each  of  these  failings
         may have an effect on an individual's Article 8 ECHR case....".



     51. The panel at [46], quoted paragraphs [120] - [121] of the Court  of
         Appeal decision in Ahsan , and at [47], said:


         "Although not immediately apparent, one way in which this  kind  of
         erroneous treatment of an individual can have a bearing on  Article
         8 proportionality is in an ensuing  human  rights  appeal,  as  was
         envisaged by Underhill LJ. In such an appeal, the individual  would
         be able to argue that, if the respondent did not form the  mistaken
         view of their conduct, he or she would have  been  given  leave  to
         remain, and that this should  be  given  weight  in  the  balancing
         exercise,  comparably  with  how  the  Court  of  Appeal,   in   AA
         (Afghanistan) et cetera, spoke of the respondent taking account  of
         past mistakes in deciding whether to  exercise  discretion  in  the
         individual's favour."



     52. The only reason the appellant was found to not meet the
         requirements for indefinite leave to remain in his application made
         on 12 April 2016 was that he had been dishonest in his tax affairs.
         Had the respondent not formed the mistaken view of his conduct, the
         appellant would have been likely had been given leave to remain no
         other issues having been identified. In my judgement that was a
         weighty factor in the proportionality assessment under Article 8.
         Similarly the same factual basis was given for refusing the
         application made on 3 October 2017. As Mr Miah submitted, the
         decision letter did not seek to challenge his period of over 10
         years continuous lawful residence but sought to refuse it on the
         basis of his undesirability and conduct in the context of his tax
         affairs under Paragraph 276B  therefore fell for refusal under
         Paragraph 276D of the Immigration Rules on the basis that he did
         not meet the conditions of Paragraphs 276B(ii) and 276B(iii) with
         reference to Paragraph 322(5). Therefore, the FtTJ was required to
         take that into account in his assessment of proportionality.

     53. On the unchallenged findings of the FtTJ, the appellant was not
         dishonest in his tax affairs. The allegation of dishonesty was the
         reason given by the respondent for refusing the applications made
         in 2016 and in 2017.

     54. He therefore would have met the requirements under the Immigration
         Rules that would entitle him to a grant of indefinite leave to
         remain on the basis of his completion of 5 years as a Tier 1
         (General) Migrant in 2016  had the allegation of dishonesty not
         been made. Therefore, even if there had been a gap in his residence
         based on the 10 years continuous long residence requirements
         (although Mr Diwnycz agreed with Mr Miah that there was no such
         gap), the immigration history demonstrates that he would have been
         successful in the application made prior to this and decided on 22
         September 2017.

     55. However, this is not an appeal against the refusal to grant the
         appellant indefinite leave to remain. It is a human rights appeal,
         made under section 82(1)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and
         Asylum Act 2002, on the ground that the decision to refuse the
         appellant's application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis
         of long residence was unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights
         Act 1998 as it was contrary to Article 8 ECHR.

     56. It is agreed between the parties that the appellant succeeds in his
         human rights appeal because in light of the length of time he has
         resided in the UK, he plainly has a private life in the UK that
         engages Article 8(1) ECHR; and that his removal from the UK would
         be disproportionate under Article 8(2) because, as he satisfies the
         conditions to be entitled to a grant of indefinite leave to remain
         under the Immigration Rules, there is no public interest in his
         removal.

     57. In this context I  have had regard to OA and Others (human  rights;
         new matter) [2019] UKUT 65 at 27 and 28:

         "27. The significance of  an  appellant  proving  to  a  First-tier
         Tribunal  judge  that  he  or  she  meets  the  requirements  of  a
         particular immigration rule, so as to be entitled to be given leave
         to remain, lies in the fact that - provided Article 8 of  the  ECHR
         is engaged - the respondent will  not  be  able  to  point  to  the
         importance of maintaining immigration controls as a factor weighing
         in favour of the respondent in the proportionality balance, so  far
         as that factor relates to the particular immigration rule that  the
         Tribunal has found to be satisfied.

         28. Whether or not such a finding in  favour  of  an  appellant  is
         likely to be determinative of the human rights appeal  will  depend
         upon whether the respondent has any additional reason,  effectively
         overriding that particular rule,  for  saying  that  the  effective
         operation  of  the  respondent's  immigration  policy  nevertheless
         outweighs the appellant's interest in remaining in this country. To
         take one simple example, an appellant who persuades the  First-tier
         Tribunal that he meets the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
         relating to entrepreneur migrants will not thereby succeed  in  his
         human rights  appeal  if  the  appellant  has  been  found  by  the
         respondent (and the Tribunal agrees) that the appellant falls  foul
         of one or more of the general grounds of refusal contained in  Part
         9 of the Rules; for example, because he made false  representations
         in connection with a  previous  application  for  leave  (paragraph
         322(2))."

     58. Also as set out in  TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) v The Secretary of
         State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1109  at [34]
         ("...where a person satisfies the Rules, whether or not by
         reference to an Article 8 informed requirement, then this will be
         positively determinative of that person's Article 8 appeal,
         provided their case engages article 8(1), for the very reason that
         it would then be disproportionate for that person to be removed").

     59. No other reasons adverse to the appellant have been raised on
         behalf of the respondent  and therefore for the reasons given
         above, I am satisfied as the parties have submitted that the
         decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error  on a point
         of law and the decision should be set aside.  The appeal is remade
         as follows; the appeal is allowed on Article 8 grounds.



Notice of Decision.

     60. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of
         an error on a point of law and therefore the decision is set aside.
         It is remade as  follows:  the  appeal  is  allowed  on  Article  8
         grounds.


Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated 1 March 2021




NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make a
written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days if the notice of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.

6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email.




