
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15467/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 13 November 2018                  |On 15 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     N H
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Smith of Counsel instructed by Paragon Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Law promulgated on 17 August 2017 in which  he  allowed  on  Article  8
    grounds the appeal of NH against a decision of the Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department dated 14 June 2016 refusing leave to remain.


2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the Appellant and NH is the Respondent, for  the  sake  of  consistency
    with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I  shall  hereafter
    refer to NH as  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.


3.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 23 December  1986.   His
    immigration history and  the  background  to  the  case  is  adequately
    summarised  at  paragraphs  1-4  of  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Essentially, the Appellant had entered the United Kingdom as
    a student in July 2010, and  had  thereafter  been  granted  subsequent
    periods of leave as a student up until 29 November 2016.  In  or  about
    September 2015 he made an application to vary  his  leave  so  that  he
    could remain as a spouse, but this was refused on financial grounds  on
    28 October 2015.  Shortly after, on 16  December  2015,  a  curtailment
    decision was taken with effect from 19  February  2016.   Although  not
    expressly specified in the materials before me, it  would  appear  that
    the curtailment decision was taken because the Respondent decided  that
    the Appellant had used a 'proxy tester' to obtain an  English  language
    certificate pursuant  to  a  test  conducted  on  17  July  2013.   The
    certificate had  been  submitted  in  support  of  an  application  for
    variation of leave to remain made on 14 August 2013.


4.   Following receipt of the curtailment decision  the  Appellant  made  an
    application on 10 February 2016 for further  leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of family life with a partner.  In this context, the Appellant  -
    as he had in his previous application of September 2015 - relied on his
    marriage to SZ, a British citizen born on 16 April  1987.   The  couple
    were married on 25 February 2015.  At the time of  the  application  it
    was said  that  the  Appellant  and  his  wife  were  living  with  the
    Appellant's parents and younger brother in the United Kingdom, and that
    SZ was expecting their first child.  In due course, on 2 April 2016, SZ
    was delivered of a son M.   There is no dispute that M  is  indeed  the
    son of the Appellant.


5.   The Appellant's application for leave to remain on  Article  8  grounds
    was refused by the Respondent for reasons set out  in  a  'reasons  for
    refusal' letter ('RFRL') of 14 June 2016.  Essentially, the  Respondent
    considered that the Appellant failed to satisfy the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules by reference to the suitability criteria by reason of
    his submission of a false English language certificate in the course of
    an earlier application for leave to remain.


6.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


7.   At the appeal hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant
    revealed a change of domestic circumstances - although such  change  is
    not overtly apparent on the face either of his witness statement signed
    on 11 August 2017, or the written skeleton argument  submitted  on  his
    behalf before the First-tier Tribunal signed by Counsel  on  10  August
    2017.


8.   The witness statement's primary focus is on the allegation of  using  a
    proxy  tester  in  the  course  of  attaining   an   English   language
    certificate. There is a single paragraph in respect of the  Appellant's
    domestic circumstances which is in these terms:

         "I wish to reside in the UK based on my private family life with my
         child who is 1 years of age".

    It  may  be  seen  that  no  reference  is  specifically  made  to  his
    relationship with his wife at that point.


9.    Similarly,  in  the  skeleton  argument   section   117B(6)   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  is  pleaded  and  it  is
    asserted "there is no public interest in A's removal.  Given  that  his
    child  is  a  qualifying  child  there  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship and removal would not be reasonable".


10.  Beyond those references there is no additional  detail  in  either  the
    witness  statement,  the  skeleton  argument,  or  indeed  any  of  the
    supporting documents that were filed before the First-tier Tribunal  in
    respect  of  the  Appellant's   domestic   circumstances   and/or   his
    relationship with his child.


11.  However, it is apparent that during the course  of  oral  evidence  the
    Appellant informed the Tribunal that  his  domestic  circumstances  had
    indeed altered.  At paragraph 6 the following is recorded:

         "His wife has now returned to live with  her  parents  and  he  was
         living with his parents and trying to obtain contact with his child
         through court proceedings; the last time he had seen his child  was
         six months ago at a family funeral.  The child had been born  on  2
         April 2016".

    On that basis it may be seen that the Appellant had not seen his  child
    since the child had been approximately 10 months old.


12.  In respect of the reference to contact proceedings, as I have  detailed
    above, there was nothing by way of documentary evidence to support  the
    notion that any such proceedings were actually in process.


13.  Be that as it may, necessarily it may  be  seen  that  the  Appellant's
    claim on the basis of family life  and/or  Article  8  had  shifted  in
    focus.   He  was  no  longer  relying   upon   a   subsisting   marital
    relationship.   Additionally,  the  issue  over  the  English  language
    certificate - and thereby the past use of deception -  remained  'live'
    before the First-tier Tribunal.


14.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  resolved  the  certificate  /  decpetion
    issue against the Appellant: see the conclusion set  out  at  paragraph
    20.  Although the  appeal  before  me  is  an  appeal  brought  by  the
    Secretary of State, there has been no challenge raised by way of a Rule
    24 response or otherwise to the Judge's  findings  in  respect  of  the
    English language certificate.  To this extent that particular aspect of
    the Judge's decision is unchallenged by either party.


15.  However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the  Appellant's  appeal
    on Article 8 grounds with reference  to  the  Appellant's  relationship
    with his son.


16.      The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  applied  for
    permission to appeal which was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kimnell on 31 January 2018.  In granting  permission  to  appeal  Judge
    Kimnell made the following observation:

         "The appeal was allowed because it was found to be disproportionate
         to refuse leave to enable the Appellant to seek  contact  with  his
         child through the Family Court.  There was however no detail of any
         court proceedings in relation to the  child  (paragraph  30).   The
         only facts  of  which  the  Judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
         Appellant was  that  the  child  lives  with  his  mother  and  the
         Appellant has not seen him for six months.  Arguably it is an error
         to find the public interest is outweighed by such flimsy evidence".





17.  I have already noted above the nature and quality  of  the  evidence  -
    indeed the general lack of  evidence  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    relationship with  his  son  and  any  contact  proceedings.   The  key
    passages in the decision where the Judge looks at this  aspect  of  the
    case are at paragraph 6  (which  I  have  already  quoted  above),  and
    paragraph 30:

         "There is of course no prospect  of  the  Appellant's  child  being
         required to leave the UK since he is a British citizen.  Other than
         the age of that child, the fact that he lives with his  mother  and
         that the Appellant has not seen him  for  six  months,  I  have  no
         information.  The Appellant said that he was seeking  contact  with
         his child through court proceedings, but again I have  no  details.
         I am proceeding on the basis that the Appellant as the father of  a
         minor child, has family life with that child".





18.  It seems to me that that  was  an  inappropriate  assumption.   In  any
    event, what the Judge had to consider was the nature and extent of  any
    subsisting relationship.  The Judge gives some  consideration  to  this
    later in the decision at paragraphs 33-35.  In the context  of  section
    117B(6) the Judge states  "I  find  that  the  Appellant  does  have  a
    parental relationship  with  him"  (paragraph  35).  This  finding  was
    seemingly reached in  reliance  upon  R  (on  the  application  of  RK)
    (s.117B(6); "parental relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT 00031  wherein  it
    was  held  there  that  there  was  no  necessity  to   have   parental
    responsibility in order for there to exist a parental relationship.


19.  The problem with the Judge's approach and evaluation is  that  he  does
    not consider section 117B(6) in its fullest context.   Section  117B(6)
    specifies in its premise that "the person has a genuine and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child".   The  Judge  fails  to
    consider or evaluate the issue of "genuine and  subsisting".   In  this
    context,  my  attention  has  been  directed  to  the  decision  of  SR
    (subsisting parental relationship, s117B(6)) Pakistan [2018]  UKUT  334
    (IAC),  in  particular  at  paragraphs  35  and  37.   For  a  parental
    relationship to be genuine and subsisting something  more  is  required
    than mere consanguinity.  Evidence would  be  required  to  demonstrate
    that the person was taking an active role in the child's upbringing.


20.  The Judge makes further  reference  to  the  factual  circumstances  at
    paragraph 37 in these terms:

         "As already stated I have very little information about  the  child
         and it would be wrong to attempt to  predict  the  outcome  of  the
         contact proceedings.  I note from  the  Appellant's  evidence  that
         both sets of grandparents live in the UK".

    The Judge then cites various case law in relation to best interests  of
    children, before stating the  following  at  paragraph  44  by  way  of
    conclusion:

         "Taking all these factors into consideration, including my findings
         in relation to the test result and that the Appellant has  not  met
         the suitability requirement, nevertheless I find that the  decision
         under appeal is not proportionate when weighing the public interest
         against the Appellant's Article 8 right to respect for  his  family
         life.  It will be for the Family Court  to  determine  whether  the
         Appellant should have contact with his child and I would expect the
         Respondent to grant a sufficient period of leave  to  enable  those
         proceedings to be concluded".





21.  Over and above the error of  the  Judge  in  failing  to  evaluate  the
    question of subsisting parental relationship, it seems to me  that  the
    Judge also proceeded without due  regard  to  the  lead  case  offering
    guidance in cases involving family  proceedings,  RS  (immigration  and
    family court proceedings) India [2012] UKUT  00218  (IAC).   The  Upper
    Tribunal - consisting of Lord Justice McFarlane, the then President  Mr
    Justice Blake and Upper Tribunal Judge  Martin  -  gave  extensive  and
    definitive guidance on the approach that should  be  adopted  in  cases
    involving appeals where a  claimant  seeks  to  rely  upon  outstanding
    family proceedings relating to his or her child.  I do not  propose  to
    reproduce that guidance here, it is a matter of record.


22.  Ms Smith candidly acknowledged that the Judge plainly  failed  to  have
    regard to this guidance: in such circumstances  she  did  not  seek  to
    defend the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Indeed,  it  was
    common ground before me that the  Judge's  approach  to  the  issue  of
    contact was flawed. Over and above any issue in respect of the  failure
    to consider RS, the Secretary of State's  also  pleaded  error  in  the
    Judge accepting that there were  current  contact  proceedings  in  the
    absence of any supporting evidence - to which a  degree  of  weight  is
    inevitably  leant  by  the  Judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant  had
    previously used deception. Irrespective of the merits  of  this  latter
    point, t is common ground that  the  Judge's  decision  in  respect  of
    Article 8 requires to be set aside.


23.  Ms Smith has brought to my attention further evidence now available  to
    demonstrate not only that contact proceedings were in process but  that
    matters have moved on.  She has done so by way of  producing  a  letter
    from the legal representatives acting for the Appellant in  his  family
    proceedings.  Curiously, those legal representatives are the same legal
    representatives who supported the Appellant in his  appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Such a circumstance makes it the more  remarkable
    that there was nothing more by way of evidence and substance in respect
    of the contact proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.  Be that  as
    it may, the letter that has now been produced in material  part  is  in
    the following terms:

         "I am able to confirm that the  application  was  lodged  with  the
         court in March 2017.  This was after  you  had  attended  mediation
         with another law firm.  I  recall  that  your  ex-partner  did  not
         attend this  mediation.   This  took  place  in  Nottingham.   Your
         application was  lodged  in  Wolverhampton.   The  court  listed  a
         hearing in May 2017.  This would have been a directions hearing.  I
         can confirm that the main hearing took place over two days  12  and
         13 July 2018.  The judgment was reserved.  A judgment hearing  took
         place 5 October 2018.  From the above it is clear that your contact
         matter was ongoing at the date of the  immigration  matter.   I  am
         able to confirm that you have asked me to  locate  the  courses  as
         suggested by the Judge.  As discussed  I  am  speaking  to  various
         providers.  We have found one that starts in January".





24.  Ms Smith was appropriately cautious as to  the  amount  of  information
    she was able to put before the Tribunal today.   In  this  context  she
    said that the  Appellant's  current  immigration  representatives  have
    written to the Family Court to seek permission to disclose  the  detail
    and  evidence  in  relation  to  the  Family  Court  proceedings  which
    necessarily are, as things stand,  a  matter  of  confidentiality.   Ms
    Smith was able to inform me that the Appellant  had  not  been  granted
    direct access by the Family Court but had been granted indirect access.
     The reference to 'courses' was in respect of taking measures to enable
    him to put himself in a position to  increase  the  frequency  and  the
    nature of the contact that he is presently permitted with his son -  it
    is said with a view in  due  course  to  seeking  to  establish  direct
    contact rather than just indirect contact.  The present representatives
    have only recently been instructed and accordingly it  was  only  on  7
    November 2018 that they wrote to the Family Court asking for permission
    to disclose these matters to the  Tribunal  and  to  the  Secretary  of
    State.


25.  Necessarily this new information - albeit in some  respects  incomplete
    - puts the situation in a slightly different light.   It  seems  to  me
    that the Article 8  evaluation  needs  to  be  re-visited  taking  into
    account the findings of the Family Court; it will be necessary  in  due
    course for a Tribunal to evaluate those matters against  the  framework
    of the guidance in RS (India) on the basis of the facts as they pertain
    at the date of that assessment.  Those facts necessarily  may  move  on
    with time from the current situation, bearing in mind that  I  am  told
    that it is hoped that the  Appellant  will  be  able  to  increase  his
    prospects of having direct contact with son.  Of course, if that is not
    a matter that is likely to happen, then there is perhaps no reason  why
    indirect   contact    cannot    continue    after    the    Appellant's
    departure/removal from the United Kingdom. Whether that indeed  be  the
    situation will, as I say, require careful analysis on the basis of  all
    available evidence in due course.


26.  On these bases it is common ground that the appeal should  be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be considered by  any  Judge  other  than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Law.


27.  In this regard, after discussion with the parties I  indicated  at  the
    conclusion of the hearing that the future conduct of the appeal  should
    be in accordance with the following Directions:

         (i)  I am given to understand that the earliest available  listings
         in the Nottingham Tribunal are not  until  February  2019.  In  the
         circumstances for the avoidance of any  doubt  and  to  enable  the
         parties due time to prepare for the next hearing, I direct that the
         appeal not be relisted before 13 February 2018.


         (ii) The Appellant and  his  representatives  are  to  continue  to
         pursue steps to obtain permission from the Family Court to disclose
         the details of the Family Court proceedings including  specifically
         the judgment handed down on 5  October  2018  and  any  concomitant
         order of the Tribunal.  The Appellant's representatives are to file
         and serve such documentation upon receipt.


         (iii)    If for any reason disclosure is not granted, then I direct
         that the Appellant's representatives are to provide the  First-tier
         Tribunal with the relevant information as to the court  proceedings
         in order for the First-tier Tribunal to consider whether it  should
         utilise the Joint Protocol  that  exists  between  the  Immigration
         Tribunal and the Family Court to seek to  obtain  such  information
         for itself.


         (iv) Otherwise, any further evidence is to be filed and  served  by
         the parties at least fourteen days prior to the next hearing.


         (v) If there are any particular difficulties in the  timetable  set
         out above, the parties are at liberty to apply to the Tribunal  for
         variation.





28.  I am told that the Appellant does not require an interpreter.


29.  Because these proceedings involve a child who has been the  subject  of
    family proceedings, I direct that an anonymity order be made  to  cover
    the current decision and the future proceedings until such time as  any
    other Judge varies that order.


Notice of Decision

30.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


31.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Law.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 3 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

