
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/15336/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On 6th July 2021                     |On 23rd July 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BEN KEITH


                                   Between

                             VARDIVINO DA SILVA
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Interpreter:     Ms J Negreiros in the Portuguese language


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Brazil born on  21st  March  1970.  He
       arrived in the UK on 5th  November  2011.  He  was  granted  an  EEA
       residence card on 23rd June 2016 which was valid until  8th  January
       2022. On 9th February 2019 the appellant applied for leave to remain
       in the UK based on his parental relationship with his daughter  Miss
       Vitoria Julia Ribeiro Vieira Da Silva who was born in Brazil on  1st
       June 2009. This application was refused by the  respondent  on  29th
       August 2019. His appeal against the decision was heard on the papers
       and dismissed on human rights grounds by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Hatton in a determination promulgated on the 15th November 2019.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Kamara  on
       6th July 2020, who also extended time to admit  the  application  to
       appeal in light of the Covid-19 pandemic, on the basis that  it  was
       arguable that the First-tier judge had erred in law in finding  that
       the appellant was not the father of his  child  Miss  Vitoria  Julia
       Ribeiro Vieira Da Silva when this  was  not  put  in  issue  by  the
       respondent in the refusal decision.  Further,  she  found  that  the
       appeal ought to have been listed together with that  of  his  former
       partner and child, and this arguably caused there to be a lacuna  in
       the evidence available to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Judge  Kamara
       ordered that the appeal be linked with HU/15339/2019.

    3. Upper Tribunal Judge Blum found in his order  and  directions  dated
       16th October 2020 that it has not been possible to link this  appeal
       to that of HU/15339/2019 because the Upper Tribunal  does  not  have
       jurisdiction over this appeal as it was refused permission by  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Francis in a decision dated 21st September  2020  and
       promulgated on 12th October 2020. Directions were made by Judge Blum
       for the matter to be listed for a remote hearing.

    4. A telephone case  management  review  hearing  took  place  on  21st
       January 2021 via BT Meet Me, and it was decided to list  the  matter
       for a Face to Face hearing.

    5. The matter came  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law and if so whether any error was  material,
       and if there was a material error to remake the appeal.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    6. Ms Everett accepted that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in
       making a decision that was procedurally  unfair  and  also  accepted
       that as a result it was correct that the decision and  the  findings
       of the First-tier Tribunal were set aside. We did not therefore have
       to call upon the appellant to make any submissions on this issue. We
       find that the finding at paragraph 40 of the decision of the  First-
       tier Tribunal, that there is no evidence  that the appellant is  the
       father of his claimed daughter or that he has a subsisting  parental
       relationship with her,  is  procedurally  unfair  in  light  of  the
       position taken by the respondent in the reasons for  refusal  letter
       which raises no issue on this point, and given that the  appeal  was
       determined on the papers with no opportunity for  the  appellant  to
       put forward any evidence on these points.





Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

    7. After we had resolved the issue of whether the  First-tier  Tribunal
       had erred in  law  Ms  Everett  raised  the  issue  of  whether  the
       appellant had received a decision  from  the  respondent  dated  5th
       March 2021 revoking his EEA residence card  which  the  respondent's
       records indicate had been sent to him at Hoylake Road in March 2021.
       She said that  the  allegation  underlying  the  revocation  of  the
       residence card was that the appellant's ex-wife had obtained Italian
       identity documents  which  were  improperly  issued  by  an  Italian
       official. She said a similar letter had also been sent revoking  his
       daughter's residence card at the same time  to  the  address  at  St
       John's Avenue. The appellant was  somewhat  confused  initially  but
       eventually it transpired that he had moved  from  the  Hoylake  Road
       address and back to the address at  St  John's  Avenue  in  February
       2021, and so had not received the decision sent to him as it had not
       been sent to the address where he was residing, and further  he  was
       unaware of any such decision letter  in  relation  to  his  daughter
       either. As a result we found that there was no outstanding appeal in
       the First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation  to  the  revocation  of  the
       appellant's EEA residence card.  Ms  Everett  agreed  use  her  best
       endeavours to get the decision revoking his residence  card  re-sent
       to the appellant at his correct address.

    8. The appellant confirmed that he wished  to  proceed  to  remake  the
       appeal immediately in the Upper Tribunal, and Ms  Everett  was  also
       content to do this. The  appellant  provided  us  with  two  further
       payslips from 2019 and two P60s, one issued on 5th  April  2020  and
       one on 5th April 2021, showing he works for  London  United  Busways
       Ltd. We admitted this further  evidence  with  the  consent  of  the
       respondent. The appellant  informed  the  Upper  Tribunal  that  his
       daughter had left the UK in February 2021 with her mother as she was
       depressed and unwell, and that her mother (his ex-wife) had returned
       to Brazil to get remarried. He said that he agreed that it was  best
       for his daughter to accompany her mother to Brazil as otherwise  she
       would have been alone in his flat all day whilst he was at work.

    9. Ms Everett submitted that the appellant's human rights appeal should
       be dismissed because the appellant has no basis to stay based on his
       daughter as she had left the UK and there is no known legal basis on
       which she could return. The appellant no  longer  has  a  valid  EEA
       residence card as this has been revoked, and there is no basis known
       to the respondent on which the  appellant  was  entitled  to  remain
       under the Immigration Rules.  His  appeal  outside  the  Immigration
       Rules on Article 8 ECHR could not succeed as his removal from the UK
       was clearly proportionate.

   10. The appellant accepted that he did not know of any  legal  basis  on
       which his daughter would be entitled to re-enter the  UK,  and  also
       said that currently there were practical issues with  her  doing  so
       due to quarantines and the Covid-19 pandemic. He understood that the
       Italian government had cancelled  his  ex-wife's  Italian  residence
       card, although he did not know why this had  happened,  but  he  had
       seen a letter to her from the Italian authorities when he went  back
       to live at St Johns Avenue.  He  made  no  submission  that  he  was
       entitled to remain due to any EEA right to remain. He had  made  the
       human rights application to  the  respondent  for  himself  and  his
       daughter as a result of the apparent  withdrawal  of  his  ex-wife's
       Italian nationality, as had his ex-wife.

   11. The appellant submitted that he wished to remain in the  UK  because
       he had lived here for ten years since November 2011 and  had  worked
       as a courier and more recently as a bus driver. He  wanted  to  stay
       because he hoped to develop in his career so that he could train bus
       drivers. He had been given training and other learning opportunities
       by his employer and felt that these possibilities would not be  open
       to him in Brazil.

   12. At the end of the remaking hearing we told  the  appellant  that  we
       would dismiss his appeal, and briefly outlined the reasons for this,
       but did not give an oral judgment.

Conclusions - Remaking

   13. We find that the appellant no longer has an EEA  residence  card  or
       any evidence of an EEA right to remain in the UK.  He  accepts  that
       the Italian authorities have withdrawn his ex-wife's entitlement  to
       her Italian identity card.

   14. We find that the appellant cannot argue that he  has  any  right  to
       remain in the UK relating to his  minor  daughter  as  she  has  now
       returned to Brazil, her country of nationality, with her mother  and
       the appellant could not identify any legal basis on  which  she  can
       now return to the UK and none was apparent to us either.

   15. The appellant therefore puts forward a private life Article  8  ECHR
       case to remain in the UK. He does not argue or adduce evidence  that
       he would have very significant obstacles to integration if  returned
       to Brazil and therefore his appeal cannot succeed  by  reference  to
       paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

   16. If the appeal is looked at my  widely  under  Article  8  ECHR  only
       little weight can be given his private life connections to  the  UK,
       applying s117B(4) and (5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
       Act 2002, because all of his ties to the UK have been formed  whilst
       he has been precariously (as he has not  held  indefinite  leave  to
       remain) or perhaps unlawfully present. As  such  we  can  only  give
       little weight to the appellant's ties to the UK made through his ten
       years of work or his training and aspirations to advance in a career
       with London United Busways Ltd. Further, although the appellant said
       that he would not expect to be able  to  advance  his  career  in  a
       similar way in Brazil it would seem likely  that  bus  drivers  have
       some sort of training in that country and ultimately the put forward
       no reasoning as to why he would not be able to get some work in  his
       country of nationality so as to be able to  support  himself.  As  a
       result we find that there is nothing of any significant weight  that
       can  be  balanced  against  the  public  interest   in   maintaining
       immigration control and refusing those who are not able to  show  an
       ability to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, and  thus
       that ultimately when all the evidence is considered that the removal
       of the appellant is a proportionate interference with his  right  to
       respect for private life.



          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

   3. We re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it on human rights
      grounds.



Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                         Date:  7th July 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley






