
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/15626/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 November 2018                 |On 16 November 2018                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Z F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Paur (counsel) instructed by Sadozai solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. To preserve the anonymity direction made by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I
make an anonymity order under Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Frazer, promulgated on 20  April  2018
which allowed the Appellant's appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 5 May 1975 and is a  national  of  Afghanistan.
The appellant entered the UK as the  spouse  of  a  British  Citizen  on  20
October 2012. Further leave to remain was extended by the  respondent  until
22 January 2017. On 16 January 2017  the  appellant  applied  for  leave  to
remain as the spouse of a person settled in the UK. The  respondent  refused
the  appellant's  application  on  9  November  2017,  believing  that   the
appellant had (earlier)  fraudulently  obtained  an  English  language  test
certificate. The respondent's decision relies on  paragraph  322(5)  of  the
immigration rules and S-LTR.1.6 of appendix FM  of  the  immigration  rules.
The respondent considered paragraph EX.1 of the immigration rules but  found
that the were no insurmountable obstacles to the appellant and  her  partner
continuing their family life outside the  UK.  The  respondent  acknowledged
that the appellant's child is a British citizen  but  reached  the  decision
believing that the respondent's conduct outweighed her right to family  life
with a British child because the appellant's partner would be able  to  care
for the British citizen child if the appellant returned to  Afghanistan  and
her husband decided to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Frazer ("the Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 2  August  2018  Judge  Baker
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "4. The Judge had found at [16] that the evidence before him  was  such
    so as to justify the decision under paragraph 322(5). He found at  [36]
    that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  her
    husband and son who are both British citizens. He considered  the  best
    interests of the child at [18] and [19], having particular regard to SF
    and others (guidance, post-2014 act) [2017] UKUT 120


    5. The Judge applied the guidance from the Home Office to the facts and
    concluded that as the child was a British citizen, the guidance did not
    indicate that a fraudulent misrepresentation such as the use  of  proxy
    to obtain English language test results  would  counter  sufficient  to
    separate a mother and child and he found that the conduct would have to
    be at a level of serious gravity to justify the decision.


    6. There was no finding as to whether the conduct  of  the  appellant's
    behalf could amount to "a very poor immigration history" as referred to
    in the guidance.


    7. Further the grounds are arguably further made out as the  Judge  did
    not consider the section 117B issues, other than section 117B(6) within
    the determination and which is a mandatory requirement as  asserted  in
    the grounds.


    8. Permission is granted"

The Hearing

5. For the respondent, Mr Diwnycz moved the grounds of appeal.  He  told  me
that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. He told me that the Judge  found  that  the
appellant employed deception to obtain an English language test  certificate
but did not go on to consider whether that conduct amounts to "a  very  poor
immigration  history".  The  absence  of  that   finding   demonstrates   an
inadequate consideration of the respondent's  IDIs.  He  told  me  that  the
Judge did not properly apply the reasonableness test found in s.117B(6)  and
instead found Section 55 of the 2009 Act to be determinative of the  appeal.
He asked me to allow the appeal and set the decision aside.

6. For the appellant, Mr Paur adopted the terms  of  the  skeleton  argument
for the appellant. He took me through the decision and told me that at  [11]
the Judge cites section 117B of the 2002 Act. The  Judge  then  goes  on  to
make findings in relation to section 117B, and, at  [18]  of  the  decision,
specifically applies the reasonableness test.  He  told  that  at  [20]  the
Judge adequately sets out the reasons for  her  findings.  He  urged  me  to
dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

7. It is an accepted fact that  at  the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
hearing the appellant had one child and was pregnant with her second  child.
The second child is now safely  delivered.  The  appellant's  husband  is  a
British citizen. Both of their children are British citizens.

8. The respondent refused the appellant's application for  leave  to  remain
in the UK relying on paragraph 322(5) of the  immigration  rules.  Paragraph
322(5) of  the  Immigration  Rules  is  one  of  the  "general  grounds  for
refusal". It states that applications for leave to remain should  normally
be refused where it would be undesirable for a person to remain  in  the  UK
in light of their conduct, character or associations.  The  Judge  finds  at
[16] (for the reasons adequately set out between [13]  and  [16])  that  the
appellant used a proxy  test  taker  to  obtain  an  English  language  test
certificate.

9. The only competent ground of appeal against the respondent's decision  is
on article 8 ECHR grounds. At [17] the Judge commences consideration of  the
article 8 ECHR  grounds  of  appeal.  The  Judge's  findings  are  that  the
appellant cannot meet the immigration rules.  When  considering  article  8,
the Judge is obliged to take account of section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

10. At [11] of the decision  the  Judge  makes  a  flawless  self-direction,
reminding herself of the need to consider section 117B of the 2002  Act.  At
[18] of  the  decision  the  Judge  considers  the  best  interests  of  the
appellant's British citizen child and  identifies  the  reasonableness  test
set out in section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

11. At [19] the Judge correctly takes guidance from SF and others  (guidance
post 2014 act) [2017] UKUT 120, and considers the terms of the  respondent's
own guidance.

12.   In R (on the application MA (Pakistan) and Others)  v  Upper  Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  it  was
held that in light of the jurisprudence of the  Supreme  Court,  courts  and
tribunals were not mandated to approach the proportionality  exercise  where
the best interests of the child were in issue in any particular  order  such
that it was an error of law for them to fail to do so:.  Although  it  would
usually be sensible to start with the child's best interests, ultimately  it
did not matter how the balancing exercise was conducted  provided  that  the
child's best interests were treated as a primary  consideration  (paras  49,
53-57 and 72).   In  Kaur  (children's  best  interests  /  public  interest
interface) [2017] UKUT  14  (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the  best  interests
assessment should normally be carried out at the beginning of the  balancing
exercise.

13. In Kaur (children's best interests / public interest  interface)  [2017]
UKUT 14 (IAC) it was held that the "little weight" provisions in Part 5A  of
the 2002 Act do not  entail  an  absolute,  rigid  measurement  or  concept;
"little  weight"  involves  a  spectrum  which,  within  its  self-contained
boundaries, will  result  in  the  measurement  of  the  quantum  of  weight
considered appropriate in the fact sensitive context of every case.

14.  In R (on the application of MA (Pakistan) and Others) v Upper  Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  it  was
confirmed that if section 117B(6) applies then "there can be no  doubt  that
section 117B(6) must be read as a  self-contained  provision  in  the  sense
that Parliament has stipulated that where the conditions  specified  in  the
sub-section are satisfied, the public interest will not justify removal."

15.  The guidance given by the respondent in the IDIs  on  Family  Migration
(February 2018) is that the questions a decision maker should pose are:

      (i) is there a genuine and subsisting parental relationship?
      (ii) is the child a British citizen or have they lived in the UK for a
      continuous period of at least 7 years?
      (iii) will the consequence of the refusal of the application  be  that
      the child is required to leave the UK?
      (iv) would it be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK.  In
      many cases where one parent has a right to remain in the UK, the child
      would not leave?

16. The respondent's guidance suggests that the test is  whether  the  child
would be likely to leave rather than actually be  required  to  leave.   The
Home Office now say in those circumstances EX.1 (a) and s.117B(6) would  not
apply but the impact on the child of the appellant's departure from  the  UK
should be considered taking into account the best interests of the child  as
a primary consideration and if refusal would  lead  to  unjustifiably  harsh
consequences, then  leave  can  be  granted  on  the  basis  of  exceptional
circumstances.

17. It does not follow that section 117B(6) should  be  interpreted  in  the
same way as the SSHD  interprets  his  immigration  rules.   In  R  (on  the
application of MA (Pakistan) and Others) v Upper Tribunal  (Immigration  and
Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016] EWCA Civ 705 it was held (see [19])  that
when applying section 117B(6) only three questions needed  to  be  asked  as
long as the applicant was not liable to  deportation,  and  those  questions
are

      (i) is there a genuine and subsisting parental relationship?
      (ii) is the child a British citizen or have they lived in the UK for a
      continuous period of at least 7 years?
      (iv) would it be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK?

18. The  respondent's  own  IDIs  say  that  it  is  not  reasonable  for  a
qualifying child to leave the UK. On the facts as the Judge  found  them  to
be s.117B(6) weighs in the appellant's favour.  The  Judge's  interpretation
of s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act  (correctly)  follows  the  guidance  given  in
MA(Pakistan). There is no  substance  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.  A  fair
reading of the Judge's decision makes it clear  that  the  Judge  considered
the  article  8  grounds  of  appeal  properly.  The  Judge  considered  the
appellant's child's best interest in accordance with s.55 of the  2009  Act,
and applied the statutory test (reasonableness)  required  by  s.117B(6)  of
the 2002 Act.

19. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

20. A fair reading of the decision demonstrates that the Judge  applied  the
correct test in law. The Judge carried out a holistic assessment of  all  of
the  evidence.  There  is  nothing  wrong  with  the  Judge's   fact-finding
exercise. In reality the respondent's appeal amounts to little more  than  a
disagreement with the way the Judge has applied the facts as she found  them
to be. The respondent might not like the conclusion that the  Judge  arrived
at, but that conclusion  is  the  result  of  the  correctly  applied  legal
equation. The correct test in law has been applied. The  decision  does  not
contain a material error of law.

21.   The decision does not contain a material error  of  law.  The  Judge's
decision stands.







DECISION

22.   The appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
promulgated on 20 April 2018, stands.



Signed
                   Date  9 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle







