
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15064/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5th August 2019                   |On 7th August 2019                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               BIODUM ADEYEMO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms [F A], sponsor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Mr Adeyemo made a  voluntary  departure  from  the  UK  to  Nigeria
         following the signing of a deportation order on 6th April 2006.  On
         8th December 2011 an application made to join his wife, Ms  [F  A],
         was refused on 8th December 2011.  His  appeal  was  dismissed  for
         reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 24th August  2012.  He
         was granted permission to appeal and the appeal came before  Deputy
         Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley. The presenting officer informed  the
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge that Mr Adeyemo was not  subject  to  a
         deportation order but had left the  UK  voluntarily  following  his
         criminal conviction. His appeal was allowed.

      2. After enquires were made by Mr Adeyemo  and  his  wife,  a  further
         application was made, the practical effect of which was to  require
         the SSHD to put into  effect  the  decision  of  the  Deputy  Upper
         Tribunal Judge. That led to a further refusal of the  human  rights
         claim on the basis that Mr Adeyemo was the subject of a deportation
         order and no application for revocation had been  made.  The  claim
         was also refused on other grounds, the substance of which  had  not
         been accepted by the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  in  her  decision
         promulgated on 22nd February 2013.

      3.  Before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ross,  Mr  Alagh,  the   SSHD
         presenting officer, stated (and this was  accepted  by  the  judge)
         that the deportation order 'expired' after 10 years  in  2016.  The
         First-tier Tribunal judge referred to the positive findings made at
         the earlier appeals and allowed the appeal.

      4. Mr Alagh was incorrect. The First-tier Tribunal  judge  incorrectly
         accepted  an  assertion  by  the  presenting   officer   that   the
         deportation order had 'expired after 10 years absence from the  UK.
         As made clear in the Immigration Rules, a deportation order remains
         in force, thus prohibiting entry to the UK, unless and until it  is
         revoked. As EYF (Turkey) [2019] EWCA Civ 592 makes clear, there  is
         no presumption that after 10 years has elapsed a deportation  order
         will be revoked. What is required by the Immigration  Rules  is  an
         individual assessment which means that once 10 years  has  elapsed,
         it becomes easier to argue that the balance has shifted  in  favour
         of revocation but that does not mean that revocation  is  automatic
         or presumed - see [28] of EYF.

      5. Ms [A] was understandably upset that the First-tier Tribunal  judge
         had erred in law such that the decision to allow the appeal was set
         aside. Neither she nor her husband, she said, had been  aware  that
         an application to revoke the deportation order had to be made and a
         decision taken on that application before an application for  entry
         clearance could be considered. Although the Immigration Rules  make
         clear that an individual will not meet the Suitability Requirements
         if subject to a deportation order, navigation around the  Rules  is
         complex and it would have been of assistance to Mr Adeyemo and  his
         wife if the decision  had  been  more  explicit  rather  than  just
         referring to lettered paragraphs of the Rules.

      6. Nevertheless, the First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law such  that
         the decision is set aside. I remake the decision  and  dismiss  the
         appeal: Mr Adeyemo remains subject to a deportation  order  and  as
         such cannot meet the suitability requirements of the Rules.




    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing Mr Adeyemo's  appeal
    against the refusal of his human rights claim.


     Date 5th August 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
