
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15703/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 November 2018                           |On 18 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                             Mr naeem ur rehman
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Lourdes, Counsel instructed on a public access
basis
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan  born  on  23  June  1975.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 12 May 2007, with entry clearance as a
    student and subsequently extended his leave to remain, applying out  of
    time for indefinite leave to remain and then varying  that  application
    to one based on long residence, on 4 May 2017.   This  application  was
    refused in a decision dated 7 November  2017,  the  Appellant  appealed
    against that  decision  and  his  appeal  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing on 16 April 2018 when it was adjourned, apparently
    for the Presenting Officer to file a Respondent's bundle  and  that  an
    adjournment request was not opposed by the Appellant's  representative.
    The hearing notice was sent out the following day, i.e. 17 April  2018,
    giving a new date for hearing of 10 August 2018 and this  was  sent  to
    the Appellant's home address.  However, on  10  August  2018  when  the
    matter came before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant did not appear
    and was not represented.  On that basis the judge  proceeded  with  his
    appeal and in a decision dated 11 September 2018 dismissed  the  appeal
    with reference to Article 8.

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  sought  in  time.  It
    appears the grounds of appeal were drafted by the Appellant himself and
    they assert that he was never made aware of the hearing date  scheduled
    to take place on 10 August 2018 and did not understand  on  what  basis
    the Immigration Judge was satisfied that he was  properly  notified  of
    the date of hearing.  The  Appellant  asserted  that  he  attended  the
    hearing on 16 April 2018 and had compiled the  Appellant's  bundle  and
    witness statement and that the Tribunal were aware that he had attended
    that hearing and his  compliance  in  filing  the  appeal  bundle,  his
    attendance at the Tribunal and obtaining a representative on  a  direct
    access basis, all signified his willingness to attend an  oral  hearing
    in order for him to give evidence. The second ground of appeal asserted
    that the appellant did not concede  that  he  did  not  meet  the  long
    residence requirements of the Rules.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Birrell
    in a decision dated 4 October 2018,  on  the  basis  that  the  grounds
    disclose an arguable error of law.

     Hearing

 4. At the hearing before me, Mr Lourdes who  had  appeared  also  for  the
    Appellant at the hearing on 16 April 2018, which  had  been  adjourned,
    submitted simply  that  given  that  the  Appellant  had  attended  the
    Tribunal on 16 April it was credible  that  he  had  not  received  the
    notice of hearing in respect of the hearing on 10 August because if  he
    had received it he surely would have attended in order to  put  forward
    his case and give oral evidence to the judge.

 5. In her submissions Ms  Everett  acknowledged  the  rationale  that  the
    Appellant had attended previously and that that supported  his  version
    of events that simply he did not receive the hearing notice.

     Decision and Reasons

 6. I find a material error of law in the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Boyes.  Whilst it is apparent  from  the  Tribunal  file  that  a
    hearing notice was sent to the Appellant on 17 April 2018 and was  sent
    to the address at which he continues to reside and the judge at [3] was
    properly entitled to take this into account,  I  find  that  the  judge
    arguably fell into error at [3] in finding that it was in the interests
    of justice to proceed, given that it was clear from the file that there
    had been a previous hearing which the  Appellant  had  attended  on  16
    April 2018 and he had also been represented at that  time.   Therefore,
    given the lack of opposition by Ms Everett to the appeal and  in  light
    of the maladministration that occurred, I  find  that  there  has  been
    procedural unfairness on the particular facts of this case.

 7. In respect of the issue of whether or not the Appellant  can  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276B of the Rules, read with the Home  Office
    guidance then in force, i.e. the long residence guidance  published  on
    24 November 2016, the judge's finding at  [7] that the  Appellant  does
    not appear to dispute this, is not sustained  by  the  content  of  his
    witness statement where the  Appellant  appears  to  be  continuing  to
    prosecute his appeal on the basis that he does meet the long  residence
    requirements: see [12] through to [17] of that statement.

 8. In these circumstances, the only fair course of action is to remit  the
    appeal for a hearing de novo before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Given
    that the Appellant resides in Slough it would seem more appropriate for
    his appeal to be transferred to the Hatton Cross Hearing Centre  rather
    than to Newport and I so direct. No anonymity direction is made.

     Notice of decision

9.   I find material errors of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First  tier
Tribunal Judge Boyes. I    remit the appeal for a  hearing  de  novo  before
the First tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                              Date 7.12.18

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

