
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/15337/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Hill Street, Birmingham              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 September 2018                          |On 15 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                 Sandeep [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Brooks, instructed by Super Immigration
Services Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department.  I shall refer to  Sandeep  [K]  as  the  claimant
    herein.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of India, born May 1978.  She arrived in  the
    United Kingdom on 21 September 2009 with leave to enter as  a  student,
    valid until 09 April 2011.  Thereafter she made an application  for  an
    extension of such leave, which was refused  on  01  November  2012.   A
    further application for leave to remain was  made  on  the  basis  that
    requiring the claimant to leave the UK would breach her  human  rights.
    This application  was  refused  in  October  2013,  with  a  subsequent
    application made on 02 October 2015 in the same vein being  refused  on
    03 June 2016.  It is this latter decision refusing the claimant's human
    rights application that was the subject of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. The foundation of the claimant's assertions centre on her  relationship
    with [RS], a British Citizen whom she has lived with in a  relationship
    akin to marriage.  The  appellant  has  unsuccessfully  undertaken  IVF
    treatment.  Mr [S] has two British children from  his  first  marriage.
    The claimant also cares for Mr [S]'s parents.  They have been unable to
    register their marriage in the United Kingdom because the Secretary  of
    State holds the claimant's passport and failed to  return,  even  after
    being requested to do so.

Secretary of State's decision letter

 4. The Secretary of State initially concluded that the  claimant  did  not
    meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules,  finding  as  follows
    regarding the suitability requirements under the family route (found in
    paragraph R-LTRP.1.1.(d)(i) of Appendix FM to the Rules):

         "On 22 August 2012, you purported to take  a  TOEIC  speaking  test
         with Educational Testing Service ("ETS") at Colwell College.   This
         test was withdrawn by ETS, and declared Questionable on the grounds
         that widespread test fraud was known to have occurred at the centre
         where you sat the test.  You  were  therefore  asked  to  attend  a
         further interview.

         At the interview on 18 May 2016, the decision-maker

         3 acting on behalf of the Secretary of State concluded that you had
         obtained your original  ETS  certificate  by  deception.   This  is
         because you  required  an  interpreter  to  assist  you  with  your
         interview.  The TOEIC certificate was awarded at level B2 - on  the
         Common European Framework of Reference for Languages  (CEFR).   The
         CEFR defines someone at B2 level as having "... a sufficient  range
         of language to describe unpredictable situations, explain the  main
         points in an idea or problem with reasonable precision and  express
         thoughts on abstract or cultural topics such as music and films."

         In addition to this during the interview on 18 May  2016  you  were
         unable to give any specific details of what the  test  involved  as
         evidenced by your answers to question 24.  This  is  below  the  B2
         level you have previously  evidenced.   It  is  not  credible  that
         having lived in the United Kingdom continuously since  taking  your
         TOEIC  test,  your  English   language   proficiency   would   have
         deteriorated to the level displayed at interview on  18  May  2016.
         The  Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied,  on  the  basis  of   the
         information provided to her by ETS and your  interview  assessment,
         that your certificate was fraudulently obtained.

         At the time you took your test, as you will have  been  aware,  ETS
         was an approved provider of Secure English  Language  Tests  (SELT)
         for UK immigration purposes.  Its role as a SELT  provider  was  to
         help ensure that those who seek to enter or remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom are able to speak English.  As recognised in  para  117B(2)
         of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, those who  can
         speak English are less of a burden on taxpayers and are better able
         to integrate into society.  Although you did not rely on your TOEIC
         certificate for the purposes  of  your  application  for  leave  to
         remain, your complicity in the fraud nonetheless contributed to  an
         extremely  serious  attack  on   the   maintenance   of   effective
         immigration controls and the public interest more generally.

         Accordingly, I am satisfied that your presence in  the  UK  is  not
         conducive  to  the  public  good  because  your  conduct  makes  it
         undesirable to allow you to remain the  UK.   Your  application  is
         therefore refused under paragraph  S-LTR.1.6]  of  the  Immigration
         Rules."

 5. It was also concluded that the claimant did not  meet  the  eligibility
    requirements of the rule, as she was not  a  "partner"  as  defined  in
    paragraph  GEN.1.2.  of  Appendix  FM;  nor,  it  was  said,  were  the
    requirements paragraph EX.1. of the Rules met.

 6. Turning to the issue of private life under the  Immigration  Rules,  it
    was concluded that the  claimant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE thereof. The SSHD also concluded that the  appellant's
    removal would not lead to a breach of Article 8 ECHR.

Grounds of Appeal

 7. The FtT allowed the claimant's appeal on Article ECHR grounds,  finding
    that the Secretary of State had not made out the  allegation  that  the
    claimant had committed a deception in obtaining the  TOIEC  certificate
    and  that  requiring  her  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom   would   be
    disproportionate in all the circumstances of the case.

 8. The challenge brought by the Secretary of State in the pleaded  grounds
    falls into two categories.  First, there is a particularised  challenge
    to the findings made in relation to the conclusion  that  the  claimant
    had not undertaken deception in obtaining the  TOEIC  certificate.  The
    second of the grounds brings a more general challenge to the conclusion
    that requiring the claimant to leave the United  Kingdom  would  breach
    Article 8.

 9. Taking these in turn, the first ground can  be  broken  down  into  the
    following components:

          i) The FtT erred in failing to make  a  finding  on  whether  the
             Secretary of State had discharged  the  evidential  burden  of
             proving that deception had occurred;

         ii) If the FtT accepted that the Secretary of State had discharged
             the evidential burden, then it erred  in  failing  to  make  a
             finding on whether  the  claimant  had  provided  an  innocent
             explanation,  such  that  the  burden  shifted  back  to   the
             Secretary of State:

        iii) If the FtT made a finding that the  appellant  had  discharged
             the burden upon her, it erred in failing to  consider  whether
             the Secretary of State had  thereafter  discharged  the  legal
             burden;

         iv) The FtT failed to take proper account of  the  fact  that  the
             claimant had requested the use of an interpreter for both  her
             interview with the Home Office and for the hearing,  a  factor
             which should have been treated as a strong indication that she
             used a proxy test taker  to  undertake  her  English  language
             examination, and thus committed deception;

          v) The FtT erred in requiring the Secretary of State to prove her
             case to a standard higher than the balance of probabilities.

10. As to the second ground,  it  was  submitted  that  the  FtT  erred  in
    concluding that the requirements of the Immigration Rules had been  met
    and, in any event, had further erred in concluding that the  claimant's
    removal would be disproportionate.

Oral Submissions

11. At the hearing, Mr Mills properly accepted that this was not a case  in
    which ETS had invalidated the claimant's test score but rather that the
    test result had been identified as questionable and had therefore  been
    cancelled. This was on the basis that 42% of the  tests  taken  on  the
    same date at the same test centre  as  the  claimant  purportedly  took
    hers, had been found to be invalid.

12. Mr Mills also clarified issues relating  to  the  claimant's  interview
    with the Home Office. The officer  who  had  interviewed  the  claimant
    concluded, in writing, that the claimant came across as genuine in  her
    attempts to recall what had happened on the day of the  test  and  that
    she appeared credible.  Below  the  typed  notes  of  the  interviewing
    officer a handwritten note is found  which  states  "found  to  be  not
    credible - applicant used an interpreter and was  unable  to  described
    what she had to do with her test Q24." Mr  Mills  confirmed  that  that
    hand-written note was  written  by  the  decision-maker  who  took  the
    decision in June 2016, the interview having taken place  on  8  January
    2015.

13. Mr Mills further indicated that the Secretary of  State  accepted  that
    ground 2 stood or fell with ground 1.

14. Mr Brooks was not called upon to make oral submissions.

Decision and Discussion

15. I turn first to the FtT's consideration of the  claimant's  use  of  an
    interpreter at her interview in January 2015 and at the hearing  before
    the FtT on 11 September 2017.  As to the former, the claimant  provided
    an explanation to the FtT which was considered and accepted  ([20]  and
    [22]). This was a path that the FtT was undoubtedly entitled  to  take.
    I note, in any event, that on  the  last  page  of  the  interview  the
    interviewing officer answered in the affirmative the question "Was  the
    applicant able to answer the questions in basic English?".  As  to  the
    use of an interpreter at the hearing before the FtT,  the  FtT  clearly
    took this into account and observed  that  the  claimant  provided  the
    majority of her responses in English [18].

16. Turning then to what is the core of the Secretary  of  State's  appeal,
    set out at paragraphs 9(i) to 9(iii) above.  It is trite law  that  the
    Secretary of State has the initial evidential burden  of  proving  that
    the  TOEIC  certificate  has  been  procured  by  dishonestly.  If  the
    Secretary of State meets this burden, then it is for  the  claimant  to
    provide  an  explanation  in  response.  If  that  explanation  is   of
    sufficient calibre the burden shifts back to the Secretary of State.

17. I accept that the FtT's decision  does  not  explicitly  refer  to  the
    shifting nature of the burden.  Nevertheless,  it  is  plain  from  the
    reading the decision as a whole that  the  FtT  carried  out  the  task
    required of it.  Had it not accepted that the Secretary  of  State  had
    met the initial evidential  burden  (by  production  of  evidence  from
    Rebecca Collins, Peter  Millington  and  the  report  on  the  forensic
    speaker comparison tests undertaken by ETS - see paragraphs 14 and  15)
    then it would not have been required to  go  on  and  consider  whether
    there was an innocent explanation.  It did  so  having  first  said  as
    follows:

         "Thus, at the  highest,  the  view  is  that  this  test  is  being
         questioned because widespread test fraud was known to have occurred
         at the centre at which the Appellant is  said  to  have  taken  her
         test.  I accept that this  may  provide  initial  grounds  for  the
         Respondent to investigate further."

18. The claimant's explanation and the evidence  supporting  it,  including
    the evidence from the immigration officer who interviewed the  claimant
    in 2015 to the effect that that officer believed the claimant, was then
    considered. A rational reading of the decision leads inexorably to  the
    conclusion that the FtT accepted the explanation  such  that  something
    more was required of the Secretary of  State  to  discharge  the  legal
    burden on him.

19. The Secretary of State put nothing further forward other than the hand-
    written note at the bottom on the January 2015 interview, which the FtT
    concluded was added as an afterthought but, in fact, we  now  know  was
    added by the decision-maker who had never  met  the  claimant.   Having
    looked at the entirety of the evidence, the FtT stated  as  follows  in
    paragraph 22:

         "... I therefore arrive at a conclusion that I cannot find even  on
         a balance of probabilities that the Appellant has utilised fraud to
         obtain the certificate let alone the higher threshold that would be
         required for fraud or deception."

20. This was a finding that the FtT was entitled to reach on  the  evidence
    available to it; indeed, it is the conclusion I would also have reached
    on the evidence available to the FtT.

21. As to the assertion that FtT erred in applying the  wrong  standard  of
    proof, this is hopeless.  One only needs to read the last  sentence  of
    paragraph 22 to identify the difficulty with this submission.  Even  if
    there is an error as claimed,  it  is  not  one  which  is  capable  of
    affecting the outcome of the appeal.

22. As to the second ground, as Mr Mills conceded that this ground stood or
    fell with the first ground.  I have  found  against  the  Secretary  of
    State on the first ground and, consequently, I conclude that the  FtT's
    decision should not be set aside.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal stands.


Signed:                                 Date: 9 October 2018
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
