
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/15896/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Wednesday 24 April 2019           |On Wednesday 09 May 2019             |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                PHILIP MATHEW
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Smyth, Counsel instructed by Kesar & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    BACKGROUND

      1. The Appellant appeals against a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
         Judge Hodgkinson promulgated on 1 November  2018  ("the  Decision")
         dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's
         decision dated 26 July 2018 refusing a  human  rights  claim.   The
         Respondent's decision was made following the making of a  conducive
         deportation  order  against  the  Appellant  on  22  February  2007
         pursuant to sections 3(6) and 5(1) Immigration Act 1971.

      2.  The  Judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
         Immigration Rules ("the Rules")  in  relation  to  his  family  and
         private life nor the exceptions within  Section  117C  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("Section  117C")  when  Article  8
         ECHR was considered outside the Rules.

      3. The Decision followed an earlier decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Lal promulgated on 29 August 2018 which  also  dismissed  the
         Appellant's appeal, but which  was  set  aside  by  Resident  Judge
         Campbell on 17 September 2018 because  Judge  Lal  had  applied  an
         incorrect  provision  of  the  Rules.  That  is  relevant  to   the
         Appellant's central ground of appeal as now argued.

      4. The Appellant has a lengthy immigration  history  which  I  do  not
         propose to set out.  It is adequately recorded at [4]  to  [17]  of
         the Decision.  For present purposes, I summarise the relevant parts
         of his history as follows.

      5. The Appellant, who is a  national  of  Nigeria,  was  sentenced  to
         thirty  months'  imprisonment   and   nine   months'   imprisonment
         concurrent for conspiracy  to  defraud  and  attempting  to  remove
         criminal property from England and Wales on 22 August 2006.  He was
         deported in March 2007 and August  2007  to  Nigeria  but  on  both
         occasions, he returned in breach of the deportation order.  He  was
         convicted again on 2 August 2017 of possessing a controlled article
         for use in frauds and using a vehicle without  insurance.   He  was
         sentenced to one year and three months' imprisonment on 20  October
         2017.

      6. As to his human rights, the Appellant claims to have arrived in the
         UK in 1994 with his parents (aged then about twenty-one years)  but
         that  is  disputed.   He  first  came  to  the  attention  of   the
         authorities in 2005 when he was arrested and served  notice  as  an
         overstayer.  He returned to the UK from Nigeria  after  March  2007
         before August 2007.  After his second deportation, he next came  to
         the authorities' attention on 3 June  2017  when  he  was  arrested
         again.

      7. The main focus of the Appellant's claim is  his  relationship  with
         his children. He has four children, three of whom are still minors,
         with his wife. At least one of  the  children,  (E)  is  a  British
         citizen and the other minor children and the Appellant's wife  have
         limited leave  ([43]  of  the  Decision:  those  findings  are  not
         challenged).

    THE DECISION, GROUNDS OF APPEAL AND GRANT OF PERMISSION

      8. Judge Hodgkinson did not accept that the Appellant  has  a  genuine
         and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  his  children.   The
         Appellant is estranged from his wife.  At the time of  the  hearing
         before Judge Hodgkinson, he had a Parental Responsibility Order  in
         his favour, made in June 2018, in relation to the  minor  children.
         As the Judge observed, that  did  not  grant  any  contact  rights.
         Judge Hodgkinson concluded that the best  interests  of  the  minor
         children  were  not  materially   affected   by   the   Appellant's
         deportation and that the effect would not in any  event  be  unduly
         harsh for his wife and children if the Appellant were deported  and
         they were to remain in the UK without him.  Having  considered  the
         circumstances also outside the Rules, he concluded that deportation
         would not have a disproportionate impact on either the  Appellant's
         private or family life.  He therefore dismissed the appeal.

      9. The Appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  in  person,  those  being
         received by the First-tier Tribunal  on  5  December  2018.   By  a
         decision dated 13 December 2018, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Keane
         granted permission to appeal in the following terms so far as still
         relevant:

             "1. The appellant applied in-time  for  permission  to  appeal
             against the decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             Hodgkinson promulgated on 1 November 2018 in which  the  judge
             dismissed the appeal on human rights (Article 8) grounds ...

             I have considered the judge's decision in order  to  ascertain
             whether it disclosed an arguable error or errors  of  law  but
             for which the outcome of the appeal might have been different.
              The judge at paragraph 47  of  his  decision  referred  to  a
             hearing which took place before a judge (the first  judge)  in
             August  2018.   The  judge  referred  to  evidence  which  the
             appellant's sister-in-law gave  at  the  hearing.   The  judge
             referred to a second witness who gave evidence at the hearing.
              The judge referred to evidence which the  appellant  gave  at
             that hearing.  Further, on 17 September 2018, a Resident Judge
             of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  reviewed  the   first   judge's
             decision, and at paragraph 5 of the notice which the  Resident
             Judge settled found that the decision, "...is unsafe and so  I
             set it aside".  The judge in taking into  account  proceedings
             which resulted in an unsafe decision  arguably  perpetrated  a
             procedural irregularity which materially affected the  outcome
             and the fairness of the proceedings  before  the  judge.   The
             judge's decision disclosed an arguable error of  law  but  for
             which the outcome of the appeal  might  have  been  different.
             The application for permission is granted."

     10. I note for completeness that in the  section  between  the  recital
         concerning the application made and  the  Judge's  conclusion  that
         permission should be granted, he dealt with the grounds put forward
         by the Appellant and rejected them all on the basis that  they  did
         not disclose an arguable error of law.

     11. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision  contains
         a material error of law and if so to either remit the appeal to the
         First-tier Tribunal or to re-make the decision.

     12. The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 Notice on 8 January 2019 seeking
         to uphold the Decision in the following terms so far as relevant:

             "... 3. At Paragraphs 38 and 48 of the determination the Judge
             of the FTT reminds himself that the previous decision was  set
             aside and that the findings  of  the  previous  Judge  do  not
             stand, but finds that he is entitled to take into account  the
             evidence that was before the previous Judge  and  recorded  in
             his determination.

             4.  The Respondent submits that the Judge of the FTT  has  not
             sought to adopt the findings of the previous Judge,  accepting
             that  they  have  been  set  aside,  but  that  the   evidence
             previously before the Tribunal is a matter of record  and  the
             Judge of the FTT was entitled to take it into consideration.

             5.  The Respondent submits that  the  determination  therefore
             discloses no material error of law."

     13. The Appellant has made an application to adduce  further  documents
         under Rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
         2008.  Mr Smyth  accepted  that  these  were  not  relevant  to  my
         consideration of the Decision unless I find an error of law and  go
         on to re-make  the  decision.   However,  the  Appellant's  witness
         statement dated 18  April  2019  with  that  application  has  some
         relevance to an issue in relation to timeliness of the  application
         for permission to appeal with which I deal below.

    DISCUSSION

    Timeliness of Application for Permission to Appeal

     14. Mr Smyth very fairly drew my attention at the outset  to  the  fact
         that the application made by the Appellant was out  of  time  under
         the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier)  (Immigration   and   Asylum
         Chamber) Rules 2014 ("the Procedure Rules").   Rule  33(2)  of  the
         Procedure Rules is to the effect that an application for permission
         to appeal to the Upper Tribunal must be made so that it is received
         within fourteen days from the date when the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         decision is "provided".

     15. In this case, the Decision  was  sent  on  1  November  2018.   The
         Appellant says in his latest witness  statement  that  he  did  not
         receive the Decision until 14 November 2018.  He was  in  detention
         at the relevant time.  The application was dated 28 November  2018.
         The Appellant has annexed to his latest  witness  statement  a  fax
         transmission sheet showing that documents were sent to the Tribunal
         on 29 November 2018. He says that he watched his application  being
         sent in the afternoon of 28 November.  He says that faxes were  not
         sent immediately because he was in detention but  he  received  the
         confirmation on the following day and  it  was  not  until  he  was
         notified of removal directions on 4 December 2018, that  he  became
         aware that the application had not been received by the Tribunal at
         which point he re-sent it.

     16. I am prepared to accept the Appellant's account  of  events  and  I
         therefore accept that the application was made on 29 November 2018.
          Mr Smyth sought an extension of time.  The extent of the extension
         is fifteen days if "provided" in Rule 33(2) is to be read as "sent"
         or one day if it is to be read as "received".  Mr Smyth argued that
         I should interpret Rule 33(2) in the latter sense as the  Procedure
         Rules use the word "sent" in other contexts and  Rule  33(2)  would
         have used that word if that was what was intended.

     17. Neither party was able to direct me to authority on the meaning  of
         the word "provided" in Rule 33(2) of the Procedure Rules.   I  have
         been unable to find any relevant authority.  Speaking for myself, I
         would interpret that word as equivalent to "sent".  It may be  that
         the word "provided" is used  instead  of  "sent"  in  this  context
         because,  in  certain   circumstances,   Tribunal   decisions   are
         despatched via the  Respondent  rather  than  directly.   The  word
         "provided" has the connotation of "given" and not "received" in its
         natural meaning.

     18. However, I do not consider that I need  to  decide  the  point  for
         three reasons.  First, Judge Keane has referred to the  application
         in the grant as being "in-time".  Whilst that may well be an  error
         made by the  Judge,  it  is  nonetheless  an  indication  that  the
         application was admitted.  In spite of Mr Smyth's submission to the
         contrary, I do not consider it is either necessary  or  appropriate
         for me to re-visit that question.  Second,  even  if  Mr  Smyth  is
         right to say that I ought to reconstitute myself  as  a  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge in  order  to  consider  the  question,  it  is  not
         necessary to distinguish between a delay of  one  day  and  fifteen
         days based on the chronology put  forward  by  the  Appellant.   On
         either analysis, he has provided  a  reason  for  the  delay  which
         applies in either  case.   Third,  and  in  any  event,  Mr  Jarvis
         indicated that he did not object to the extension sought.  I  agree
         that, on the Appellant's evidence, there is  good  reason  for  the
         delay.  He was not made aware of the  Decision  until  14  November
         2018 and made efforts to comply with the time limit thereafter.  He
         was in detention and therefore would be  at  some  disadvantage  in
         preparing his case (although he was in person).

     19. Accordingly, if I need to consider the matter (which I do not think
         I do), I accept that there was good reason for the delay be  it  of
         one day or fifteen days (or on the basis of  date  of  sending  and
         date of receipt about twenty-one days).  I  therefore  extend  time
         for the application so far as it is necessary to do so.

    The Substantive Appeal in Relation to Error of Law

     20. I turn then to the Appellant's grounds submitting that the Decision
         discloses an error of law.  Again, very fairly, Mr  Smyth  did  not
         argue the Appellant's pleaded grounds but rather  focussed  on  the
         basis of the grant of permission.  The sole issue therefore is  the
         Judge's approach to the evidence recorded in  the  previous  appeal
         decision and the impact of that in  the  context  of  the  findings
         about the Appellant's family life  having  regard  to  the  ongoing
         family proceedings referred to in the additional evidence (although
         I reiterate that Mr Smyth accepted that I could not have regard  to
         the recent evidence about that when considering whether  there  was
         an error of law disclosed in the Decision).

     21. Having heard Mr Jarvis' submissions  and  considered  the  case  of
         Swash v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA  Civ
         1093 to which Mr Jarvis referred, Mr Smyth accepted that the  point
         made in his  skeleton  argument  that  "a  Tribunal  Judge  is  not
         entitled to have regard to a summary of the evidence contained in a
         decision which has been set aside" went too far.

     22. Although, as Mr Jarvis accepted, the case of Swash  considered  the
         position under the previous appeal regime where the  two  tiers  of
         the  Tribunal  were  merged,  and  the   Tribunal   was   therefore
         reconsidering a decision, what is said by the Court  of  Appeal  at
         [20] of that judgment remains relevant to the issue here:

             "[20]     Miss Giovannetti is correct  to  say  that  the  new
             regime  requires  the  Tribunal  to  consider   the   original
             determination. In many cases the error of  law  identified  by
             the Tribunal will not invalidate all, or indeed  any,  of  the
             facts  found.  In  such  circumstances,  where  the   Tribunal
             transfers the proceedings to enable  additional  facts  to  be
             found, the Immigration  Judge  to  whom  the  proceedings  are
             transferred will need to see the original decision. I consider
             that it would not be  satisfactory  to  attempt  to  formulate
             principles governing when the judge should and when he  should
             not  see  the  original  decision.  It  seems   to   me   more
             satisfactory  that,  as  a  general  rule,  a  judge  to  whom
             proceedings   are   transferred   in   the   course   of   the
             reconsideration of  an  appeal  should  receive  the  original
             decision. Even if the findings of fact are invalidated  for  a
             reason of law, such as the application of the  wrong  standard
             of proof, issues identified in the original decision may  well
             be of assistance to the judge to whom the  transfer  has  been
             made. In those circumstances the judge must be careful not  to
             be influenced by the  discredited  findings,  but  that  is  a
             typical requirement of a judge and one well within  a  judge's
             capability."

     23. What is said in Swash in fact goes further than it is necessary  to
         go in this case.  In that case, the Court of Appeal  accepted  that
         the  Judge  could   consider   findings   of   a   previous   Judge
         notwithstanding the setting aside of the previous Judge's decision.
          In this case, Judge Hodgkinson sought only to have regard  to  the
         evidence recorded.  He was entitled to do so.

     24. I begin by setting out the parts of the Decision which are relevant
         to my consideration of the parties' submissions as follows.  First,
         at [48] to [50] of the Decision, the Judge said this:

             "[48]     I appreciate and reiterate that the Judge's findings
             do not stand.  However, I am, of course, entitled to take into
             account the evidence which was before him and recorded by  him
             in his decision.

             [49]      Having considered the available  relevant  evidence,
             as set out above, I conclude that the appellant does not  have
             a genuine and subsisting relationship with his wife  and  that
             he has failed to establish that he has, or wishes to have, any
             genuine or subsisting relationship with any of  his  children.
             I accept that he appears to have had some limited contact with
             his children, as is evidenced by the photographs  to  which  I
             have referred.  However, the evidence does not establish  that
             the appellant has had any contact of any description with  his
             children for at least the last 2-3 years.

             [50]      Clearly, the evidence  to  which  I  have  referred,
             within  this  section  of  my  decision,  is  relevant  to  my
             conclusion that there  was  no  good  reason  to  adjourn  the
             appellant's appeal, with reference to his indication that  his
             wife would have attended, had she been able to do  so.   I  am
             satisfied that he is estranged from her and  that  he  has  no
             ongoing contact with her or, in  the  recent  past,  with  the
             children.  I conclude that the appellant was even  willing  to
             be untruthful when giving oral evidence before me, in terms of
             where he was living when he was arrested, I concluding that he
             was living at the address in Kent referred to.  As noted by Mr
             Williams in  his  submissions,  at  a  recent  withdrawn  bail
             hearing/application of the appellant, he gave his bail address
             as being that of, as I understand it, Ms Savage, and  not  his
             claimed home address with his wife and children."

     25. The evidence recorded  by  Judge  Hodgkinson  is  set  out  in  the
         preceding paragraphs at [41] to [47] of the  Decision.   I  do  not
         need to record everything which is there said.  The Judge refers to
         the Parental Responsibility Order and accepts by reference to  this
         document that the Appellant is the father of the  children  ([41]).
         However, he finds at [44] of the Decision that "the  said  Parental
         Responsibility  Order  is  simply  that;  it  does  not  grant  the
         appellant any contact rights in relation to any  of  the  children.
         There is no evidence  that  he  has  submitted  an  application  in
         relation to such contact.  Indeed,  the  respondent's  position  is
         that the appellant simply issued the Parental Responsibility Order,
         in order to seek to frustrate his deportation, rather than it being
         for the purpose of the appellant genuinely having any interest  in,
         or contact with, his children".

     26. The main focus of the evidence upon which reliance is placed though
         is that dealing with the extent of the Appellant's contact with the
         children.  That is set out at [45]  to  [47]  of  the  Decision  as
         follows:

             "[45]     Turning further to the said  Cafcass  documentation,
             in Cafcass' letter of 6 June 2018 (X2-3 respondent's  bundle),
             it  is  noted  that  the  appellant's  wife  stated  that  the
             appellant had had no regular contact  with  the  children  for
             several years.  In Cafcass' letter of 4 June 2018 (X4-X5),  it
             is recorded that, in 2013, the appellant's wife  claimed  that
             she had not seen the  appellant  since  2008;  namely,  for  a
             period of 5 years between 2008 and 2013.  In the  said  Family
             Court order, it is noted therein  that  the  appellant's  wife
             stated that she did not wish to agree to the grant of parental
             responsibility to the  appellant  and  that  she  opposed  the
             making of any order, even though the relevant order  was  made
             by the Family Court.

             [46]      In cross-examination, Mr  Williams  noted  with  the
             appellant that, when he was arrested  in  2017,  he  gave  his
             address as being that of his brother in Kent, even though  the
             appellant claimed, in cross-examination, that at the  time  of
             his arrest, he was living with his wife and children in Essex.
              The appellant acknowledged that he had  given  his  brother's
             address but was unable to give any cogent  explanation  as  to
             why he had done so,  if  he  was  living  with  his  wife  and
             children.

             [47]      I note that, at the  hearing  before  the  Judge  in
             August 2018, the appellant's wife did not attend that hearing,
             in order to support him thereat, and that she did not  provide
             any statement or letter in support. The Judge heard from a  Ms
             Zoe Savage, the appellant's sister-in-law, who is one  of  the
             people who has provided a  supporting  letter.   However,  the
             Judge noted that the appellant's oral evidence before him  was
             that his wife and children  had  not  visited  him  whilst  in
             prison or immigration custody.   At  the  hearing  before  the
             Judge,  Ms  Savage  confirmed  that  she  had  last  seen  the
             appellant's wife a year previously but that contact had  since
             been broken off.  A  second  witness,  a  Mr  Akintola,  whose
             letter is also before me, similarly stated that  he  had  last
             seen the appellant's wife over  a  year  ago.   There  is  one
             further supporting letter amongst the documents before me  but
             its content is not material to the outcome of the  appeal  and
             does not really add to the balance of available evidence."

     27. I turn then to what was said about the evidence on  this  issue  by
         Judge Lal and on which Judge Hodgkinson relied since that forms the
         foundation of the ground upon which  permission  was  granted.   At
         [19] and [20] of Judge Lal's decision,  he  records  the  following
         evidence:

             "[19]     The next witness to give evidence was the sister  in
             law of the Appellant.  Ms Zoe Savage who  recalled  the  whole
             family living together as a family unit and she described them
             as close knit.  She accepted that she had last seen his wife a
             year ago but since then contact had been broken off.  She  had
             no knowledge that the relationship was abusive as  claimed  by
             the wife in 2013.

             [20]      The witness to give evidence  was  Mr  Akintola  who
             recalled the family coming to and from  church  together.   He
             had last seen the Appellant's wife over a year ago."

     28. I turn then to the written evidence of Ms Savage since  it  was  on
         her evidence that Mr Smyth focussed in his criticism of the way  in
         which the Judge dealt with this issue.  An e mail from her  appears
         at [AB/129] dated 21 August 2018 and reads as follows:

             "I am writing on behalf of MR PHILIP MATTHEW, to  support  his
             case.

             I have known MR Philip Matthew and his  wife  Bose  and  there
             children for the past 18 years

             I have been there when the last 3 where born and was  visiting
             Nigeria with my husband when his son [A] was  born.  They  are
             more like family to us, and my children have grown up to  call
             them family.

             Sunday has always been a day where Mr Matthew will come to  my
             house with his family after church.  His wife Bose and I  will
             cook and we all eat together and have a family gathering.

             Mr Matthew is a loving  devoted  father  and  husband  to  his
             family.

             There is many times where we will go together to  buy  clothes
             for his children, and when it was his wife's birthday he  will
             ask me to join him to pick presents for her.  He always  makes
             sure his children are clothed and I remember in many occasions
             where he will buy there school uniforms  a  few  weeks  before
             they are dew to return back to school, he always does his best
             to provide for them and make them happy.

             Mr Mathew and his family have always been close and happy, yes
             they have there ups and downs like any couple  would,  but  he
             always puts his family first.

             Sometimes Mr Matthew would invite my husband and  I  to  there
             church, where we did his last born, [E]'s naming ceremony.  Mr
             Mathew would do all  he  can  to  provide  for  his  wife  and
             children and sending him back to his  country  of  birth  will
             effect his children in many ways, which it has been  since  he
             has been in the immigration centre.

             Mr Mathew is a kind and loving man who makes every  one  smile
             with his beautiful spirit.

             Sending him back will not benefit him or his children.

             Please can you kindly give him the  opportunity  to  be  there
             while his children are growing up.

             They need each other more than one can imagine."

     29. The reference to the Appellant's family being  like  family  to  Ms
         Savage is somewhat odd since I understood (as apparently did Judges
         Hodgkinson and Lal) that she is in fact related to the Appellant by
         her marriage to his brother.  It  is  also  notable  that,  despite
         having known  the  Appellant  for  eighteen  years,  she  makes  no
         reference to his deportation back to Nigeria on  not  one  but  two
         occasions.  However, the  more  notable  omission  and  that  which
         caught Judge Hodgkinson's attention is the failure to mention  that
         Ms Savage had not seen the Appellant's wife for a year prior to the
         hearing  before  Judge  Lal  and  therefore  from  mid-2017.    The
         Appellant himself accepts  that  he  has  not  seen  his  wife  and
         children since he was detained in June 2017.

     30. Turning then to the statement of Mr Akintola ([AB/132]), that is by
         way of a letter which is undated.  It reads as follows:

             "This is to testify that  I  know  PHILIP  MATTHEW,  otherwise
             known as OLUSEYI ADELAJA since 2015.

             I know him, his wife and children.  He is a doting  father  to
             his children and a good husband to his wife.

             I am ready and  willing  to  offer  more  information  on  his
             behalf.  You can contact me [~] if necessary.

             Your cooperation would be highly appreciated, please."

         Although the letter is undated, it was apparently produced for  the
         hearing before Judge Lal.  Again, the omission of  any  mention  of
         the Appellant not having seen his wife for a year is notable.

     31. In fact, as Mr Smyth's submissions developed,  it  became  apparent
         that the focus was on the Judge's reference to  the  Appellant  not
         wanting to have contact with his children at [49] of  the  Decision
         when that is considered in the context of what  is  said  about  Ms
         Savage's evidence in particular at [47] of the Decision  when  that
         is also compared with what she says in her e mail and by Judge Lal.
          In essence, Mr Smyth argues that the Judge  was  not  entitled  to
         find that the Appellant did not  wish  to  have  contact  with  his
         children based on Ms Savage's written  evidence  as  summarised  by
         Judge Lal, that the Appellant has a "close-knit" relationship  with
         his wife and children.  Reliance was also placed on the Appellant's
         obtaining of a Parental Responsibility Order as evidence  that  his
         relationship with his children was genuine and subsisting and  that
         he did wish to reinstate that contact.

     32. I am unable to accept Mr Smyth's submission.  In  relation  to  the
         Parental Responsibility Order, as noted by the Judge at [44] of the
         Decision, the Respondent's position was that this had been obtained
         only in order to frustrate deportation.  In any event, as the Judge
         there observes, it does not grant the Appellant  contact  with  his
         children.

     33. In relation to the evidence of the witnesses, particularly that  of
         Ms Savage, her description of  the  closeness  of  the  Appellant's
         family has to be read (as Judge Hodgkinson did) in the  context  of
         her admission in previous oral evidence that she had not  seen  the
         Appellant's wife for a year previously (a fact not mentioned in her
         e- mail) and  the  Appellant's  own  evidence  that  his  wife  and
         children had not visited him whilst he was in prison or immigration
         custody.

     34. The Judge was bound to  consider  the  issue  of  the  relationship
         between the Appellant and his wife and children as at the  date  of
         the hearing before him.  At that date and based on all the evidence
         as recorded by the Judge, there is no error of law in  his  finding
         that the relationship was not a genuine and subsisting one.  As  it
         happens,  the  Appellant  has,  since  the  hearing  before   Judge
         Hodgkinson, initiated contact proceedings but he had not done so at
         that time and the Judge was therefore entitled to  the  finding  he
         reached about the Appellant's intentions.

     35. The Judge went on in any event to consider the  best  interests  of
         the children and whether it would be unduly harsh for the  children
         if they were to remain in the UK without him if he were deported to
         Nigeria.  The Judge provides reasons  for  finding  that  the  best
         interests of the children favour remaining with  their  mother  and
         that it would not be unduly harsh for them to remain  with  her  in
         the UK if the Appellant were deported, at  [54]  and  [55]  of  the
         Decision as follows:

             "[54]     As  there  are  children  involved  in  the  present
             instance, namely the appellant's three minor children, I  have
             also considered carefully their best  interests,  as  being  a
             primary consideration,  as  part  of  the  relevant  balancing
             exercise...Based upon my findings of fact,  I  concluded  that
             the appellant's removal from the UK  would  have  no  material
             adverse effect upon any of the children, as I find that he has
             not enjoyed any regular contact with  his  children  for  some
             time.  There has clearly been no contact with  them  since  he
             has been incarcerated and I conclude that their best interests
             lie in them remaining with their mother, whether it be in  the
             UK or Nigeria.  [S] is, of course, now an  adult  and  I  know
             nothing further about him.

             [55]      I conclude that the appellant's absence from the UK,
             with his children remaining in the UK,  would  not  be  unduly
             harsh in terms of  his  children's  interests  ([399(b)]),  it
             clearly not being an option to expect the appellant's wife and
             children to leave the UK, in order to return to  Nigeria,  one
             of those children at least being a qualified British child and
             the  remaining  children  quite  conceivably  being  qualified
             children."

     36. Mr Smyth says that what is there said is tainted by the finding  at
         [49] of the Decision about the subsistence of the relationship, the
         Judge having taken  into  account  his  earlier  factual  findings.
         However, what is said at [54] of the Decision refers only to actual
         contact and the lack thereof for some  time  (which  the  Appellant
         accepts is as a matter of fact correct).  The Judge's assessment of
         the children's best interests and whether it would be unduly  harsh
         for them to remain in the UK without the Appellant therefore  turns
         on a factually accurate position and does not factor in whether the
         Appellant may wish in the future to resume contact.

     37. For those reasons, I find that there is no  error  of  law  in  the
         Judge's findings, reasoning or conclusion regarding  the  issue  of
         the Appellant's contact with his children.  It follows that I  find
         there is  no  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the
         Appellant's family life claim and therefore his human rights  claim
         (his family life and not his private life being the subject of  the
         appeal before me).

     38. Mr Jarvis also submitted that the outcome of the appeal  would  not
         be any different even if the Judge erred in his conclusion that the
         Appellant did not intend to resume contact at some  point  and  had
         taken that into account at [54]  and  [55]  of  the  Decision.   He
         relied on the Court of Appeal's judgment in Mohan  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1363 and the guidance
         given at [18] of  the  judgment  by  reference  to  the  Tribunal's
         decision in RS (immigration and  family  court  proceedings)  India
         [2012] UKUT 00218 (IAC) as follows:

             "[18]     The material parts of that guidance are to be  found
             in the following extracts:

                  "43.  In  our  judgment,  when  a  judge  sitting  in   an
                  immigration appeal has to consider whether a person with a
                  criminal record or adverse immigration history  should  be
                  removed or deported  when  there  are  family  proceedings
                  contemplated by the judge should  consider  the  following
                  questions:

                      (i)   Is  the  outcome  of  the  contemplated  family
                      proceedings likely to be material to the  immigration
                      decision?

                      (ii)  Are there compelling public interest reasons to
                      exclude  the  claimant  from   the   United   Kingdom
                      irrespective of the outcome of the family proceedings
                      or the best interests of the child?

                      (iii) In the case of contact proceedings initiated by
                      an appellant in an immigration appeal, is  there  any
                      reason to believe that the  family  proceedings  have
                      been instituted to delay or frustrate removal and not
                      to promote the child's welfare?

                      (iv)  In assessing the  above  questions,  the  judge
                      will normally want to consider:  the  degree  of  the
                      claimant's previous interest in and contact with  the
                      child, the timing of the contact proceedings and  the
                      commitment with which they have been progressed, when
                      a decision is likely to be  reached,  what  materials
                      (if  any)  are  already  available  or  can  be  made
                      available to identify pointers to where  the  child's
                      welfare lies?"

     39. As Mr Jarvis  submitted  and  I  accept,  a  Judge  following  that
         guidance  would  have  to  consider  the  timing  of  the   contact
         proceedings, brought as they now have been, after  the  Appellant's
         appeal had been dismissed, the findings as to the  children's  best
         interests (which are not predicated  on  any  wrong  assumption  in
         relation to the relationship between the Appellant and his children
         even  if  the  earlier  finding  regarding  intention  is  a  wrong
         assumption) and the strength of the public interest  in  this  case
         which involves not only the Appellant's criminal offending but also
         his entry into the UK in breach of a deportation order on  not  one
         but two occasions.  Mr Jarvis submitted that  a  Judge  considering
         those  questions  would  be  bound  to  answer  them  against   the
         Appellant.  Mr Smyth submitted though that I should not decide  the
         case by reference to materiality in this way because it will be for
         the Family Court to decide what is in the children's best interests
         when considering the contact proceedings  and  that  Court's  views
         would  have  to  be  taken  into   account   when   assessing   the
         proportionality of deportation.  I do not need to decide  the  case
         in this way in any event due to my above conclusions that there  is
         no error or law in the Decision.

    Conclusion

     40. For all of the above reasons, I am satisfied that the Decision does
         not contain an error of law. Accordingly, I uphold the Decision.

    DECISION

    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material  error  of
    law. I uphold the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson
    promulgated  on  1  November  2018  with  the  consequence   that   the
    Appellant's appeal stands dismissed


    Signed [pic] Dated: 2 May 2019
    Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
