
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16040/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd November 2020                 |On 19th November 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                fahrije vitia
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Kate Jones instructed by Reiss Edwards Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Kosovo born on 15th March 1943 and is 76
    years old.  She made an application for leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of her private and family life on  13th  May  2019
    and this was refused by the respondent on  12th  September  2019  under
    paragraph 276ADE.  It was noted that she had flown unaccompanied to the
    United Kingdom when she had previously entered on 30th  November  2018.
    She entered on a visit visa valid until 18th  August  2019,  after  the
    death of her husband in 2018 and remained in the United Kingdom pending
    her application decision.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Buttar dismissed her appeal and the appellant
    with permission challenges that dismissal.

 3. The appellant's five children,  twelve  grandchildren  and  two  great-
    grandchildren all live  in  the  UK  and  are  British  citizens.   The
    appellant is said to have no relations in Kosovo.

 4. The grounds of appeal were as follows.  First, there was  an  erroneous
    consideration of material facts which materially informed  the  judge's
    Article 8 analysis.  The factual basis on which an analysis of  Article
    8 principles are to be considered is a crucial aspect with the exercise
    identified in EB (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2008] UKHL 41.

 5. The judge erred in her consideration of the medical  evidence  relevant
    to the ability of  the  appellant  to  travel  to  Kosovo.   The  judge
    determined that "In the absence of an updated  medical  report  I  find
    that she can travel to Kosovo as she travelled here in 2018" (paragraph
    30).

 6. The medical report however, submitted by Dr Balendra dated  2nd  August
    2019 stated that the appellant "Is currently not fit to  travel,  given
    that we do not know the full extent of her  ascending  thoracic  aortic
    aneurysm (and this could potentially be life threatening) and  requires
    urgent assessment which we are currently awaiting" (appellant's  bundle
    page 18).  The medical report constituted evidence that  the  appellant
    was currently not  fit  to  travel  and  this  evidence  postdated  the
    appellant travelling to the UK in November 2018.

 7. Consequently, it was submitted, the judge  made  an  erroneous  finding
    that the appellant was fit to travel, and  this  finding  informed  the
    subsequent Article 8 analysis.  That was a material error.

 8. Secondly, the judge  erred  in  consideration  of  the  care  currently
    provided by the appellant's two granddaughters Dafina and  Jetesa  with
    whom she lived.  Dr Balendra stated in the medical report the appellant
    was unable to walk  without  assistance  and  she  struggles  with  all
    activities of daily living  and  requires  assistance  with  everything
    including showering, dressing, cooking, eating, cleaning,  feeding  and
    shopping.

 9. The appellant's granddaughters set out in their witness statements  the
    care they provided on a daily basis and they  detailed  that  they  had
    arranged their jobs around the appellant to ensure that she is not left
    alone.  Dafina in her evidence clarified she worked from home remotely.
     The judge concluded in error in the face  of  contrary  evidence  that
    although the granddaughters may assist her in her day-to-day activities
    this is minimal and when they are not working.   The  judge  failed  to
    consider the granddaughters' evidence.

10. This error permeated the further consideration of whether  family  life
    existed between  the  appellant  and  her  granddaughters.   The  judge
    considered in error that the  granddaughters  had  only  been  able  to
    provide limited care as full-time workers.   The  judge  erred  on  the
    facts and based her consideration in relation to Article 8.

11. Thirdly, the judge failed to  consider  the  fact  of  the  appellant's
    illiteracy and her technological incompetence as regard  the  isolation
    she would face if returned to Kosovo.  The fact of this specifically on
    her vulnerability if returned to Kosovo in the wake  of  her  husband's
    death was a factor relevant to her moral and physical integrity as  per
    Botta v Italy (Application No 2. 21439/93).

12. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker on
    the basis that the judge arguably misread the medical evidence.

13. At the hearing Miss Adams on behalf of the appellant submitted that the
    medical evidence that being the letter from the GP  dated  August  2019
    was  not  properly  considered.   The  judge  simply  stated  that  the
    appellant was able to travel did not properly weigh into the Article  8
    balancing exercise the factor of that medical evidence.   Further,  the
    judge  had  not  properly  considered  the  relationship  between   the
    grandmother and the granddaughters who helped  her  sleep,  shower  and
    matters of daily living which  went  beyond  minimal  assistance.   The
    Appellant could not read or write and her husband had  passed  away  in
    Kosovo in 2018.  The level of assistance went  above  and  beyond  that
    which is required for family life.

14. Mr Clarke submitted that the grant of appeal was very limited in  scope
    and further to Section 84 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 the grounds of appeal related to unlawful removal and  in  the
    absence of that removal there would be no  breach  of  Article  8.   In
    terms of fitness to fly, the appellant would be assessed prior  to  any
    removal.

15. In relation to the findings of fact it was correct that there was a pre-
    existing condition of which the appellant and the GP did not  know  the
    full extent and there was no evidence before the Tribunal regarding the
    proposed assessment and as such the findings were open to the judge.

16. In relation to the second issue the judge  did  not  quibble  with  the
    extent of the care but properly  assessed  family  life  and  made  her
    findings in the alternative.  That said the  extent  of  the  care  was
    predicated on the witness statement  of  the  appellant  herself.   The
    judge made unchallenged findings at paragraph 39 in  relation  to  care
    homes and private homes in Kosovo and the findings had to be considered
    in the light of Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ  813  such  that  the  appellant
    would be an insider in Kosovo.

17. The findings spoke to the Rules and the findings on suitable care  were
    not challenged.  The failure to refer to illiteracy was not a  material
    error of law.




    Analysis

18. In his analysis the judge at paragraph 18 set out the appellant's  case
    fully, noting  that the  appellant asserted  was  not  able  to  travel
    owing to her medical conditions, her ascending thoracic aortic aneurysm
    and other medical conditions  would  not  be  sufficiently  treated  in
    Kosovo without the care of a family  member,  and  care  facilities  in
    Kosovo  did  not  conform  with  her  religious  beliefs.   The   judge
    specifically referred to the letter from Dr Balendra from  the  Watling
    Medical Centre dated 2nd August 2019, a GP, that the appellant suffered
    from  various  medical  conditions.   Nonetheless  the   judge   noted,
    importantly, that the medical conditions were pre-existing and that the
    appellant  had travelled to the United Kingdom with those  pre-existing
    conditions and with medications obtained  whilst  in  Kosovo  and  that
    further, it was the respondent's case that she could  obtain  treatment
    in Kosovo even if she had to pay for it.   The  judge  specifically  at
    paragraph  30  turned  her  mind  to  whether  there  were  significant
    obstacles to returning the appellant to Kosovo  specifically  with  the
    medical conditions in mind and without her husband to support her there
    owing to her medical conditions.

19. The judge noted  specifically  the  appellant  had  multiple  diagnoses
    including ascending thoracic aortic aneurysm and albeit that the  judge
    states, "The letter dated 2nd August 2019 states the condition  may  be
    life threatening but does not inform me that she cannot travel or  that
    appropriate care is  not  available  in  Kosovo  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing", in effect the judge found the  appellant  she  had  travelled
    here with that same condition and she was  receiving  appropriate  care
    for her pre-existing medical conditions in Kosovo.  There  was  nothing
    to suggest that she could not receive medical treatment appropriate  to
    her conditions in Kosovo.   It was accepted that there was no  evidence
    that she could  not  receive  such  medical  treatment.  That  was  not
    challenged

20. Turning to the medical evidence itself, it is correct to state that  in
    the GP letter that the appellant was described as "currently not fit to
    travel, given that we do not know the  full  extent  of  her  ascending
    thoracic  aortic  aneurysm  (and  this  could   potentially   be   life
    threatening) and requires urgent  assessment  which  we  are  currently
    awaiting" but there was no  updated  assessment  provided.   The  judge
    specifically states, "In the absence of an  updated  medical  report  I
    find that she can travel to Kosovo as  she  travelled  here  in  2018".
    Those findings were open to the judge bearing in mind the appellant had
    travelled her with that pre-existing condition.

21. There was no indication that there was updated medical evidence to show
    how her condition had deteriorated since she last travelled ,and on the
    basis of the GP report which specifically  identifies  that  a  further
    assessment was being awaited and in view of what I have to say below, I
    am not persuaded that there was any material error of law.

22. As Mr Clarke submitted the appellant would be  assessed  prior  to  any
    removal and thus the fitness to travel was not necessarily  a  relevant
    factor in  the  Article  8  balancing  exercise.   Section  84  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act speaks to the breach of Article
    8 rights on removal and any such removal would be subjected to  a  pre-
    assessment.

23. The judge took into account that the appellant had travelled to the  UK
    only months prior to the letter dated August 2019 from Dr Balendra  and
    that she had pre-existing conditions.  The judge construed  the  letter
    such that there was in effect little detail that  the  appellant  could
    not travel as at the date of the hearing.

24. In the absence of a full  and  comprehensive  detailed  report  on  the
    ascending thoracic aortic aneurysm  and  bearing  in  mind  the  doctor
    referred to the  multiple  medical  conditions  as  being  chronic  and
    lifelong, I do not find that  the  judge  erred  in  approach  to  that
    medical evidence. On careful reading of  the  framing  of  the  medical
    report I find that there is no force to the grounds of challenge.

25. As Mr Clarke pointed out the  judge  did  find  loving  emotional  ties
    existed between the granddaughters and the appellant and  clearly  took
    cognisance of the granddaughters' and  appellant's  witness  statements
    and oral evidence.  It was open to the judge to  find  this  assistance
    limited.   It  was  on  the   appellant's   own   evidence   that   her
    granddaughters assisted her only to  the  extent  when  they  were  not
    working.  As the judge reasoned both granddaughters have full time jobs
    (one the judge noted worked for the  police)  and  the  detail  in  the
    appellant's witness statement was limited in detail.

26. The judge specifically stated, "I find that although her granddaughters
    may assist her in her day-to-day activities, this is minimal  and  when
    they are not working", and  "limited  day-to-day  activities  that  the
    granddaughters will  actually  have  been  able  to  provide  to  their
    grandmother as full-time workers."

27. Further, the oral evidence of Dafina Zeqiraj, as  the  judge  recorded,
    conflicted with that of her sister.  The implication  from  Dafina  was
    that the grandmother had medicine brought back from Kosovo for her  and
    used an online doctor.  Indeed, Dafina stated in oral evidence that she
    had not actually received medical treatment and that she had merely  an
    overview of the conditions that she suffered.   By contrast Jetesa said
    that Dafina and her uncle had taken her to the doctor in  the  Stanmore
    'a good few times' (also indicated from the notes of the  GP).  As  the
    judge pointed out at paragraph 32 Dafina had  not  actually  taken  the
    grandmother to the doctor herself.  Owing to the contrast in  evidence,
    albeit both of  the  granddaughters  were  said  to  do  'shifts',  the
    evidence  undermined  the  extent  of  care  claimed  to  be  provided.
    Although the judge expresses herself  briefly  these  are  clearly  the
    conclusions reached. The statement of Jetesa outlines the illnesses and
    the difficulties the appellant has but does not detail  the  assistance
    given.  Similarly, with the statement of  Dafina  Zeqiraj.   The  judge
    carefully  considered  the  evidence  of  the   granddaughters.    Mere
    disagreement about the weight to be accorded to the evidence, which  is
    a matter for the judge, should not be characterised as an error of law,
    Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 412.

28. The judge's analysis of  the  care  home  evidence  was  set  out  from
    paragraphs 36 to 39.  The judge specifically found at paragraph 38 that
    there were available  options  for  care  within  Kosovo  including  at
    paragraph 38 finding that there were "23 licensed NGOs or other private
    care providers which exist according  to  the  report,  have  not  been
    explored by the family" and further "there is nothing before me to  say
    that the care provided by either private care providers of  NGOs  would
    be insufficient to meet the needs  of  the  appellant".  That  was  not
    challenged.

29. The judge assessed the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  her
    family in the UK and her findings are made throughout the decision  and
    particularly at paragraphs 41 onwards. It was the judge who  heard  the
    oral evidence from the appellant and her grandchildren and assessed the
    evidence and the judge made the key and necessary findings in line with
    Article 8.  The judge noted that when the grandmother  first  came  the
    plan was "to only have their grandmother stay with them for a month and
    then return  to  Kosovo".   The  judge  adequately  reasoned  that  the
    relationship could continue as  it  had  done  hitherto  and  that  the
    appellant had spent her  entire  life  in  Kosovo.   Additionally,  the
    appellant 'gave up the tenancy to her home in Kosovo at the  same  time
    as applying to remain'.

30. Nonetheless, at paragraph 42 it was quite clear that the judge accepted
    the appellant had family life with her family in the UK but weighing in
    the  various  relevant  factors  found  that  the   refusal   was   not
    disproportionate.   In  relation  to  the  ground   of   challenge   on
    'isolation'  and  technological  incompetence,  any  failure  to   make
    specific reference is not an error of law.  The judge found a paragraph
    38 that there was no evidence that  private  care  providers  would  be
    insufficient to meet her needs.  That would inevitably include  contact
    with care workers  and  facilitating  contact.   The  judge  adequately
    reasoned at paragraph 42, and against the background  of  the  previous
    findings, that the appellant had lived all her life in Kosovo  and  was
    clearly culturally integrated there.  The judge identified as  she  was
    obliged to do that the appellant does not speak English and 'the family
    could have the same level of contact as they did before'.   The  health
    conditions were evidently pre-existing and the appellant  had  received
    extensive medical care in Kosovo  indeed  the  report  of  Dr  Balendra
    records a "complex past medical  history"  and  "a  background  of  the
    following medical conditions" which included ascending thoracic  aortic
    aneurysm.  Specifically, the judge found with regard to the appellant,

         "She is not an outsider in Kosovo, her entire life has  been  spent
         there and she can be supported in remaining there  by  her  family,
         with the benefit of available private care facilities...".

    Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief  explanation  of  the
    conclusions on the central issue on  which  an  appeal  is  determined,
    those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole  makes
    sense, having regard to the material  accepted  by  the  judge,  Shizad
    (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC)

31. UT (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 1095 warns that mere disagreement with a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal should not be characterised  as  an
    error of law.  At paragraph 26 the following is set out

         "...In R (Jones)  v  First  Tier  Tribunal  and  Criminal  Injuries
         Compensation Authority [2013] UKSC 19, Lord Hope said (at paragraph
         25):


             "It is well established, as an  aspect  of  tribunal  law  and
             practice, that judicial restraint should be exercised when the
             reasons that a tribunal  gives  for  its  decision  are  being
             examined. The appellate court should not  assume  too  readily
             that the tribunal misdirected itself just  because  not  every
             step in its reasoning is fully set out in it.""


32. The decision shows no material error of  law  and  the  decision  shall
    stand.  The appeal of Mrs Vitia remains dismissed.


Signed   Helen Rimington                         Date 16th November 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington




