
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16888/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th January 2019                 |On 12th February 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                               miss Anifa Aziz
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Tampuri, legal representative, instructed by
                    Chancery CS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana who applied for entry clearance  to
    come to the United Kingdom and whose application was refused and  whose
    subsequent appeal to Judge Herlihy dismissed in a decision  promulgated
    on 21st August 2018.

 2. The judge noted that there were no Grounds of Appeal before him and  on
    that basis decided that  there  was  no  basis  to  conclude  that  the
    Respondent's decision was not made in accordance with the Rules or that
    it breached the Appellant's human rights.   The  judge  held  that  the
    appeal must therefore fail.

 3. Permission to appeal was applied for and initially refused but  granted
    by an Upper Tribunal Judge in a decision (undated)  but  which  pointed
    out  that  there  may  have  been  a  procedural  irregularity  in  the
    proceedings.

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me  on  the  above  date.   Before  me  Mr
    Tampuri stated that the Sponsor's witness statement and the Grounds  of
    Appeal had been lodged with the court and should have been  before  the
    judge and therefore there had been procedural unfairness in  the  judge
    not considering the documents.

 5. Helpfully Ms Jones acknowledged that the documents had been before  the
    court and therefore, although for some reason  not  before  the  judge,
    were within the court system and as such the decision was not safe.

 6. The parties agreed that  the  sensible  way  forward  was  to  set  the
    decision aside because of the material error in law and  to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal in order  that  the  Appellant  could
    have a fair hearing.

 7. Because the Appellant has not had a fair hearing (because the judge did
    not consider the documents were lodged with the Tribunal)  fact-finding
    is necessary and the matter will have to be heard again by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.

 9. Under Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement 7.2
    the nature and extent of the judicial fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

11. I set aside the decision.

12. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

13. No anonymity order is made.


Signed    JG Macdonald                           Dated   5th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald



