
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16672/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2018                            |On 6 December 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                shakeeb khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Khan, Khirri Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, has permission to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Hopkins of the First-tier Tribunal sent  on  12  July
    2017 dismissing his appeal against the decision made by the  respondent
    on 23 June 2016 refusing him leave to remain.
2.   I need not set out the grounds in any detail because both parties  were
    in agreement with me that the judge materially erred in law.  The  root
    problem with  the  judge's  decision  relates  to  what  he  stated  at
    paragraphs 25-27:

         "25. I appreciate that the  Appellant's  appeal  is  on  the  broad
             ground that the decision is unlawful under section  6  of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998.  In particular, his  case  is  that  it
             infringes his right to  respect  for  his  family  life  under
             Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR').
              The Respondent was aware at the time of the decision that  he
             has a son who is a British citizen and he has  always  claimed
             that he has a family  life  with  him.   However,  the  appeal
             before me  is  against  a  specific  decision  to  refuse  his
             application for leave to remain as a  partner.   The  question
             whether he should instead have been leave as a parent was  not
             considered by the Secretary of State.  The Appellant may  have
             a family life with his son.  Were he required to leave the  UK
             following the refusal of leave, this would interfere with such
             family  life.   However,  I  find  that  it   would   not   be
             disproportionate to the need for effective immigration control
             to expect him to make a separate application to the  Secretary
             of State for leave to remain as the parent of a British child.


         26.  I indicated at the hearing that I was  minded  to  decide  the
             appeal on that basis.  I  heard  no  oral  evidence  from  the
             Appellant and I make no findings on any matters that might  be
             said to be in dispute.  I reach no conclusion as to whether or
             not the Appellant received  from  the  Secretary  of  State  a
             request for further evidence or whether at  the  time  of  the
             decision his marriage was subsisting.  In any event,  none  of
             this is likely to be relevant now, since it is  accepted  that
             the relationship between the Appellant and his wife  has  come
             to an end as at the present time.  I note that  the  Appellant
             asserts that he has an ongoing committed relationship with his
             son in the UK, but, given my conclusion that he would have  to
             make a new  application  on  that  basis,  I  consider  it  is
             unnecessary to make any finding as to whether or  not  he  has
             proved that this is the case.


         27.  During the hearing I had some discussion with Mr Riaz Khan  as
             to whether an application by the Appellant for leave to remain
             as a parent would meet all the relevant  requirements  of  the
             Immigration Rules, since the Appellant is still married to his
             wife, although he is separated from her.   It  is  unnecessary
             for me to come to any conclusion about that.  Even if he  does
             not meet them, there is nothing to stop the Appellant applying
             to the Respondent for leave to remain outside the Rules."

3.   The error of the judge in the above  paragraphs  was  twofold.   First,
    the respondent's refusal decision chose to consider his case under  the
    Immigration Rule relating to parents, namely EX.1.  (see  page  5)  and
    also  considered  the  matter  of  the  appellant's  claimed   parental
    relationship with a British citizen child when considering his  Article
    8 circumstances outside  the  Rules.   Accordingly  the  appellant  was
    entitled  to  challenge  those  parts  of  the  respondent's  decision.
    Second, the appellant's application constituted a  human  rights  claim
    and by virtue of Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 was entitled to
    have a decision as to whether the  respondent's  refusal  breached  his
    Article 8 rights.  As Mr Bates highlighted, it was  also  incumbent  on
    the judge to consider the appellant's Article 8 circumstances as at the
    date of hearing.   The  matter  of  the  appellant's  claimed  parental
    relationship with his child was not, as the judge stated, a "new matter
    subject to the procedure laid down in s. 85 of the NIAA 2002".

4.   The judge's error was plainly material and necessitates that I  set  it
    aside.

5.   Both parties were of the view that the case should be remitted  to  the
    FtT.  I agree  with  them.   By  virtue  of  the  judge's  self-denying
    ordinance no assessment was made as to the context of  the  appellant's
    relationship with his child and as to whether it was  genuine  or  not.
    It will be necessary for  the  FtT  to  hear  evidence  regarding  that
    matter, in addition to needing  to  address  legal  submissions  as  to
    whether or not the appellant stood to benefit from Home  Office  policy
    regarding parents of British citizen children - policy presently  being
    revisited in the light of the Supreme Court decision in KO [2018] UKSC

6.   I also agree with the parties, however, that the next judge  can  treat
    as preserved the judge's finding that the appellant and his spouse  are
    no longer in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

7.   To conclude:

     The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law;

     the case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Hopkins).

     No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:1 December 2018
                 [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
