
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/16759/2016



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



Heard at Field House   Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 19 September 2018   On 2 April 2019


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                EUNICE OSUNDE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Fisher, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background


1.    The appellant is a national of Nigeria born on 24  July  1972.  On  29
    February 2016 she applied for settlement  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules ("the Rules"). The  application  was  refused  inter  alia  under
    paragraph 322(5) of the Rules on the basis that her presence in the  UK
    was not conducive to the public good and further refused under Appendix
    FM, paragraph 276ADE and, outside of the Rules, on the basis that there
    were no exceptional circumstances.

2.    The appellant appealed the decision. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Anstis
    dismissed the appeal. Following an error of law hearing I set aside the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal because there was a failure to take
    into account relevant factors  in  the  assessment  of  proportionality
    under Article 8 of the European Convention.

3.    The appeal was listed for a resumed hearing in  order  to  remake  the
    decision. As the facts were not in dispute; the findings of the  First-
    tier Tribunal being preserved,  it  was  not  necessary  to  hear  oral
    evidence and the hearing proceeded by way of submissions.

4.    The factual background is as follows. The appellant is  a  46-year-old
    woman who has lived in the UK for twelve (nearly thirteen  years).  She
    spent approximately the first 31 years of her life  living  in  Nigeria
    before she moved to Italy where she spent three years living  with  her
    husband as a work permit holder before she came to the UK. In 2004  the
    appellant applied from Italy to enter the UK as a student. She  entered
    the UK on 12 September 2005 with entry clearance as a Tier 4  (Student)
    Migrant. She was subsequently joined in the UK by  her  husband  on  31
    December 2008. While Ms Fisher in her skeleton argument  refers  to  Mr
    Osunde's leave in Italy expiring on 30 October 2014,  his  evidence  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, supported by his Italian  identity  card,  was
    that he had leave to remain in Italy until November 2014.

5.    The appellant's leave as a student expired on 30 August 2014, and  she
    made an in-time application for leave to remain again as a student, but
    this was refused on 3 November 2014. Central to  that  refusal  was  an
    allegation that the appellant had attempted to obtain leave  to  remain
    by deception by a making a false  representation.  The  particulars  of
    that allegation were that she had been dishonest in denying she had not
    previously been refused entry clearance to the UK when in fact she had.
    The decision refusing the application stated that she did  not  have  a
    right of appeal and this is confirmed by the respondent in his  refusal
    of 27 June 2016, but on 20  November  2014  a  removal  decision  under
    section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  was  served  on  the
    appellant and Ms Isherwood was able to  show  that  this  informed  the
    appellant of her right to an out of country right of appeal.

6.    On 29 February 2016 the appellant  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain outside of the Rules. The basis of her claim was  that  she  and
    her husband had no family, home or job to return to in Nigeria  whereas
    in the UK she was supported by her  brother-in-law,  cousins,  nephews,
    friends and the church community and  her  husband's  brother  and  his
    family. She also expressed concerns over being ostracised  by  Nigerian
    society as she was childless, and her husband  made  reference  to  his
    loss of rights in Italy by his inability to renew his leave  to  remain
    in 2014 as the Home Office held his passport.

7.    Central  to  the  refusal  was  a  repeat  of  the  earlier  deception
    allegation and an application of paragraph  322(5)  of  the  Rules.  In
    relation  to  that  allegation,  the   appellant   claimed   that   she
    misunderstood the question in the application form. She made a  genuine
    error and would not have enclosed her  passport  with  the  application
    endorsed with the previous refusal if she was dishonest.

8.    The First-tier Tribunal heard from the appellant and  found  that  she
     was not guilty of deception and found that the refusal invoking general
     grounds of refusal was wrong. The Fist-tier  Tribunal  did  not  accept
     however  that  the  appellant  met  the   requirements   of   paragraph
     276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules as it had not been  shown  that  there  were
     "very significant obstacles" to her integration in Nigeria. As for  its
     consideration outside of the Rules  the  First-tier  Tribunal  answered
     questions (1) - (4) of Razgar in the  affirmative,  noting  that  while
     there was no interference with family life, the  relationships  enjoyed
     by the appellant with other family members and friends in the  UK  fell
     to be considered as aspects of her private life.

 9.   The issue in the appeal that requires  remaking  is  the  question  of
     proportionality. A summary of the parties' submissions on the issue  is
     as follows.

Submissions

10.   Ms Isherwood began by reminding  the  Tribunal  that  the  appellant's
     immigration status  was  precarious  throughout  and  should  be  given
     limited weight pursuant to section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration
     and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"). The appellant had  completed  her
     course and the purpose of her entry had been fulfilled.  There  was  no
     evidence  that  the  respondent's  refusal  prevented  the  appellant's
     husband from renewing his leave in Italy or of any requests being  made
     to return his passport. There was no delay by the Secretary of State in
     consideration of the application in 2014, but it was the appellant  who
     delayed until 2016 before submitting  an  application  outside  of  the
     Rules. The appellant was given an out of country right of appeal  which
     she failed to exercise. Ms Isherwood  acknowledged  the  appellant  was
     penalised by being wrongly accused of deception, but it was not certain
     that she would  have  been  granted  leave  to  remain.  The  appellant
     together with her husband  could  continue  to  enjoy  family  life  in
     Nigeria and they could find work. Ms Isherwood submitted that there was
     no evidence of exceptional circumstances and she urged  me  to  dismiss
     the appeal.

11.   Ms Fisher filed  a  skeleton  argument  which  she  augmented  at  the
     hearing. Ms Fisher submitted that the out of country  right  of  appeal
     did  not  advance  the  Secretary  of  State's  case.  The   First-tier
     Tribunal's finding that there had been no  deception  was  relevant  to
     proportionality. The  appellant  had  not  completed  her  course.  The
     appellant had a basis to renew her leave. The appellant and husband had
     permanent residence in Italy and were exercising  treaty  rights.  They
     had no reason to request their  passport  as  they  had  no  reason  to
     believe that the application would be refused. Ms Fisher submitted that
     but for the deception the appellant met the requirements of the  Rules.
     She referred to the appellant's lawful residence over  nine  years  and
     the unlawful allegation of deception. Even with precarious  status  the
     appellant and her husband  were  working  towards  settled  status  and
     maintained and accommodated themselves.

Conclusions

12.   I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the  First-
     tier Tribunal, the evidence before him,  and  the  submissions  that  I
     heard from the representatives. I am allowing this appeal on the  basis
     identified below for the following reasons.

13.   First, this is a case where the appellant came to the UK lawfully  for
    the purpose of study. She remained here lawfully in that capacity until
    August 2014 hoping to complete an MBA. Whilst engaged  in  studies  she
    was supported by her husband and family. There has been no recourse  to
    public funds and the  appellant,  and  her  husband  have  remained  as
    defined by the Rules financially independent.

14.   Second, it  is  established  that  the  appellant  has  a  significant
     private life with family and friends in the UK. Her studies  have  also
     been a significant part of her private life. The refusal  of  her  2014
     student application prevented her  from  completing  her  studies.  The
     certificate produced by the appellant is an  interim  award  of  Higher
     Education. She has not completed her MBA. The First-tier Tribunal noted
     the failure of the Secretary of State to provide prima  facia  evidence
     of dishonesty and accepted the appellant made an innocent mistake.

15.   Third, notwithstanding the fact that  it  has  now  been  demonstrated
     that the appellant was given the right to exercise a  right  of  appeal
     out of country, I agree with Ms Fisher that this does  not  advance  or
     indeed justify the Secretary of State's refusal in 2014. There  was  no
     dishonesty. The appellant had been here as a  student  over  a  lengthy
     period before this application in 2014  and  applied  to  continue  her
     studies and was maintained  and  accommodated.  There  is  no  apparent
     reason, and none has been identified, why save for  the  allegation  of
     deception, that application would not have otherwise been successful.

16.   Fourth, the wrongful  break  in  the  appellant's  student  leave  has
     prevented her from completing her studies. There has been  a  "historic
     injustice" to the appellant if full regard is had to her  history  that
     has clearly impacted upon her. When the Article 8(2) balancing exercise
     is performed, it is  clear  from  established  jurisprudence  that  the
     "historic injustice" falls  to  be  taken  into  account.   It  is  not
     irrelevant.

17.   As was made clear by the Court of Appeal in Gurung (at  paragraphs  36
     to 37), the "requirement to take the injustice into account in striking
     a fair balance between Article 8.1 rights and the  public  interest  in
     maintaining a firm immigration  policy  is  inherent  in  Article  8(2)
     itself ..."

18.   Fifth, a fair  approach  consistent  with  an  acknowledged  right  to
     respect for her private life, means  that  a  period  of  discretionary
     leave should be granted to her, permitting her to live, and  work,  and
     study for a suitable time to enable her to complete her studies.

19.    Sixth,  the  balance  of  other  considerations   relevant   to   the
     proportionality exercise falling in favour of  the  appellant  are  her
     length of residence in the UK for 12 years,  she  migrated  to  the  UK
     lawfully and has an established private and home life in  the  UK  with
     family and friends.

20.     The factors that militate against the appellant are as follows.

21.   First, the Appellant's case is not one where she is  seeking  to  rely
     upon Article 8 as a general dispensing power because she does meet  the
     requirements of the Rules.

22.   Second, regard must be had to the public interest  considerations  set
    out in section 117B of the 2002 Act. It is in the  public  interest  to
    maintain an effective system of immigration  control  [s.117B(1)].  The
    appellant speaks English and is  financially  independent  [s.117B(2)].
    These are neutral factors and do not  lend  additional  weight  to  the
    public interest: see AM (S.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260.

23.   Third, little weight is to be given to the  appellant's  private  life
    which has been established in the UK at a  time  when  her  immigration
    status was precarious [s.117B(4)].

24.   Fourth, it has not been shown that  the  2014  refusal  prevented  and
    thereby prejudiced the appellant's husband. The application was refused
    early in the month on 3 November 2014. On the evidence he gave  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal his  leave  expired  in  November  2014.  There  is
    insufficient evidence that  his  leave  had  expired  by  the  date  of
    refusal. If it expired after that date, there is insufficient  evidence
    that he made a request to have his passport returned or made any effort
    to obtain a new one or, explain why his Italian identity card could not
    have been used to make an application.

25.   In conclusion, whilst I acknowledge and take account  of  the  limited
    utility of Article 8 in private life cases and the  significant  weight
    to be attached to the public interest, I note that in  Rhuppiah  [2018]
    UKSC 58, the Supreme Court recently affirmed that,  whilst  it  is  the
    case that Section 117B makes it clear that  "little  weight  should  be
    given to a private life established by a person  at  a  time  when  the
    person's immigration status is precarious", nevertheless,

         "The provisions of Section 117B cannot  put  decision-makers  in  a
         straight-jacket which constrains them  to  determine  claims  under
         Article 8 inconsistently with the Article itself. Inbuilt into  the
         concept  of  'little  weight'  itself  is   a   small   degree   of
         flexibility."

26.   In fact, "Section 117A(2)(a) necessarily  enables  their  applications
    occasionally to succeed" (paragraph 49).

27.   Bearing all of the above in  mind,  I  reach  the  conclusion  that  I
    should allow the appeal. I emphasise that this is a finding on specific
    facts, that it is in my view a marginal decision, and that I do not  in
    any sense consider that this would be a precedent for  other  cases  of
    this kind. I have essentially come  to  this  conclusion  because  when
    viewed in the context of the facts  which  go  into  a  proportionality
    balancing  exercise  I  consider  that  the  facts  of  this  case,  in
    combination, are towards the - "exceptional" or "compelling" end of the
    spectrum.

28.   I find that in this case the appellant is  able  to  demonstrate  that
     the Secretary of State's refusal to exercise discretion outside of  the
     Rules is not a necessary and proportionate exercise of power because of
     her established private life right. This, together with the reasons set
     out above as to why she was not able to continue with  her  studies  by
     the refusal of her application in  2014,  means  this  appeal  must  be
     allowed to enable her to do so. While she  may  only  require  a  short
     period of leave to complete her course, the  duration  of  leave  is  a
     matter for the Secretary of State.

29.   For the reasons given above, I find that  removal  in  consequence  of
    the decision would amount to a disproportionate interference  with  the
    appellant's right to private life under Article 8 of the ECHR.

Notice of Decision


The appellant's appeal is allowed

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Date: 13th January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have made a fee award of the amount that has been paid or is payable.


Signed      Date: 13th January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral
