
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16632/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 December 2018                           |On 15 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     M T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Aslam, instructed by Solomon Shepherd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of the respondent made on 20
    June 2016 to refuse her application for leave  to  remain  on  a  human
    rights basis and thus to refuse her human rights claim.

 2. The appeal against was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson
    sitting in Birmingham for the reasons given in my decision  promulgated
    on 12 October 2018 (a copy of which is annexed).  I found an  error  of
    law in that decision and set it aside to be remade.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana who entered the United  Kingdom  in
    2001 with leave as a visitor for six months.   She  has  remained  here
    since without leave.

 4. The appellant was 33 when she entered the  United  Kingdom  and  states
    that all the living members of her family are  in  the  United  Kingdom
    including her mother, all four  of  her  sisters,  their  husbands  and
    children.

 5. After entry into the United Kingdom, she entered  into  a  relationship
    with a man for about a year and a half.  In 2003 she was  diagnosed  as
    having contracted HIV, a complication of which has left  her  blind  in
    her right eye.  She feels stigmatised as a result  and  has  only  been
    able to tell two of her sisters of her condition.

 6. The appellant is supported by her family and also by  the  church  that
    she attends.  She says that she has nothing and no-one to go back to in
    Ghana where she has no accommodation and no prospect of employment.

 7. In addition, the appellant's case is that she would not receive  proper
    treatment for her condition and that accordingly, her removal would  be
    in breach of Article 3 Human Rights Convention as well as Article 8  of
    the Human Rights Convention.

 8. The respondent's case is that the appellant's removal would not  be  in
    breach of Article 3, in respect of whether this is a case to  which  it
    is not in any event falling within the terms of  Paposhvili  v  Belgium
    [2017] Imm AR 867, there being adequate  treatment  available  for  the
    appellant in Ghana.  It is also submitted that there were not  in  this
    case very significant obstacles to the appellant integrating  again  to
    life in Ghana and so she did not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.  The respondent considered also
    there were not in this case exceptional circumstances such that removal
    would be disproportionate.

 9. I heard evidence from the appellant and two of her sisters.  I also had
    before me the following:-

      i) Respondent's bundle.

     ii) Bundle prepared for the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

    iii) Bundle prepared for earlier judicial review proceedings.

     iv) Supplementary bundle containing updated medical evidence.

      v) Response to information  request  produced  by  the  respondent  re
         availability of healthcare and medications for HIV in Ghana.

10. In addition, I heard submissions from both representatives.

11. The appellant adopted her witness statement adding in cross-examination
    that she had only worked briefly in the United Kingdom and she had  not
    kept in contact with anybody in Ghana.  She  said  that  she  would  be
    homeless.  She said that she did not  think  that  the  pastor  of  her
    church, who knew people in Ghana, would be able to help her.  Asked  if
    she had tried to find out what treatment would be available for her she
    said she did not known anybody in Ghana and she was not  very  good  at
    using the internet.

12. I then heard evidence from the appellant's sister, H, who  adopted  her
    witness statement, who in cross-examination said that she goes back  to
    Ghana every two to three years not more frequently and  while  she  has
    friends there they would not be able to help the appellant.   She  said
    she had not made any enquiries about this.  She said  that  her  sister
    lives with her and she is able to support her however it is very  small
    amounts of money and she eats with the family.  She said  it  would  be
    too difficult for the appellant to go back to Ghana and she  would  not
    be able to afford things.

13. Ms Holmes submitted that even on the broader interpretation of  Article
    3 set out in Paposhvili, as referred to at paragraphs 40 and 41  of  AM
    (Zimbabwe) this case simply came nowhere near the Article  3  threshold
    as medical  treatment  would  be  available  for  the  appellant.   She
    submitted  further  that  little  weight  should  be  attached  to  the
    appellant's private life in the United  Kingdom.   She  submitted  that
    there were in this case no exceptional circumstances  and  that  having
    had due regard to Section 117B of the 2002 Act, the conditions that the
    appellant would face in Ghana were not sufficiently serious  to  engage
    Article 8.  It was accepted that she would have difficulties on  return
    but equally she had lived in the United Kingdom illegally for seventeen
    years and had established no family life in the United Kingdom.

14. Mr Aslam submitted that on the basis of the evidence from  Ghana  about
    the  availability  of  treatment  and  below  the  non-availability  of
    Raltegravir removal would on the facts of this case engage Article 3.

15. Mr Aslam submitted further that  on  the  facts  of  this  case  viewed
    cumulatively, the difficulties that the appellant would face  are  such
    that she would not be able to reintegrate  again  into  life  in  Ghana
    given the length of time she had been away, her  health  problems,  the
    lack of employment and the lack of accommodation.   He  submitted  that
    she had established family life here and that she was dependent on  her
    sisters and had been an integral part of the family for some  seventeen
    years.

The Law

16. I am bound with regards to Article 3 by N v SSHD  [2005]  UKHL  31.   I
    have considered whether, that case notwithstanding, I  should  consider
    the position has changed.  In the light of AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 64 I have nonetheless considered it  is,  I  accept,  arguable
    that the Grand Chamber has in Paposhvili relaxed the test of  violation
    of Article 3 in the case of  removal  of  a  foreign  national  with  a
    medical condition but I consider that, insofar as it does so, it is  to
    a modest extent as noted by Sales LJ in AM (Zimbabwe) at 40 to 41:

         40.  It is true that if one read the phrase "would face a real risk
             ... of being exposed ... to a significant  reduction  in  life
             expectancy" in para. [183] out of context, it might  be  taken
             to indicate a very wide extension of the protection of Article
             3 in medical cases, since in very  many  such  cases  where  a
             foreign national is receiving treatment at a higher  level  of
             effectiveness in the removing state than would be available in
             the receiving state (e.g. in the case of those suffering  from
             AIDS) they would be able to say they would face a real risk of
             a significant  reduction  of  life  expectancy  if  they  were
             removed. But this is not a  tenable  interpretation  of  para.
             [183] of Paposhvili, read in its proper context.  N  v  United
             Kingdom was itself a case where removal  resulted  in  a  very
             significant reduction in life expectancy (as was also noted in
             Paposhvili at para. [178]), in which no violation of Article 3
             was  found,  and  the  Grand  Chamber  in  Paposhvili  plainly
             regarded that case as rightly decided. N v United Kingdom  was
             itself a Grand Chamber judgment, decided by 14 votes to 3.  It
             is impossible to infer that by the formula used in para. [183]
             of Paposhvili the ECtHR intended to reverse the effect of N  v
             United Kingdom. Moreover, the Grand Chamber's  formulation  in
             para. [183] requires there  to  be  a  "serious"  and  "rapid"
             decline in  health  resulting  in  intense  suffering  to  the
             Article 3 standard where death is not expected, and  it  makes
             no sense to say in the context of  analysis  under  Article  3
             that  a  serious  and  rapid  decline  in  health  is  not   a
             requirement where death rather than intense suffering  is  the
             harm expected. In my view, the only tenable interpretation  of
             para. [183], read in context, is the one given above.


         41.  In that regard, it  is  also  significant  that  even  on  the
             extreme and exceptional facts of the  Paposhvili  case,  where
             the applicant faced a likelihood of death within 6  months  if
             removed to Georgia, the Grand Chamber did not feel able to say
             that it was clear that a violation of  Article  3  would  have
             occurred for that reason had he  been  removed.  Instead,  all
             that the Grand Chamber held was that the applicant had  raised
             a sufficiently credible Article 3 case that it gave rise to  a
             procedural obligation for the relevant Belgian authorities  to
             examine that case with care and  with  reference  to  all  the
             available evidence. The violation of Article 3 which the Grand
             Chamber held would have occurred if  the  applicant  had  been
             removed  to  Georgia  was  a  violation  of  that   procedural
             obligation.


17. I have therefore gone on to consider whether on the facts of this  case
    it is established that there would be a serious and  rapid  decline  of
    the appellant's health resulting in intense suffering to the Article  3
    standard.

18. It is not in doubt that the appellant is HIV positive or that  she  has
    been on antiretroviral therapy since 2003.  She is currently on Truvada
    and Raltegravir.  The most recent letter from her treating physician is
    that she will require lifelong antiretroviral therapy in the absence of
    which she would experience,  within  in  a  matter  of  a  few  months,
    opportunistic infections or cancers which may become  life  threatening
    or end up in permanent sequalae such as loss of her sight.  The  doctor
    added that it is not within her remit  to  state  whether  the  present
    treatment is available in Ghana although  she  did  doubt  whether  she
    would be able to afford it.

19. The letter from the Ghana Canada Medical Centre gives no indication  of
    where that centre is based but I assume that it is based in Ghana.   It
    is also undated although it clearly postdates the letter from the Royal
    Free Hospital of 25 October 2018.  The letter confirms that Raltegravir
    is not available in Ghana, as is confirmed by the Home Office's report,
    and the letter opines that if treatment is interrupted for  any  reason
    it is very likely that a  life-threatening  HIV  drug  resistance  will
    develop and this will adversely affect her health.   It  is  also  said
    that on the basis of  her  medical  history  the  appellant  will  need
    laboratory investigations including HIV drug  residence  monitoring  in
    the future but that there was no accredited laboratory where  genotypic
    and phenotypic HIV testing can  be  conducted  in  Ghana  to  optimally
    monitor her treatment.  The letter concludes:

         "Against this background, should  the  appellant  be  compelled  to
         return to Ghana, my assessment is that she  will  not  be  able  to
         access the full regimen of her life-saving cocktail of  drugs  that
         she is currently taking and her health condition and access to  HIV
         treatment is likely to be very precarious."

20. It is of note that neither the Home Office's response  nor  the  letter
    from the Ghana Canada Medical Centre make any comments about  the  cost
    of HIV treatment or whether it is available free at point of  treatment
    in Ghana.  It is, however, recorded in the May 2012 country information
    form produced by the respondent  that  the  government  announced  that
    money would be made available to ensure the reduction of infections and
    that funds had been made available for antiretroviral treatment for  up
    to 20,000 new HIV/AIDS cases in 2012.

21. I accept that one of the drugs currently prescribed for the  appellant,
    Raltegravir, is not available in Ghana.   What  there  is  not  is  any
    indication of whether the other drugs which are available would  be  of
    assistance or what the effect would  be  of  any  change  in  treatment
    regime.  There is insufficient evidence  to  show  that  the  appellant
    would not be able to  access  antiretroviral  treatment  in  Ghana  and
    certainly, there is insufficient  evidence  to  show  with  a  lack  of
    treatment that she would suffer a serious and rapid decline  in  health
    resulting in intense suffering.  Whilst I can accept that, in the  case
    of withdrawal of kidney dialysis, such a  result  may  flow,  there  is
    simply insufficient evidence to show that would occur on the  facts  of
    this case.

22. I found the evidence of the claimed lack of support for  the  appellant
    in Ghana to be unsatisfactory.  It was clear from the evidence of  both
    the appellant and her sister that at best they had simply not made  any
    enquiries as to what support would be available for  the  appellant  in
    Ghana.  While I can accept that, as the  sister  said,  she  could  not
    expect her friends in Ghana to support the appellant  or  offer  actual
    help, she did not even ask how to  go  about  arranging,  for  example,
    assistance moving back  to  Ghana.   I  found  the  evidence  that  the
    appellant gave  for  not  asking  her  pastor  for  help,  was  equally
    unsatisfactory.  Again, I accept it would not have been  reasonable  to
    expect him to have provided help for her directly but it  is  difficult
    to see how he is not the kind of person who might be able to point  her
    in the right direction of how she could resettle back into Ghana.   One
    might have thought that a church  pastor  was  precisely  the  sort  of
    person who would be able to provide such assistance.

23. That is not to say that the appellant will  not  have  difficulties  on
    return to Ghana.  She has been out of the country  for  over  seventeen
    years, has no relatives to whom to turn, no friends,  no  accommodation
    and she has few if any transferrable skills.

24. The picture the appellant has given is that she has, to all intents and
    purposes, been entirely dependent on  her  family  even  as  an  adult.
    Asked about whether she had worked in Ghana, she said that she had done
    a little selling of  goods  for  friends  on  a  commission  basis  but
    otherwise, it would appear she was entirely dependent on family.

25. I accept that the appellant is financially dependent on her  family  in
    the United Kingdom.  She lives with her sister who  provides  her  with
    accommodation and food; she also provides her  with  small  amounts  of
    money so that she can travel.  I accept that the  relationship  between
    the appellant and her sister and other relatives in the United  Kingdom
    is close but I am not satisfied that, viewing the evidence as a  whole,
    the degree of emotional dependency and the financial dependency is such
    that, unusually, a family life exists between the appellant and any  of
    her sisters or their children.  I am  not  satisfied  either  that  the
    appellant has shown that there would be  no  accommodation  or  support
    available for her in Ghana.  The reality is the family has  simply  not
    tried  to  find  out  any  information  and,  it  would  appear,   have
    consciously avoided making the sort of enquiries one might have thought
    were necessary.

26. Accordingly, taking all  of  these  factors  into  account,  I  am  not
    satisfied that the appellant has shown that she meets  the  requirement
    of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration  Rules  as  although  she
    will face difficulties, she has not shown that they meet the very  high
    threshold necessary. She has not shown that  accommodation  or  support
    could not be found for her.

27. In assessing whether, nonetheless, despite not meeting the requirements
    of the Immigration Rules, her removal  would  be  disproportionate.  In
    doing so I apply section 117B of the 2002 Act.

28. For the reasons set out above, I am not satisfied  that  the  appellant
    has developed a family life in the United Kingdom with her siblings  or
    her other relatives.

29. I bear  in  mind  that  there  is  a  strong  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of immigration control which includes the removal from  the
    United Kingdom of those with no right to be here.   The  appellant  has
    overstayed for some seventeen years and has relied for  her  health  on
    extensive treatment provided by the National Health Service.  She does,
    I accept, speak English  but  she  could  in  no  way  be  seen  to  be
    financially dependent.

30. The appellant's private life which includes her relationships with  her
    family here, which I accept are close, has been established  here  when
    her position here was at best precarious.  I conclude that accordingly,
    little weight should be attached to that  although  on  the  particular
    facts of this case, given the length of time spent here  and  the  fact
    that she has lived with siblings the whole of  that  time  some  weight
    must be attached to this.

31. Bearing in mind that the appellant would be sent back to Ghana  with  a
    serious condition and a country  where  she  has  not  lived  for  some
    seventeen years, it is clear that her circumstances will be  difficult.
    I am not, however, persuaded that any interference with  her  right  to
    private and family life is such that removal would not be proportionate
    given the considerable public weight to be attached to the  enforcement
    of immigration control and accordingly I  dismiss  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

Summary of Conclusions

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 22 January 2019

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/16632/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 October 2018                             |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     M T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam instructed by Soloman Shepherd solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Robertson in which she dismissed the  appeal  against  a
    decision made to refuse her human rights claim and to remove her,  that
    decision being made on 20 June 2016.

 2. In short there are two aspects to the claim.  First,  that  removal  of
    the appellant would be a breach of her rights pursuant to Article 3  of
    the Human Rights Convention given the HIV diagnosis, that she  has  the
    circumstances of which that is said to have occurred  and  whether  she
    would be able to obtain treatment for that on  return  to  Ghana.   She
    says that she could not.  Second, the appellant also  says  that  there
    would be a breach of her rights pursuant to  Article  8  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention as she has nobody to turn to in Ghana, her family all
    live in the United Kingdom including siblings and  their  children.  On
    that basis and given the length of time that she has now spent  outside
    Ghana it is said that she meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of
    the Immigration Rules and/or her removal would, the fact she  does  not
    meet   the   requirements   of   the    Rules    notwithstanding,    be
    disproportionate.

 3. The judge concluded that the removal of the appellant would not  be  in
    breach of Article 3 finding that treatment is available  in  Ghana  and
    thus Article 3 was not engaged.   The  judge  noted  also  it  was  not
    established that the appellant cannot  be  returned  to  Ghana  because
    there will be no care for her and where she says she has no-one at  the
    end stage of her life.

 4. The judge considered  the  Razgar  approach  and  found  in  particular
    paragraph 12(iii) that even taking into account the fact the medication
    is available to her and there was limited contact with the family  this
    did not amount to  very  significant  difficulties  and  that  applying
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act given that the stay in the United  Kingdom
    has been unlawful for the whole of the period bar the first six  months
    that removal would be proportionate.

 5. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal and by  the
    Upper Tribunal resulting in a "Cart JR" in respect of which  permission
    is granted on both issues.  The matter then came back to the First-tier
    Tribunal, permission being granted by the Vice-President.

 6. The current position with regard to Paposhvili  is  somewhat  in  flux.
    The recent  decision  of  AM  (Zimbabwe)  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  64  is  of
    assistance.

 7. I have considered that it would given what is  said  in  AM  (Zimbabwe)
    [38] to [40] to consider in this case whether there was  a  possibility
    that the test identified in Paposhvili by Sales LJ would apply  on  the
    facts of this case.  I consider that it may do so but that perhaps  for
    understandable reasons the findings of fact reached by Judge  Robertson
    do not extend to the findings on the issues identified.  In  particular
    there was no clear finding as to what treatment would or would  not  be
    available to the appellant on return.

 8. On that basis I consider the findings of fact with respect to Article 3
    cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside.   It  follows  also  that   a
    consideration of what  treatment  is  or  is  not  available  would  be
    relevant to an Article 8 issue and I consider that on  that  basis  the
    findings with respect to Article 8 do not stand.  I am therefore of the
    view that the decision involved the making of an error of law and  must
    be remade in the Upper Tribunal.

 9. The question then arises to how and when the appeal should be remade.

10. In my view the appeal should be relisted  it  after  four  weeks.  That
    should allow time  to  obtain  relevant  information  with  respect  to
    treatment in Ghana

11. The appellant is directed to obtain evidence:

      i) Of what treatment would be available to her in Ghana;

     ii) Evidence (preferably from her treating physicians) the consequences
         of not taking the  drugs  currently  prescribed;  what  the  likely
         pattern of deterioration is likely to be both in terms of the  drop
         of CD4 count and its  consequences; how that is  likely  to  affect
         the appellant in terms of suffering;, and, the likely timescale;

12. Any new evidence is to be served at least 10 working  days  before  the
    next hearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 12 October 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

