
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/16134/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 August 2019                        |On 13 September 2019               |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN

                                   Between

                                     Y J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss R Bagral, Counsel, instructed by direct access
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lodge ('the Judge') issued on 13 May  2019  by  which  the  appellant's
    appeal against a decision of the respondent  to  refuse  to  grant  him
    leave to remain on human rights (Article 8) grounds was refused.

 2. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchison granted permission  to
    appeal on all grounds.



Anonymity

 3. The Judge did not issue an anonymity order.  I am mindful  of  Guidance
    Note 2013 No 1 concerned with anonymity orders and I observe  that  the
    starting point for consideration of anonymity orders in this chamber of
    the Upper Tribunal, as in all courts and Tribunals,  is  open  justice.
    However, I observe that as part of the appellant's claimed  history  he
    refers to having been regularly physically and  sexually  abused  as  a
    child and asserts that he possesses suicide ideation.  I find that  the
    publication of the appellant's name creates  a  risk  of  harm  to  his
    mental health of such nature as to require derogation  from  the  basic
    principle of open justice so as to secure the proper administration  of
    justice on the facts arising in this appeal.

 4. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any  form
    of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
    appellant or any member of his  family.   This  direction  applies  to,
    amongst others, the appellant  and  the  respondent.   Any  failure  to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.  I do so in order to avoid a likelihood  of  serious  harm
    arising to the appellant from the publication of the  contents  of  his
    human rights claim.

Background

 5. The appellant is a national of India who is aged 27.  He secured  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student and  entered  this  country  in
    September 2009 when aged 17.  His  leave  was  subsequently  varied  on
    several occasions, finally expiring on  30  April  2017.   During  this
    time,  he  secured  a  BA  in  Business  and  Management  and   pursued
    Association of Chartered Certified  Accountant  (ACCA)  qualifications.
    He resided in accordance with his conditions of leave.

 6. On 28 May 2017, within 28 days of the expiry of his previous leave,  he
    applied for indefinite leave  to  remain  on  ten-year  long  residence
    grounds.  The respondent refused the application by way of  a  decision
    dated 16 November 2017, concluding that the appellant had not satisfied
    the residence requirements of paragraph 276B(a)(i) of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 7. As to private life rights under paragraph 276ADE the decision detailed,
    inter alia::-

         "You have stated that the thought of returning to India only brings
         back memories of a  disturbing  childhood  in  which  you  remember
         fights and violence between your parents.  You have stated that you
         started to have suicidal thoughts in your early teenage years".

         "It is the view of this department that you are an adult, who spent
         his formative years from birth to the age  17  in  India.   If  you
         return it will be to a country where you speak  the  language.   In
         addition, you would be able to live anywhere in India and would not
         have to live near your parents".





Hearing before the FTT

 8. The appeal came before the Judge at Birmingham  on  1  May  2019.   The
    appellant was represented, as he is before the Upper Tribunal, by  Miss
    Bagral,  Counsel,  who  sought  an  adjournment  on  his  behalf.   She
    confirmed that in her opinion the appellant was not in a fit  state  to
    give evidence and she sought an adjournment for six weeks.  In refusing
    the application the Judge observed, inter alia, that no medical  report
    had been filed with the Tribunal and there was no  evidence  confirming
    that the appellant was medically unfit to give evidence and  unable  to
    take part in proceedings.

 9. Upon the hearing proceeding, Miss Bagral  appropriately  observed  that
    the appellant could not  succeed  on  family  life  grounds  under  the
    Immigration Rules and  relied  upon  the  private  life  provisions  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules, asserting that  very  significant
    obstacles existed in relation to his integration in India.   The  Judge
    proceeded to determine that the appellant could not succeed under  this
    Rule, nor would his removal from this country be unjustifiably harsh as
    the appellant always knew that whilst holding student status  he  would
    be required to return to India.

Grounds of Appeal

10. Miss Bagral drafted detailed grounds  and  I  observe  that  they  were
    authored with significant care.  The introduction observes, inter alia:-



         "The appellant is a  vulnerable  person.   The  evidence  from  the
         appellant's doctor confirmed an anxiety disorder and low mood.   In
         March 2018 the appellant commenced  Cognitive  Behavioural  Therapy
         (CBT) and participated in twelve sessions until  October  2018.   A
         letter from his therapist confirmed that his anxiety was  found  to
         have developed following traumatic incidences of abuse and  neglect
         in childhood.  It was noted that the appellant's  memories  of  his
         early experiences caused him distress and it was decided  that  CBT
         was not the right treatment and that the  appellant  would  benefit
         from a longer term and more explanatory form of counselling outside
         of  the  NHS.   The  appellant  commenced  a  course   of   private
         counselling with Re-Vision in the first  week  of  March  2019.   A
         letter  from  a  trainee  counsellor  at  Re-Vision  confirmed  the
         appellant's attendance for counselling and further  confirmed  that
         counselling was expected to continue until 14 November 2019."

11. By way of ground 1 it is observed:-

         "7.  The appeal was listed  for  hearing  on  10  August  2018  and
            adjourned on application by the appellant as his  CBT  therapist
            opined  that  at  that  time  a  court  appearance  would  cause
            significant anxiety.  The appeal was listed for  hearing  on  22
            February  2019.   On  8  January  2019  the   appellant's   then
            representatives lodged a written request for an  adjournment  in
            order to allow the appellant to commence and complete 6 weeks of
            counselling  (recommended  by  his  CBT  therapist)   that   was
            scheduled  to  commence  in  the  first  week  of  March.    The
            adjournment request was granted, and the appeal was relisted for
            1 March 2019 (a week later).  The appellant believes  that  this
            was an administrative error by the  Tribunal  as  the  requested
            adjournment period was at least 6 weeks.  The appeal came before
            Judge Cox on 1 March who considered this background and  acceded
            to the appellant's further request for an adjournment to  enable
            him to  commence  and  complete  a  course  of  counselling  (30
            sessions at a rate of 5 sessions per  week)  and  to  produce  a
            medical report or a report from his counsellor by 22 April 2019.
             The appeal was accordingly adjourned to 1 May 2019.

         8.   The  appellant  then  received  a  Notice  from  the  Tribunal
            directing him to file further evidence by 2 April.  He wrote  to
            the Tribunal on 12 March 2019 requesting that the time  to  file
            evidence be extended to 22 April 2019 as agreed by  the  parties
            before Judge Cox on 1 March 2019.

         9.   On the date of the hearing, of 1 May 2019, the  appellant  had
            completed approximately 6 weeks of counselling.  These  sessions
            had the effect of  heightening  the  level  of  the  appellant's
            anxiety and he was advised to reduce  the  sessions  to  once  a
            week.  Accordingly, counselling was extended to continue to mid-
            November 2019.  The appellant reported his  increased  level  of
            anxiety  to  his  Doctor  and  was  prescribed  anti-depressants
            [ABS/2].

         10.  At the hearing the appellant presented with a heightened state
            of fear and anxiety and in consequence instructed  counsel  that
            he did not feel well, was frightened and  unable  to  enter  the
            hearing room and give evidence.  The appellant  hoped  that  his
            heightened  state  of  anxiety  would   lower   as   counselling
            progressed thereby reducing his vulnerability and  allowing  him
            to feel able to engage with  proceedings  at  some  future  date
            after 6 weeks and  thus  instructed  counsel  to  apply  for  an
            adjournment on that basis."

12. Miss Bagral then carefully detailed a number of asserted errors of  law
    by the Judge as to the adjournment request.  Such errors are  contained
    within two pages of the grounds.  I  observe  that  each  complaint  is
    drafted in an assiduously fair manner and the general  theme  was  that
    the Judge unfortunately misunderstood previous judicial decisions  upon
    reading the notes on file.  This is particularly so as to the purported
    failure by the appellant to file medical evidence.  I note  that  there
    is no unwarranted criticism of the Judge in the grounds.

13. Four other grounds of appeal are relied upon. At their heart there is a
    complaint that in considering an appeal  of  a  vulnerable  person  the
    Judge failed to apply the  guidance  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AM
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 1123; [2018] 4 WLR 78.

14. Ground 2 asserts:-

         "Once the refusal of the adjournment request  was  communicated  to
         the appellant by counsel, the hearing proceeded, and the  appellant
         was not called to give evidence due  to  his  heightened  state  of
         anxiety.  The Judge therefore  only  had  the  appellant's  written
         testimony to consider, but in his consideration of the same,  which
         included a finding of adverse credibility, the Judge failed to make
         appropriate provision for  the  fact  that  he  was  assessing  the
         evidence of a vulnerable witness  as  confirmed  by  his  diagnosis
         which was not challenged by the respondent."

15. In granting permission to appeal, by way of a decision  dated  19  June
    2019, JFtT Grant-Hutchison reasoned:-

         "It is arguable that the Judge was not aware  or  misconstrued  the
         full background relating to the appellant's mental health and  that
         previously Judge Cox had adjourned the case previously not only  to
         obtain a medical report  but  to  allow  the  appellant  to  obtain
         treatment  and  commence  counselling.   This  could  have  made  a
         material difference to the outcome of the case when considering the
         facts found and the findings made in relation  to  the  appellant's
         circumstances  and  family  life  or  to  the   fairness   of   the
         proceedings.  Nwaigwe (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418
         (IAC) which is referred to in the granted permission to appeal  and
         is referred to for its terms.   In  addition,  although  the  Judge
         proceeded to hear the case on the basis of the appellant's  written
         testimony because he was not called to give evidence because of his
         heightened state of anxiety it is further arguable that  the  Judge
         made no reference to the guidance to apply  in  such  circumstances
         asked (sic) detailed and the case of AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017]
         EWCA Civ 1123  which  is  also  referred  to  in  the  grounds  for
         permission to appeal and is referred to for its terms."

16. No Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent.

The Hearing

17. The representatives informed me at the outset of the hearing that  they
    were in agreement that the Judge's decision was flawed by legal  error,
    such that it should be set aside.  It was agreed that  the  failure  to
    consider the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2  of  2010  concerned
    with vulnerable witnesses and the guidance provided  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in AM (Afghanistan) was a material error of law.

Decision on Error of Law

18. I have sympathy for the Judge who understood  that  the  appellant  had
    attended the hearing centre to pursue his appeal and only became  aware
    as to the true state of events upon arriving in the hearing room, being
    faced with the appellant's refusal to enter the hearing room  and  Miss
    Bagral's subsequent  application  for  a  short  six-week  adjournment.
    However, having decided to  proceed  with  the  appeal  the  Judge  was
    required to act fairly.  The Judge was aware of the appellant's medical
    condition:-

         33.  There are a number of medical letters within  the  appellant's
            bundle, a letter dated the 8 April 2019 from the appellant's  GP
            states that the appellant suffers from anxiety and low mood  and
            takes anti-depressants.  There are  a  number  of  letters  with
            regard  to  the  therapy  and  counselling  the  appellant   has
            undergone.  A letter of  the  1  February  2019  refers  to  his
            traumatic childhood.  It is said that the therapy  sessions  are
            progressing  'it  has  become  apparent  that  his  anxiety   is
            explained with reference to specific groups of people'.   It  is
            said the appellant struggles to complete day to  day  tasks  and
            that impacts upon  his  ability  to  gather  documents  for  his
            pending court case.  A letter of the 3 July 2018 speaks  of  his
            growing up in India witnessing fighting  and  arguments  between
            his parents.  'He also discloses historic childhood sexual abuse
            and experiences of great distress when discussing this'.

         34.  In evidence before me the appellant's  aunt  said  she  became
            aware of his mental health problem in 2015 and that was when  he
            first  went  to  the  GP  with  regard  to  that  problem.   The
            appellant, however, says that it was after his visa  application
            was refused  in  2017  that  he  started  having  flashbacks  of
            traumatic childhood incidents.  Looking at the medical evidence,
            all the medical evidence I have before me is  post  the  refusal
            letter.  I have not been provided with any GP  records  for  the
            years 2015 onwards.

19. I find that when undertaking what proved to be an adverse assessment of
    the  appellant's  credibility  the  Judge  undertook   no   preliminary
    consideration as to whether the appellant is a vulnerable  person,  and
    if so, how such vulnerability may impact upon the presentation  of  his
    evidence.  The Court of Appeal gave guidance in AM (Afghanistan) on the
    general approach to be adopted in law and practice by  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal and  the  Upper  Tribunal
    where claims for asylum were made by vulnerable persons  whose  ability
    to participate  effectively  in  proceedings  might  be  limited.   The
    guidance is designed to ensure that such  persons  enjoy  an  effective
    right of access to the Tribunal and a voice in the proceedings and that
    their claims  are  fairly  determined.   I  observe  that  the  court's
    scripture, that in appeals concerning vulnerable appellants, the higher
    standards of procedural fairness are required.   Though  the  Court  of
    Appeal was concerned with an asylum appeal,  the  requirement  that  an
    appellant enjoy effective access to justice, and in particular that his
    voice be heard in proceedings, is applicable to all hearings before the
    First-tier Tribunal as well as this Tribunal.   In  this  instance  the
    failure to undertake an assessment as to whether  the  appellant  is  a
    vulnerable person in light of the medical evidence relied upon, led  to
    a failure to abide by the overriding objective established by Rule 2 of
    the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 and so there is a fundamental procedural unfairness
    sufficient for this Tribunal to intervene.

20. I further observe that when considering unfairness, I am  not  required
    to consider whether ultimately the decision reached is  one  which  was
    open to the Tribunal or was Wednesbury unreasonable or  perverse.   The
    sole test is whether it was unfair.  I remind  myself  that  Tribunals,
    like courts, have to set aside a determination reached by the  adoption
    of an unfair procedure unless satisfied that it would be  pointless  to
    do so because the result would be the same: John v. Rees [1970] CH. 345
    and SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.

21. Whilst it would be open for a  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    decide that there was insufficient evidence to establish vulnerability,
    upon considering the evidence presented in this appeal  I  cannot  find
    that no Judge could reasonably find him vulnerable and  so  proceed  to
    assess his suicide ideation as being of such nature  as  to  allow  his
    appeal on article 8 grounds.  The appellant may have to  cross  several
    high hurdles, but I cannot say that he enjoys no chance of  success  on
    his suicide ideation grounds.  In  such  circumstances  the  procedural
    unfairness is such that the decision of the Judge must  be  set  aside.
    Having found in the appellant's  favour  as  to  there  having  been  a
    material error of law in respect of ground 2,  I  am  not  required  to
    consider grounds 1 and 3 to 5.

Remittal

22. As to remaking the decision I am again mindful that the  appellant  may
    be considered to have several hurdles to cross in order to  succeed  in
    his appeal.  I do not discount his ability to  do  so  as  I  have  not
    considered the  core  issues  of  his  appeal  in  significant  detail.
    However, whilst noting the Joint Practice Statement of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals in  this
    Tribunal and its confirmation that the  Upper  Tribunal  is  likely  to
    proceed to remake the decision following  the  finding  of  a  material
    error of law, I am mindful that  Judge  Cox  previously  adjourned  the
    appellant's hearing in March 2019 so as  to  permit  the  appellant  to
    undertake counselling and to then produce a  medical  report  from  his
    counsellor.  In such circumstances, and being aware that the  issue  of
    vulnerability remains to be fairly decided, I observe paragraph 7.2  of
    the Joint Practice Statement:-

         "7.2     The Upper Tribunal is likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
             proceed to remake the decision instead of remitting  the  case
             to the  First-tier  Tribunal  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
             satisfied that:-

             (a)      the effect of the error has  to  been  to  deprive  a
                  party before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing  or
                  other opportunity for that party's  case  to  be  put  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)      the nature or extent  of  any  judicial  fact-finding
                  which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal
                  to be remade is such that having regard to the  overriding
                  objective in Rule 2 it is appropriate to remit the case to
                  the First-tier Tribunal".

23. I have reached the conclusion that it  is  appropriate  to  remit  this
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all  matters.
    The appellant has enjoyed no adequate consideration of  his  appeal  to
    date and has not yet enjoyed a fair hearing.  It  is  appropriate  that
    the issue as to vulnerability is first  considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law and I set aside the Judge's decision  promulgated  on
    13 May 2019 pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007.

25. This matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing
    before any Judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lodge.

26. No findings of fact are preserved.



Directions

27. The appellant resides in London and has requested that  his  appeal  be
    transferred to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Hatton Cross.

28. This is not a matter that should be  subjected  to  unwarranted  delay.
    The appellant is required to produce medical and  other  evidence  upon
    which he wishes to rely.  His counselling with Re-Vision  is  scheduled
    to conclude on 14 November 2019 and Judge Cox expected a medical report
    to be produced from his counsellor.  Being mindful as  to  the  burdens
    placed upon report writers, I  direct  that  the  appellant  should  be
    granted eight weeks from 14 November 2019 to file and serve any medical
    evidence to be relied upon, taking into account the Christmas  and  New
    Year holidays, and the hearing of this appeal is to be  listed  on  the
    first available date two weeks thereafter.

29. I direct the following:

          1) At the appellant's request the hearing of this appeal is to be
             transferred to the First-tier Tribunal (IAC) sitting  at  York
             House.

          2) The appellant is to file with the First-tier Tribunal (IAC) at
             York House and serve upon the respondent any further  evidence
             he wishes to rely upon, including medical  evidence  no  later
             than by 4.00 p.m. on 9 January 2020.

          3) This appeal is to be listed on the first available date on  or
             after 23 January 2020 with a time estimate of two  hours.   It
             is not to be placed on the float list.



Signed: D O'Callaghan


Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 5 September 2019


