
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/16360/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons delivered ex      |
|                                      |tempore at the hearing.              |
|On 7 February 2018                    |On 8 March 2018                      |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                             mr behzad farvahari
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Geraint Jones QC, sitting at Hatton Cross  on  27  July  2017  in
    effect against an  application  for  entry  clearance.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle stating, in  part,  as
    follows:

         "The grounds assert that the Judge erred in his approach to Article
         8 ECHR grounds of appeal and gave inadequate consideration  to  the
         Appellant's claimed ability to meet the Immigration  Rules.   As  a
         result, his Article 8 balancing exercise was flawed.  Comparison of
         paragraphs 11 and 15 betrays ambiguity in the Judge's findings.  It
         is arguable that the judge has incorrectly applied Mostafa (Article
         8 in entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC) and Adjei (visit  visas
         - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC)."

2.    Mr Gayle who represented the Appellant in the First-tier Tribunal  and
    indeed appears on his behalf today explained to me that he has had  the
    opportunity before the hearing commenced to speak to Ms  Everett  about
    the matter.  He says that they have come to an agreed position  subject
    to the Tribunal's view that there is a material error  of  law  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  There was discussion as to  what
    may be the appropriate way forward if there is indeed a material  error
    of law.  Miss Everett confirms this agreement.

3.    The grounds are set out well  at  paragraphs  3,  4  and  5  when  the
    following is said:

         "3.      The Judge considered  the  application  of  the  dicta  in
             Mostafa in relation to in relation to consideration of factors
             under paragraph 352A Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  asserts
             that the correct procedure,  given  the  alleged  factual  and
             other errors in the refusal decision, would have been to apply
             for judicial review in the High Court, asking for the decision
             to be quashed and sent back for  redetermination.   Given  the
             degree to which the High  Court  is  battling  against  a  hug
             backlog of  judicial  reviews,  as  well  as  the  prohibitive
             associated costs, such an assertion is wholly unreasonable.


         2. The judge's assertion that the First-tier Tribunal does not have
             the jurisdiction to quash the decision  betrays  a  materially
             flawed application of the approach set out in  Mostafa.   Even
             under Section 84 of the 2002 Act, the blatant  errors  in  the
             refusal decision can be more than  adequately  dealt  with  as
             part of the proportionality assessment under Article 8.


         3. At paragraph 11, the judge states that he makes no finding as to
             whether the Appellant is  lawfully  married,  or  whether  the
             marriage is subsisting.   It  is  submitted  that  this  is  a
             material error of  law.   Although  limited  to  human  rights
             matters, this is an appeal against refusal of  refugee  family
             reunion.  The judge's assertion that  it  would  be  wrong  to
             place weight in the proportionality assessment on the  ability
             of  the  Appellant  to  succeed  under  paragraph   352A,   is
             perverse."


4.    In addition to those grounds Mr Gayle submitted today that  the  judge
    incorrectly said that there  was  no  evidence  by  way  of  a  written
    statement from the Appellant.  In fact, there was, and I was  taken  to
    page 66 of the bundle before the judge and there is  indeed  a  witness
    statement from the Appellant setting out the background.  It  has  been
    explained to me that the Appellant, and the Sponsor if I call her that,
    have been waiting for a long period of time to resolve the geographical
    separation that has come between them and I am referred to  a  detailed
    letter at pages 7 to 11 of the original bundle  dated  18  August  2016
    from Messrs Elder Rahini Solicitors addressed to  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager.  That refers to the various applications which had  been  made
    and it is said that all the requirements for leave  to  enter  for  the
    Appellant to join his refugee wife here in the UK had been met and that
    the refusal decision was interfering significantly  with  family  life.
    Not only that of the Appellant's wife but  also  of  the  children  and
    grandchildren, and indeed was impacting upon Mr Nejad's fragile  mental
    health.

5.    It does appear that there is strength in what has  been  submitted  on
    behalf of the Appellant today, namely that there has been a  very  long
    which has elapsed whereby this Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  have  been
    trying to reunite and I have explored with the parties as to  what  may
    be the quickest option in  terms  of  seeking  to  resolve  the  issues
    between the Appellant and the Entry Clearance Officer.  It appears that
    there is merit in what is submitted on behalf of Mr Gayle. Namely, that
    there appears to be a considerable amount of evidence  supporting  what
    the Appellant  has  contended.   The  difficulty  though  is  that  the
    evidence needs to be presented fully and at least to be explored by way
    of oral evidence through the Sponsor and perhaps others who are here in
    the United Kingdom and again, having canvassed the  possibilities  with
    the representatives, it appears that the quickest hearing date will  be
    achievable at the First-tier Tribunal.  I am sure that  the  judge  who
    deals with this matter at the First-tier  Tribunal  will  be  furnished
    with a composite bundle of documents setting out all  of  the  previous
    evidence and any updating evidence  to  further  support  the  position
    which is being advanced.  Clearly I  cannot  make  a  decision  on  the
    evidence but, as I say, it does appear to me that a significant  amount
    of evidence was presented to the Entry Clearance Officer  and  it  does
    not immediately appear that that evidence  was  necessarily  considered
    when making the decision.

Notice of Decision

      There is a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal and it  is
    set aside.  There will be a rehearing on all matters at the  First-tier
    Tribunal at Hatton Cross.

      No anonymity direction is made.


Signed: Abid Mahmood                               Date: 7th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
