
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/16853/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 October 2019                   |On 3 December 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     SD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Griffiths, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I have decided to anonymise the appellant. There is  evidence  before
       me concerning the appellant's  wife's  mental  health.   I  have  had
       regard to Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber Guidance Note
       2013 No 1: Anonymity Orders and  specifically  Rule  14  (7)  of  the
       Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana. His date of  birth  is  25  July
       1981. This is the  appellant's  application  to  appeal  against  the
       decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Eldridge to dismiss his  appeal
       against the  respondent's  decision  to  deport  him.  The  appellant
       appealed on the ground that deportation would breach his rights under
       Article 8.  The decision to  deport  the  appellant  arose  from  his
       conviction of possession of Class A drugs with intent  for  which  he
       was sentenced to 42 months imprisonment. The appellant was  convicted
       and sentenced on 2 November  2016.  Judge  Eldridge  found  that  the
       appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with his partner,
       JA, and their children, but that  deportation  would  not  be  unduly
       harsh and that  the  decision  to  deport  him  was  a  proportionate
       interference with his family and private life.

    3. Permission was granted to the appellant on 5 June 2019 by FTTJ  Boyes
       on all grounds.

    4. I found that there was procedural unfairness and therefore  that  the
       first ground was made out. I communicated this to the parties at  the
       hearing on 22 October 2019. Having found that  there  was  procedural
       unfairness, I set aside the decision of Judge Eldridge  and  remitted
       the case to the FTT. Both parties agreed  that  if  I  were  to  find
       unfairness this would be the appropriate venue for a de novo hearing.
        It is not necessary for me to engage with all grounds.

Error of Law

    5. The appellant argued that there  was  procedural  unfairness  arising
       from the decision of the FTT to proceed with the hearing  instead  of
       adjourning at the request of the appellant's Counsel,  Ms  Griffiths.
       The appellant attended the hearing on 21 March 2019. He asked for  an
       adjournment of the basis that his father-in-law, SA, was not able  to
       attend because he was in hospital having suffered from a "mini- heart
       attack". JA, (SA's daughter) was not in attendance because  according
       to the appellant she was unable to give evidence without  her  father
       being in attendance because she is a vulnerable witness. There was no
       medical evidence to support the application and it was opposed by the
       presenting officer.

    6. The reasons for the judge refusing to adjourn are set out at [18] and
       [19]. He said that the appeal had been before the Tribunal for a very
       long period. He said that if  the  appellant's  partner,  JA,  was  a
       vulnerable witness this should have been addressed earlier and  there
       would be medical records to support this. He said  that  nothing  had
       been produced from  the  hospital  or  any  medical  practitioner  as
       regards SA.  The  judge  concluded  that  it  was  fair  to  proceed,
       considering  that  there  were  witness  statements  from   the   two
       witnesses.  He heard  evidence  from  the  appellant.   Ms  Griffiths
       renewed her application to adjourn at the hearing after the appellant
       had given evidence on the basis that this was necessary to enable  JA
       to give evidence about the children's  best  interests  and  her  own
       medical condition. Again, the application was refused. Judge Eldridge
       again noted that there was no  documentary  evidence  supporting  her
       condition.

    7. At the hearing before me there was  a  letter  of  8  May  2019  from
       Basildon University Hospital to Dr Deshpande concerning SA.  It  sets
       out his medical history including that he has chronic kidney  disease
       and that he was admitted with a chest infection and discharged on  22
       March 2019.  There was a further statement from JA of 22 October 2019
       explaining why she was unable to attend the hearing.  She  says  that
       she suffers from learning disabilities and anxiety. She  finds  going
       to court difficult  and  overwhelming  and  struggles  to  understand
       complicated matters. She did  not  attend  the  hearing  because  she
       needed the support of her father.

    8. There was a further statement from SA submitted to explain  his  non-
       attendance. His evidence is that he was in hospital at the time for 4
       days. It was the second time that year that he had been  hospitalised
       for a heart problem although he was initially  treated  for  a  chest
       infection. He was not able to produce  the  discharge  letter  having
       mislaid it.  He had to get another letter from the hospital,  and  he
       has only just received it (the copy of the letter from  the  hospital
       to Dr Deshpande of 8 May 2019).

    9. The thrust of Ms Griffiths' argument of was that the judge needed  to
       accede to the request for an adjournment in order to  do  justice  to
       the appeal. JA could not give evidence in the absence of her  father.
       I queried why this had not been raised before  the  hearing.  I  said
       that it was not made clear from the evidence before the FTT that  her
       vulnerability was to such an extent  that  she  was  unable  to  give
       evidence without her father's presence.  Ms Griffiths said  that  the
       issue had not arisen because it was anticipated that they would  both
       be at the hearing. She drew may  attention  the  matter  having  been
       previously listed in  December  2018  when  the  appellant  and  both
       witnesses attended, but  on  that  occasion  the  matter  had  to  be
       adjourned because the respondent's decision was not complete.

   10. The respondent's position is that there is no unfairness.  There  was
       no medical evidence and there has been no application under Rule  15A
       of the Rules.  In any event, the judge rejected that the  appellant's
       partner had learning difficulties and rejected the  proposition  that
       any alleged difficulties had any material impact on  her  ability  to
       look after the children.  In  addition,  it  was  accepted  that  the
       relationship was genuine and subsisting between the appellant and  JA
       and the appellant and the children.

   11. The further evidence now relied on has not been served in  accordance
       with the directions of the UT. However, I admit the  evidence  relied
       on by the appellant to support the assertion  of  unfairness.   I  am
       satisfied that at least part of the  new  evidence  (that  supporting
       SA's hospitalisation) could not have been  obtained  with  reasonable
       diligence and that the evidence may have had an  important  influence
       on the decision to adjourn and the overall outcome  and  additionally
       there was no challenge to the veracity of  the  evidence  tending  to
       show that SA was  in  hospital  at  the  material  time.  SA  in  his
       statement explains why he was not able  to  obtain  evidence  of  his
       hospitalisation until a short while ago. He said that he had  mislaid
       the discharge summary. I accept  that  explanation.   I  accept  that
       Judge Eldridge reasonably refused the application; however,  that  is
       not the issue before me.   The criterion to be applied on  an  appeal
       is fairness, properly applying MM (unfairness; E &  R)  Sudan  [2014]
       UKUT.

   12. I had sympathy with Ms Jones' submission in  respect  of  JA  because
       there was no evidence before the  judge  that  her  attendance  as  a
       witness was dependent on the attendance of her  father.   However,  I
       accept that the skeleton argument  before  Judge  Eldridge  submitted
       that that she is a vulnerable witness and that the Joint Presidential
       Guidance  Note  2  of  2010  applied:  Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and
       Sensitive Witnesses Guidance and Practice Direction.  Ms  Jones  drew
       my attention to the judge having rejected evidence  of  "significant"
       learning difficulties. However, I note that  there  was  evidence  in
       SA's witness statement which was before the judge that  his  daughter
       has a form of autism and other  health  problems  and  that  she  has
       learning difficulties (having been diagnosed when aged 14 or 15). His
       evidence  was  that  she  gets  nervous  and  can  be  difficult   to
       understand.

   13. I have taken on board Ms Jones' submissions in  respect  of  JA.  The
       judge did not accept that her vulnerabilities were significant. There
       was an absence of independent evidence on the issue and there was  no
       evidence that she was  unable  to  attend  the  hearing  without  her
       father.  The appellant relies on post decision evidence from  her  GP
       which  does  not  in  my  view  take  matters.  There  was  a  proper
       application made  under  Rule  15A  to  adduce  this  statement.  The
       application was refused by an UTJ.   The  letter  (of  23  May  2019)
       simply asserts that "she  has  requested  a  letter  to  confirm  her
       learning disabilities diagnosis".

   14. Whilst I appreciate that an absence of witnesses  is  not  in  itself
       unfair and that the appellant was able to  give  evidence  about  his
       partner and father-in -law, on the facts of  this  case,  I  conclude
       that there was unfairness. Whilst the witnesses had given  statements
       which were before the judge, they had not advanced evidence  that  JA
       was unable to attend without  her  father.  I  accept  Ms  Griffiths'
       submission that this was not something which  they  foresaw.  I  also
       accept that had the witnesses attended the judge  may  have  taken  a
       different view about the manifestation of JA's  autism  and  learning
       difficulties.   SA in his witness statement which  was  before  Judge
       Eldridge states that his daughter had learning difficulties (page 5).
       The judge queried the extent and  the  implications  of  this.    The
       evidence now before me may have assisted the judge.

   15. The judge had to make an assessment of unduly harsh in the context of
       JA and her and  the  appellant's  children.   The  evidence  of  each
       witness individually or taken  together  which  was  not  before  the
       judge, contains evidence material to  that  assessment.  Whilst,  the
       test is a very demanding one, I cannot be sure that had the judge had
       sight of the evidence now before me, he would have reached  the  same
       conclusion.

   16. Whilst the matter has been remitted to the FTT to be heard afresh,  I
       make the following observations.  There  is  evidence  of  SA  having
       health problems. It is unlikely that the FTT will accede to a further
       application for an adjournment arising from his inability  to  attend
       on the grounds of ill  health.  The  solicitors  should  prepare  the
       appellant's case on this basis. This may require  full  and  detailed
       witness statements and for another member of the family to attend the
       Tribunal with JA in  the  event  of  her  father's  absence.  If  the
       Tribunal is being asked to make  any  reasonable  adjustments  it  is
       incumbent on those representing the appellant to bring  this  to  the
       attention of the Tribunal in good time for the hearing.

   17. The appellant gave evidence at the  hearing  before  Judge  Eldridge,
       parts of which the judge set out (see [51], [53]-[54]). There  is  no
       challenge to this. A judge hearing the  appeal  afresh  may  properly
       take account of it.  The  judge  made  positive  findings  about  the
       appellant's family life. Of course, the FTT will have to consider the
       circumstances at the date of the hearing, but the findings  of  Judge
       Eldridge about the relationships that existed between  the  appellant
       and his wife and his children (at the date of the hearing before  him
       in March 2019) should be the starting point for an assessment.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 2 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

