
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16877/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th January 2019                 |On 6th February 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     f K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Bashow of Counsel instructed by Mohammed
                    Anderson & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal made against the decision of Judge Drake
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 17th March 2018.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  12th  May  1978.   He
    married a British citizen in  2012.   She  has  a  son  from  a  former
    relationship, born on 16th October 2005, also a British citizen.  He is
    now 13 years old and attending secondary school.  The couple also  have
    a second son born on 17th January 2017.

 3. For over twenty years the appellant has been living in the UAE  running
    a small and successful haulage business.  He came here on 16th  January
    2017 on a visit visa valid to 26th October 2017 in order to attend  his
    son's birth.  Following the birth  his  wife  was  unwell  and  she  is
    undergoing physiotherapy.  She does not work,  and  the  appellant  now
    supports the family with his savings.

 4. He decided that it was necessary for him to remain in the UK  in  order
    to look after his family and so, on 15th June 2017, he made an  in-time
    application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of his  private
    and family life.

 5. The respondent refused the application on 20th November 2017 and it was
    this refusal which was the subject of the appeal before the Immigration
    Judge.

 6. The judge accepted that there was a genuine family life  in  this  case
    but considered that it would be reasonable for the wife and children to
    go with the appellant to live either in the UAE or in Pakistan, and  on
    that basis dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in law in failing to apply Section 117B of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  in  her   consideration   of   the
    proportionality of removal.  In particular there was a complete failure
    to consider the position of the two British children in this case.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Shaerf on 30th May 2018.

 9. Mr Diwnycz accepted that the judge had erred in law and made no further
    submissions on the merits, simply observing that the genuineness of the
    relationship had been accepted.

10. Ms Bashow relied on her grounds and argued that  it  would  be  plainly
    unreasonable for the appellant's stepchild to be expected to leave  the
    UK given that he was now in secondary school, had never been either  to
    Pakistan or to the UAE.  She relied  on  the  decision  in  MT  and  ET
    (child's best interests; extempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 00088.

Findings and Conclusions

11. Mr Diwnycz accepted that the decision would have to be remade.

12. The appellant does not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    having arrived in the UK relatively recently as a visitor and  has  not
    demonstrated insurmountable obstacles to a return  to  his  country  of
    nationality.

13. In considering whether the appeal ought to  be  allowed  on  Article  8
    principles outside  the  Immigration  Rules  I  am  required  to  apply
    paragraph 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

14. The main issue here concerns paragraph 117B(6), but  for  completeness,
    in relation to paragraph 117B(2),  the  appellant  speaks  English,  in
    relation to 117B(3), he is financially independent, and in relation  to
    117B(4), the relationship between the appellant and his  wife  was  not
    formed at a time when he was in the UK unlawfully.  Indeed he has never
    been in the UK unlawfully.

15. Paragraph 117B(6) states that in the case of a person who is not liable
    to deportation the  public  interest  does  not  require  the  person's
    removal  where  the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child and it would not be reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK.

16. In this  case  there  are  two  qualifying  children,  the  appellant's
    biological child who is 2 years old and, perhaps more  relevantly,  his
    stepson who is now 13 and at secondary school.

17. In MA (Pakistan) and Others v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ  705  the  Court  of
    Appeal held that even on the approach of the Secretary  of  State,  the
    fact that a  child  has  been  here  for  seven  years  must  be  given
    significant weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise.  The
    guidance of  August  2015,  in  the  form  of  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions entitled Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and  Private
    Life Ten Year Routes, expressly  states  that  once  the  seven  years'
    residence requirement is satisfied there need to be strong reasons  for
    refusing leave.

18. At paragraph 49 the Court of Appeal said

         "The fact that the child has been in the UK for seven  years  would
         need to be given significant weight in the proportionality exercise
         for two  related  reasons:  first,  because  of  its  relevance  to
         determining the nature and strength of a  child's  best  interests;
         and second, because it establishes as a starting point  that  leave
         should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful  reasons  to  the
         contrary."

19. Clearly the best interests are of the appellant's British  stepson  lie
    in remaining in the UK where he has lived all of his life and where  he
    is now at a critical stage of his education.

20. The appellant has a good immigration history, having complied with  the
    requirements of immigration control at all times.  It is  difficult  to
    see what powerful reasons there could be to support the contention that
    it would be reasonable to expect the family to relocate either  to  the
    UAE (particularly since the appellant's work permit there has  expired)
    or to Pakistan.  Indeed Mr Diwnycz did not seek  to  argue  that  there
    were any such reasons.

21. The original judge erred in law.  The decision is  set  aside.   It  is
    remade as follows.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed[pic]                             Date 4 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
