

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16189/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26 July 2021                              |On 04 August 2021              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

                                shanaz akhter
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Anawar Miah of Counsel, instructed by Farani
Taylor solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Esen Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on 17 September 2019 to refuse  her  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of private life and medical issues, with reference
    to paragraph 276ADE. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.

Background

 2. The appellant came to the United Kingdom on a family visit visa  on  19
    June 2013, having entered three times previously on the same  visa  and
    left at the end of her visit.  On this occasion, she  did  not  do  so.
    The appellant has had no valid leave since 19 December 2013,  when  her
    visit visa expired.  She has adult children and grandchildren here  but
    no dependents under the age of 18.

Refusal letter

 3. In her refusal letter dated 20 May  2015,  the  respondent  found  that
    there were no very significant obstacles to reintegration in  Pakistan,
    where the appellant lived until she was 43 years old (she is  58  years
    old now). The links she had with her adult siblings and extended family
    members were not  considered  to  be  exceptional  circumstances.   The
    application was refused under paragraph 276ADE(1)(i), (iii), (iv),  (v)
    and (vi) of the Rules, which excluded her from the  10-year  settlement
    route.

 4. The respondent also  considered  whether  leave  to  remain  should  be
    granted outside the Rules on compassionate grounds on the basis of  the
    appellant's health.  She complained of depression, anxiety, stress, low
    mood,  suicidal  thoughts,  colitis,  osteoarthritis,   a   vitamin   D
    deficiency, severe  memory  loss,  essential  hypertension,  dizziness,
    chest pains, nausea and vomiting,  raised  lipids,  hiatus  hernia  and
    reflux.   The  appellant  had  been  prescribed  Simvastatin  (20  mg),
    Losartan (50 mg) and Lansoprazole (30 mg).

 5. A letter from the appellant's general medical  practitioner,  Dr  Jyoti
    Singh,  confirmed  the  hypertension,  osteoarthritis,  depression  and
    vitamin D deficiency.  The appellant had  also  been  referred  to  the
    spinal diagnostic team.

 6.  A  letter  from  Lucy   Lipscomb,   Senior   Psychological   Wellbeing
    Practitioner mentioned assessing the appellant due to issues  with  low
    mood, anxiety and stress.  There were occasional thoughts of  self-harm
    but the appellant had made no  plans  and  had  no  developed  suicidal
    intention, which would be contrary to her religion,  nor  had  she  any
    history of attempts.  She feared her ex-husband might harm her  if  she
    were returned to Pakistan.

 7. The respondent considered that treatment was available in Pakistan  for
    the appellant's  health  issues  and  that  these  did  not  amount  to
    compassionate factors for which leave to remain ought  to  be  granted.
    Pakistan had a functioning healthcare system and none of the conditions
    were life threatening.

 8. Following  the  refusal,  the  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 9. On 11 December 2019, First-tier Judge Easterman dismissed  the  appeal.
    It is common ground that he failed entirely to  address  whether  there
    were 'very significant obstacles to integration' in Pakistan.

10. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

11. On 21 April 2020, First-tier Judge Foudy granted permission to  appeal,
    on the basis that the First-tier Judge had arguably  failed  adequately
    to consider what, if any,  very  significant  obstacles  the  appellant
    faced to reintegration in Pakistan.

Rule 24 Reply

12. There was no Rule 24 Reply from the respondent.

13. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

14. On 20 August 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge  Blundell  gave  directions  to
    clarify what had been argued before Judge Easterman, to  be  considered
    at an oral hearing.  The hearing was  originally  to  have  been  heard
    remotely but fortunately it has been possible to hear it face  to  face
    as the Covid pandemic restrictions have eased recently.

15. In consequence, the Tribunal has the advantage of seeing the  notes  of
    Ms Amanda Jones, who appeared  for  the  appellant  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and Mr Adebisi Adenaike, the Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    who represented the respondent. It is quite clear from these notes that
    the question of whether there were very significant obstacles  remained
    in issue before the First-tier Tribunal.

16. Mr Tufan for the  respondent  submitted  that  the  First-tier  Judge's
    reasoning  on  proportionality  and  exceptional  and/or  compassionate
    circumstances outside the Rules was sufficient to indicate that had  he
    considered whether there were significant obstacles  to  reintegration,
    he would have reached the same conclusion and that any error of law was
    thus immaterial.

Analysis

17. So far as relevant  to  this  appeal,  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  is  as
    follows:

         "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on  the
         grounds of private life

         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the
         date of application, the applicant: ...

         (vi) ... is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in  the
         UK for less than 20 years (discounting any period of  imprisonment)
         but there would be very significant obstacles  to  the  applicant's
         integration into the country to  which  he  would  have  to  go  if
         required           to           leave           the            UK."
              [Emphasis added]

18. I indicated to Mr Tufan that I was not with him on  his  argument  that
    the error would have been immaterial to the outcome of the appeal.  The
    refusal letter relied on paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and an express finding
    of fact on that issue should have been made.

19. There was no alternative but to set aside the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Judge and arrange for the appeal to be reheard afresh in the First-
    tier Tribunal.

DECISION

20. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.
    I set aside the previous decision.
    The decision in this appeal will be remade in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on a date to be fixed.

Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:      26 July
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



