
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Hu/16791/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 February 2018                          |On 23 February 2018           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                             mr syed nafiz hasan
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Marafat, Legal Representative.
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Bangladesh  who  made  a  human  rights
    application for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the
    grounds of his ten years continuous lawful residence.  His  application
    was considered in terms of paragraph 276B with reference to 276A  to  D
    and paragraph 276ADE. Consideration was also given to  the  application
    in terms of Appendix FM and  paragraph  276ADE(1)-CE  and  outside  the
    Immigration Rules. The refusal  was  because  the  Appellant  had  been
    outside the United Kingdom for a period of over six months from 22 July
    2010 until 25 July 2011 which broke his long residence and therefore he
    could not  meet  the  Rules  in  terms  of  paragraph  276B(i)(a).  The
    Appellant's appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Hands
    who, following a hearing on 30 July 2017 dismissed it.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was initially  refused.
    A renewed application was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Keki?  on  1
    December 2017. Her reasons for so doing are: -

         "The appellant challenges the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Hands dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to
         refuse to grant indefinite leave to  remain  because  he  had  been
         outside the UK for just over one year between July  2010  and  2011
         and his period of lawful  leave  had  therefore  been  broken.  The
         respondent also considered there were no reasons to warrant a grant
         of discretionary leave.

         The reason the appellant left the UK was  because  his  application
         for further leave had been refused on the grounds that he failed to
         show the required funds for maintenance for a 28-day  period  prior
         to his application. After his departure, the respondent changed her
         policy and undertook to reconsider certain categories of applicants
         including those who had left the UK.

         The appellant argues that  he  fell  into  one  of  the  categories
         requiring reconsideration, that had his application  been  properly
         considered under that guidance he would have been  granted  further
         leave and that he would have completed an unbroken ten-year period.



         Arguably, the judge did not consider the  respondent's  failure  to
         follow  her  policy.  The  grounds,  which  could  have  been  more
         succinctly and coherently put, may all be argued."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. Both parties  agreed  that  the  Judge  had  materially  erred  in  not
    considering the Respondent's failure to follow her own policy and  that
    consequently this is an appeal that should be remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be heard de novo.

 5. That is an analysis I share.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Hands.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 19 February 2018.
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
