
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16690/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Skype        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 March 2021                     |On 3 June 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before
                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD IMTIAZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z. Malik QC, instructed by Hiren Patel
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  This  matter  comes  before  us  following   the   quashing   by   the
    Administrative Court of an earlier refusal  of  permission  to  appeal.
    The order of the High Court was made by  Master  Gidden  in  the  usual
    form, simply quashing the decision to  refuse  permission,  despite  an
    indication by Mostyn J that an order would be made in a different form,
    in particular, directing the Upper  Tribunal  to  grant  permission  to
    appeal and transferring the costs of the Judicial Review proceedings to
    the Upper Tribunal to be dealt with at the conclusion of the appeals.

 2. Before us, Mr Malik QC indicated that he was content to operate on  the
    basis of the order as made, and that he required permission to  appeal.
    On behalf of the Secretary of State, Ms Cunha told us that she did  not
    resist the application for permission to appeal.   It  appeared  to  us
    that the matters to be canvassed before us were clearly  arguable,  and
    we therefore granted permission.  With the agreement of the parties, we
    accordingly pass to substantive consideration of the appeal.

 3. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, who entered the United Kingdom
    in 2009, with leave.  He was granted further leave, most recently as  a
    Tier 1 Entrepreneur.  That leave was due to expire on 20 May 2018.

 4. On 18 May 2018 the appellant submitted an application for further leave
    as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur.  That application was refused, with  a  right
    to administrative review, on 13 March 2019.   The  appellant  exercised
    the right to administrative review, but the decision was maintained  in
    a decision of 29 April 2019.  On 11  May  2019  the  appellant  made  a
    further application for leave as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur.  It  is  common
    ground that at the time of making that application  the  appellant  did
    not have existing  leave;  but  it  is  also  common  ground  that  the
    application was made within 14 days of the expiry of his leave.  On  23
    September 2019, the 11 May application not  having  been  decided,  the
    appellant made an application for indefinite leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of 10 years' continuous lawful residence.  On 27  September  2019
    the Secretary of State refused the application for indefinite leave  to
    remain on the basis of 10  years'  continuous  lawful  residence.   The
    primary reason  for  that  refusal  was  that  the  appellant's  lawful
    residence amounted to  only  9  years  and  6  months,  his  subsequent
    residence, following the expiry of his leave earlier  in  2019,  having
    been unlawful.  In making the decision, the Secretary of State went  on
    to consider other elements of the rules relating  to  family  life  and
    private life, and to the  appellant's  article  8  rights  outside  the
    rules.  She noted that the appellant's family were not  in  the  United
    Kingdom but that he could be reunited with them  and  they  could  live
    together as  a  family  in  Pakistan.   The  conclusion  was  that  the
    appellant did not qualify for leave under any of the provisions of  the
    Rules, and that there  was  no  reason  why  refusing  him  leave,  and
    requiring him to return to Pakistan, would be a breach of any provision
    of the Human Rights Act 1998.

 5. It is convenient at this point to make  two  observations.   The  first
    relates to the calculation of the period of lawful leave.  Although the
    appellant's leave expired before he made his  most  recent  application
    for leave as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur on 11 May 2019, because he made that
    application within 14 days of the expiry of his leave, that  period  of
    overstaying fell to be disregarded for the purposes  for  his  need  to
    show, in an application for Tier 1 leave, that he was not in the United
    Kingdom "in breach of immigration laws" (see  paragraphs  245DD(g)  and
    paragraph 39E of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules, HC  395
    (as amended)).  Questions had arisen as to the extent to which a period
    of overstaying disregarded in this way impacted upon  a  person's  full
    record of the legality of presence in the  United  Kingdom.   The  fact
    that lead cases were to be heard by the Court of Appeal was the primary
    reason for Mostyn J's grant of permission in  the  Judicial  Review  to
    which we referred at the beginning of  this  decision.   The  Court  of
    Appeal gave its judgment on 22 October 2020: Hoque v SSHD  [2020]  EWCA
    Civ 1357.  The "disregard" provisions of paragraph 39E do not apply  to
    the requirement in paragraph 276B(i)(a)  that  the  applicant  have  at
    least 10  years'  lawful  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  is
    therefore clear that in the present case this point was correctly taken
    by the Secretary of State in relation to the application for  leave  to
    remain on the grounds of 10 years' lawful residence: the appellant  has
    not had 10 years lawful residence in the United Kingdom.

 6. In relation to another matter,  the  Secretary  of  State  was  clearly
    wrong.  It is not the case that the whole of the appellant's family  is
    outside the United Kingdom.  Following the death of a family member  in
    2018, the appellant's  wife  and  his  two  younger  children  went  to
    Pakistan,  where  they  remain.   The  appellant's  oldest  child,  SI,
    remained in the United Kingdom.  (There is room for confusion,  because
    the initials of another of the children are also SI, but we  shall  use
    "SI" to refer to the child who is in the United Kingdom).  It is  clear
    from what we have already said that the  Secretary  of  State  took  no
    account of the position of SI.  That is of some importance, because  SI
    has health difficulties, of which there appears to have  been  evidence
    before the Secretary of State, and there is certainly evidence that has
    been adduced in the appeal process.

 7. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  grounds  of
    appeal, as supplemented, and as considered by the First-tier  Tribunal,
    raise three issues.  The first is that which has now been  disposed  of
    by Hoque.  The second is that the appellant's application for leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur (in relation to which  the  overstaying
    would fall to be disregarded) was still pending and  awaited  decision.
    The third head of  the  grounds  related  to  SI's  condition  and  the
    consequences of his having to depart from the United Kingdom.

 8. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal there was  no  appearance
    by or on behalf of the respondent.  Judge Birrell heard  oral  evidence
    from the appellant and  took  into  account  the  documentary  evidence
    adduced.  Counsel for the appellant before her did in fact accept  that
    the appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraph  276B(i)(a).
    In relation to the second ground, she referred to the  decision  of  Mr
    Akhlaq Choudhury QC (as he then was) in R (Chaparadza)  v  SSHD  [2017]
    EWHC 1209 (Admin).   We shall discuss this case in some detail later in
    this decision.  For the moment it suffices to say  that  Judge  Birrell
    declined to follow Chaparadza  on  the  ground  that  in  reaching  the
    conclusion that he had done in that case, Mr  Chowdhury  had  not  been
    referred to paragraph 34BB of the Immigration Rules.  (We discuss  this
    below at [12] ff.) Judge Birrell therefore decided that only  the  long
    residence application was before  the  Secretary  of  State,  and  that
    application had been correctly decided in accordance with the Rules.

 9. Judge Birrell then went on to look at the evidence outside  the  Rules.
    Her summary of the evidence before him was as follows:

         "45.  It is argued that returning to Pakistan would not be  in  the
         best interests of [SI].  I have read all of  the  medical  evidence
         relating to him which is at AB 35-97: from Dr Cowling an  associate
         specialist in Community Paediatrics, Catherine Himsworth  a  speech
         and language therapist, Lisa Henderson  the  co  Ordinator  of  the
         paediatric  cochlear  implant  programme,   Dr   Veronica   Kennedy
         Consultant in Audio vestibular medicine and the most recent  letter
         from Dr Cowling.

         46. [SI] has Pendred syndrome which has  caused  profound  sensori-
         neural  hearing  impairment.   He  has   cochlear   implants.    In
         association with his hearing loss  he  has  significantly  impaired
         language and communication skills which  impact  on  his  learning,
         behaviour and general development (AB 35).  He attends a specialist
         school for children with  hearing  impairment.   I  note  that  the
         cochlear implants are described as 'highly technical and specialist
         pieces of equipment' and that from the various  organisations  [SI]
         is receiving a high level of support.

         47.  It is argued by the Appellant that the necessary  support  and
         expertise to deal with the cochlear implants and to enable the [SI]
         to continue to improve in his speech and language development  will
         not be available in Pakistan.  I remind myself that  the  Appellant
         bears the burden of proof in this appeal.  While the  Appellant  in
         evidence suggested that his  wife  had  spoken  to  specialists  in
         Pakistan, I did not hear evidence from his wife or from any of  the
         experts she spoke to in Pakistan.  I  was  not  provided  with  any
         background material at all about the provision of care and  support
         for deaf children in Pakistan.  Even the Appellant in his  evidence
         stated that the Doctors there had told his wife they could not  say
         whether  they  could  treat  his  son  without  examining  him  and
         therefore they did not exclude the possibility of  treatment  being
         available.  None of the  Doctors  in  the  UK  claim  to  have  any
         particular knowledge and expertise in relation to medical  care  in
         Pakistan with Dr Cowling only able to state "I am not sure  whether
         this sort of specialist support would be available  if  the  family
         were to return to Pakistan.

         48. [citing AM (section 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)].

         49. While every case is fact specific  I  find  that  the  evidence
         placed before me falls short  of  establishing  that  returning  to
         Pakistan would be contrary to [SI]'s best interests as there was no
         evidence about such care in Pakistan only supposition on  the  part
         of the Appellant and those who care for [SI] and have no  knowledge
         of what is available there."

10. Judge Birrell therefore concluded that the best interests  of  all  the
    children would be to return to Pakistan with their parents.   She  went
    on to work through s 117B itself, and concluded as follows:

         "56.  When considering where the  balance  lies  between  the  best
         interests of the children on the one hand  where  I  have  set  out
         above that the best interests of the children are  to  return  with
         their  family  to  Pakistan,  and  the  importance  of  maintaining
         immigration control on the other, I am mindful of the fact that the
         children should not be punished for the actions of  their  parents.
         But I am entitled to take into account the fact that they  are  not
         British Citizen children and  are  not  entitled  as  of  right  to
         benefit from the education system and other public services of this
         country.  Whilst it will inevitably cause  ...  some  distress  and
         hardship to this family to  return  to  their  home  country  after
         nearly 10 years in the UK, I am not persuaded  that  this  will  be
         sufficiently grave to outweigh the wider interests  of  maintaining
         immigration control.  The Appellant is well educated and it was not
         suggested that he would be unable to find work.  They  have  family
         there and would therefore have a network of social support.   While
         I acknowledge that there will be challenges for [SI] in  particular
         who has benefitted from the wide range of support for deaf children
         in the UK the Appellant failed to provide any  persuasive  evidence
         to suggest that such  support  and  treatment  was  unavailable  in
         Pakistan.  While the treatment may not  match  the  high  standards
         available in the UK that is not the test.  Without knowing what  is
         available in Pakistan  I  can  give  no  weight  to  Ms  Pinder[']s
         argument that [SI] would be  left  unable  to  communicate  and  be
         socially isolated.  I find that the evidence provided  in  relation
         to [SI] falls very far short of reaching the threshold required  to
         engage Article 3.

         57. I am satisfied that in this  case  the  application  failed  to
         comply with the Immigration Rules and no  compelling  circumstances
         were identified why those Rules should not be applied in this  case
         in the usual way, there was nothing  disproportionate  in  applying
         the Rules in accordance with their  terms,  with  the  effect  that
         Appellant[']s  application  failed.   In  determining  whether  the
         removal would be proportionate to the legitimate aim of immigration
         control  I  find  that  none  of   the   facts   underpinning   the
         Appellant[']s life in the United Kingdom taken either singularly or
         cumulatively outweigh the legitimate purpose of  the  Appellant[']s
         removal."

11. She accordingly dismissed the appeal.

12. Before us, the first issue is the effect the application for indefinite
    leave to remain on 23 September 2019.  Did it supplement or augment the
    pending  application  of  11  May  2019  for  leave  to  remain  as  an
    entrepreneur, or did it supersede it, so that the application for leave
    as  an  entrepreneur  no  longer  required  determination?   Mr   Malik
    submitted that we should follow Chaparadza.

13. In that case  the  Court  was  concerned  with  a  claim  for  unlawful
    detention.  One of the issued raised was that the claimant had leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom during  the  period  of  detention.   That
    claim depended on two points of statutory  interpretation.   The  facts
    were that the claimant had had leave to remain which was due to  expire
    on 31 July 2011.  Before the expiry of that leave  he  made  a  further
    application for leave to remain.  That application was refused, but the
    notice of the refusal was  incorrectly  served.   Before  it  had  been
    correctly served, on 2 June 2013, the claimant claimed  asylum.   On  2
    July 2013 the  asylum  claim  was  refused.   On  the  first  issue  of
    statutory interpretation, the judge found that the failure correctly to
    serve the notice of refusal of the original application for leave meant
    that it was still pending, awaiting a  lawfully-notified  decision,  at
    the time of the asylum claim.

14. The second point is that relevant to this case.  At  the  time  of  the
    claimant's detention, although the asylum claim had been determined and
    refused, there had still been no decision on the  original  application
    for further leave.  It was common ground  that,  because  the  original
    application was made before the expiry of existing leave, section 3C of
    the Immigration Act 1971 operated to extend the  existing  leave  until
    the decision on the application.  The question  was  therefore  whether
    the original application still  awaited  a  decision,  or  whether  the
    decision on the asylum claim was sufficient to determine it.

15. Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 is as follows:

         "Continuation of leave pending variation decision

         (1)  This section applies if-

               a) a person who has limited leave to enter or remain in the
                  United Kingdom applies to the Secretary of State for
                  variation of the leave,

               b) the application for variation is made before the leave
                  expires, and

               c) the leave expires without the application for variation
                  having been decided.

         (2)  The leave is extended by virtue of this section during any
         period when-

               a) the application for variation is neither decided nor
                  withdrawn,

             (b)  an appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Asylum
                  and Immigration Act 2002 could be brought, while the
                  appellant is in the United Kingdom against the decision on
                  the application for variation (ignoring any possibility of
                  an appeal out of time with permission),

             (c)  an appeal under that section against that decision
                  brought while the appellant is in the United Kingdom, is
                  pending (within the meaning of section 104 of that Act),

             ...

               d) an administrative review of the decision on the
                  application for variation-

                   i) could be sought, or

                  ii) is pending.

         (3)  Leave extended by virtue of this section shall lapse if the
         applicant leaves the United Kingdom.

         (3A) Leave extended by virtue of this section may be cancelled if
         the applicant-

               a) has failed to comply with a condition attached to the
                  leave, or

               b) has used or uses deception in seeking leave to remain
                  (whether successfully or not).

         (4)  A person may not make an application for variation of his
         leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom while that leave is
         extended by virtue of this section.

         (5)  But subsection (4) does not prevent the variation of the
         application mentioned in subsection (1)(a).

         (6)  The Secretary of State may make regulations determining when
         an application is decided for the purposes of this section; and the
         regulations-

               a) may make provision by reference to receipt of a notice,

               b) may provide for a notice to be treated as having been
                  received in specified circumstances,

               c) may make different provision for different purposes or
                  circumstances,

               d) shall be made by statutory instrument, and

               e) shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution
                  of either House of Parliament."

16. The judge referred to the leading case on the interpretation of  s  3C,
    JH (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 78.  In that case,  the  Court  of
    Appeal decided that an application could be varied within  the  meaning
    of s 3C(5)  by  a  new  application,  even  for  a  purpose  completely
    different from the original  application.   So  the  way  was  open  to
    treating the asylum application as varying  the  original  application.
    On behalf of the Secretary of State, it was  argued  that  if  the  new
    application  is  for  a  different  purpose,  it  varies  the  original
    application by replacing it by the new one.   The  Secretary  of  State
    deployed three arguments to that effect.  The first was that as s 3C(4)
    only permits a single application, the result of variation must also be
    a single application.  The judge rejected that argument, holding that:

         "There is nothing in s  3C  of  the  1971  Act  that  precludes  an
         application of varied leave to remain made for  one  purpose  being
         varied so as to add another purpose for seeking leave to remain....
         The Court of Appeal's statement in JH that "there can be  only  one
         application for variation of the original leave" does not  preclude
         there being a single application based on more  than  one  purpose.
         Indeed, given that the  Court  of  Appeal  found  that  the  second
         application could,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  have  the  effect  of
         withdrawing or varying the first application (see JH at  [43]),  it
         seems to follow that a finding that there had not been a withdrawal
         would necessarily  involve  a  variation  comprising  the  purposes
         raised in both applications." (at [30]-[31].)

17. The Secretary of State's second argument was based on the  accuracy  of
    published guidance.  The judge noted that the guidance upon  which  the
    Secretary of State relied was not in force at  the  relevant  time  and
    could not, in any event, be regarded as authoritative.  The judge  said
    that he could see that the Secretary of State would find it  convenient
    to be faced only with a single application, and to grant leave only for
    a single purpose, but there appeared to be nothing in the guidance, and
    he was not referred to any statutory provision, preventing there  being
    an application for leave under more than one head at the same time.

18. The Secretary of State's third argument related to the  possibility  of
    abuse if there were multiple applications.  The judge  held  that  that
    had been dealt with in JH and required no more comment  from  him.   He
    concluded that in his case the original application was not  withdrawn,
    but was varied so as to include  both  the  application  for  leave  to
    remain and the asylum claim, and that any decision  should  have  dealt
    with both elements of the application as varied.

19. Mr Malik asked us to  follow  the  interpretation  of  the  process  of
    varying an application that was adopted in Chaparadza.  In the  grounds
    of appeal (not drafted by Mr Malik) it is specifically argued that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was wrong because  Mr  Chowdhury  appears  to
    have had the substance of paragraph 34BB of the  Immigration  Rules  in
    mind, even if he did not cite the actual  rule.   At  the  hearing,  Mr
    Malik dealt with a number of other rules, but did not refer us  to  any
    statutory provision.

20. Although as at present advised we incline to the view that the  concept
    of the variation of an  application  probably  ought  to  be  the  same
    whether  s  3C  applies  or  not,  we  think  it  right  to  begin  our
    consideration of this issue with  the  law  which  does  apply  to  the
    present case.  In this case, the  original  application  was  not  made
    during the course of existing  leave.   Section  3C  is  therefore  not
    applicable, and its provisions for extending existing leave pending the
    decision on an application have no impact in this case.

21. The important statutory provision to which neither we nor the Court  in
    Chaparadza were referred  is  s  50  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006:

         "50. Procedure

      1) Rules under section 3 of the Immigration Act 1971 (c. 77)-

               a) may require a specified procedure to be followed in making
                  or pursuing an application or claim (whether or not under
                  those rules or any other enactment),

               a) may, in particular, require the use of a specified form
                  and the submission of specified information or documents,

               b) may make provision about the manner in which a fee is to
                  be paid, and

               c) may make provision for the consequences of failure to
                  comply with a requirement under paragraph (a), (b) or (c).

         (2)  In respect of any application or claim in connection with
         immigration (whether or not under the rules referred to in
         subsection (1) or any other enactment) the Secretary of State-

                 a) may require the use of a specified form,

                 b) may require the submission of specified information or
                    documents, and

                 c) may direct the manner in which a fee is to be paid;

         and the rules referred to in subsection (1) may provide for the
         consequences of failure to comply with a requirement under
         paragraph (a), (b) or (c)." [The rest of the section has been
         repealed.]

22. The rules made under that section and in  force  at  the  time  of  the
    events with which we are concerned in this appeal  are  paragraphs  34,
    34A, 34B, 34BB, 34C, 34E, 34F, and 34G. Paragraph 34 is headed "How  to
    make a valid application for leave to remain in the UK",  and  provides
    that an application has to be made on  an  application  form  which  is
    specified for the immigration category under  which  the  applicant  is
    applying on the date on which the application is made,  and  lays  down
    various other requirements.   Paragraph  34A  provides  that  where  an
    application for leave to remain  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 34, "it  is  invalid  and  will  not  be  considered".   That
    provision is subject to paragraph 34B, which permits the  Secretary  of
    State to give an applicant  one  opportunity  to  correct  any  errors.
    Paragraph 34BB is as follows:

         "(1) An applicant may only have one outstanding application for
         leave to remain at a time.

         (2) If an application for leave to remain is submitted in
         circumstances where a previous application for leave to remain has
         not been decided, it will be treated as a variation of the pervious
         application.

         (3) Where more than one application for leave to remain is
         submitted on the same day then subject to sub-paragraph (4), each
         application will be invalid and will not be considered.

         (4) The Secretary of State may give the applicant a single
         opportunity to withdraw all but one of the applications within 10
         working days of the date on which the notification was sent.  If
         all but one of the applications are not withdrawn by the specified
         date each application will be invalid and will not be considered.

         (5) Notice of invalidity will be given in writing and served in
         accordance with Appendix SN of these Rules."

23. Paragraph 34E is as follows:

         "If a person wishes to vary the purpose of an application for leave
         to remain in the United Kingdom, the variation must comply with the
         requirements of paragraph 34 (as they apply at the date the
         variation is made) as if the variation were a new application.  If
         it does not, subject to paragraph 34B, the variation will be
         invalid and will not be considered."

24. In our judgement it is clear that the provisions relating to the way in
    which an application can be made and varied, and  the  consequences  of
    failure, fall within s 50 and accordingly have  the  authority  derived
    from that section of the statute.  There can be no  proper  doubt  that
    they apply to the facts in this case.  The position is that it was  not
    open  to  the  appellant  to  have  more  than  one  application  under
    consideration at once.  More particularly, the  application  which  was
    being considered needed to be an application which could have been made
    in the first place.  It is that provision, found in paragraph 34E taken
    in combination with paragraphs 34 and 34A, that prevents  old  purposes
    surviving when new purposes are introduced by a variation.  The  result
    of the variation needs to be an application which could have been  made
    originally.  There is no provision  for  making  an  application  which
    combines elements of leave to remain as an entrepreneur and  indefinite
    leave to remain on the basis of 10 years residence, so  an  application
    as varied cannot contain that combination either.  It follows that  the
    appellant cannot succeed on this ground.

25.  With  the  greatest  respect,  and   without   making   any   detailed
    investigation into the terms of paragraphs  34  and  following  of  the
    Immigration Rules as they applied to the  claimant  in  Chaparadza,  it
    appears that in any event the latter case should  not  be  followed  in
    circumstances  where  the  present  Immigration  Rules  apply.   As  we
    remarked earlier, there seems no good reason for adopting  a  different
    interpretation of what is a  "variation"  between  cases  where  s  34C
    applies, and cases where it does not.  Further, it is clear  that  both
    on its face and as explained by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JH,  s  3C
    envisages that only one application will be pending, and there seems no
    good reason for not interpreting the word "application" in the way that
    paragraphs 34ff require.

26. We turn now to the other ground, which is that the judge erred  in  his
    approach to the evidence supporting the article  8  claim  outside  the
    rules.  We can deal with this rather more briefly.  The case as put  to
    the First-tier Tribunal was that the  child  SI's  treatment  would  be
    affected by his departure from the United Kingdom.  There was, however,
    no evidence as to the availability of treatment  in  Pakistan,  and  we
    think it is fair  to  say  that  there  was  no  suggestion  that  such
    treatment would not be available.  The grounds of  appeal  assert  that
    the judge failed to take into account the effect on SI of there being a
    change in the persons who were treating him.   But  the  truth  of  the
    matter is that there is no evidence of that either.  There is no proper
    basis upon which it can be asserted without evidence that  a  Pakistani
    child with the medical conditions  exhibited  by  SI  can  be  properly
    looked after only in the United Kingdom,  or  that  in  SI's  case  the
    disruption to his treatment would be such as to show that it would  not
    be in his best interests to return with his father to  the  country  of
    which both parents and all the children are  nationals.   The  evidence
    clearly does show that  the  appellant  himself  is  well-educated  and
    likely to be prosperous in Pakistan; his wife who is in  Pakistan  with
    two of the children, is herself apparently qualified as  a  pharmacist.
    The two children with her have evidently adapted to living in Pakistan,
    and there seems to have been no suggestion that it  was  not  in  their
    best interests to travel with her to Pakistan when they did so.

27. Mr Malik's principal oral argument before us was that as the  appellant
    had nearly attained the 10 years residence under the Rules, that  might
    be sufficient to tip the balance in his favour.  There are two problems
    with that submission.   The first is that it is not  easy  to  see  how
    that  is  supposed  to  combine  with  SI's  condition  as  making  the
    appellant's case under article 8.  The second is that  the  defects  in
    the evidence about the availability of treatment in Pakistan, to  which
    the judge referred, removed the force of the  argument  based  on  SI's
    condition in any event.  Thus, all that  is  being  said  is  that  the
    appellant should succeed under article 8 on the basis of 9 years and  7
    months lawful residence in  the  United  Kingdom,  because  if  he  had
    completed 10 years lawful residence he would have succeeded  under  the
    rules.  We do not know whether the miss is even "near": in  any  event,
    it is not sufficient to establish a case  under  article  8.   Further,
    this argument was not made to the First-tier  Tribunal.   Instead,  the
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was  faced  with  a  different  submission,
    inconsistent with that now being advanced: the argument before him  was
    that the appellant had been in the United Kingdom lawfully for over  10
    years.  That was simply wrong.

28. For all these reasons, it appears to us that  the  decision  the  judge
    made on the evidence before him was  not  only  open  to  him:  it  was
    virtually inevitable.  Certainly he made no error of  law  in  reaching
    it.

29. For the foregoing reasons, having granted permission,  we  dismiss  the
    appeal.


                                                             C.M.G. Ockelton

                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                           Date: 12 May 2021
