
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16124/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd October 2018                          |On 12th October 2018          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                mrs hina [s]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Goldborough, Solicitor, Julia & Rana Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge VC Dean) dismissing her appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent made on 14 November 2017 to refuse to  grant
    her leave to remain as a partner of a settled person  because  she  did
    not have valid leave to remain when she submitted her  application  and
    the requirements of EX.1 were not satisfied. Judge Dean found that EX.1
    was not satisfied, and also that the sponsor did not meet  the  minimum
    income requirement ("MIR"). He held that that it was  proportionate  to
    require the appellant and the two  children  to  relocate  to  Pakistan
    either to enjoy family life there with the sponsor on a permanent basis
    or, alternatively, on a temporary basis while the appellant made an out
    of country application.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 13 August 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer  granted  permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

         "(3) The grounds assert that the Judge failed to take into  account
             the best interests of the two children. The second  child  was
             born in the UK after the appellant's application was made  but
             before the father was granted ILR in November 2017. He will be
             registered as a British citizen and will not be treated  as  a
             national of Pakistan. Nor did the Judge consider  R  (Chen)  v
             SSHD [2015] UKUT 00189.

         (4)  It is arguable that the Judge's s.55 assessment is  inadequate
             in the circumstances. There was no consideration as to whether
             even a temporary separation would be  disproportionate  having
             regard to the appellant's business and the likelihood  of  the
             younger son's registration as a British citizen."

The Appeal Hearing

 3. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Goldborough produced evidence that the second child,  [H],  had
    been issued with a British passport on 7 September 2018.

Discussion

 4. On analysis, the error of law challenge is no more than  an  expression
    of disagreement with findings and conclusions that were reasonably open
    to the Judge on the evidence, and which were  also  entirely  consonant
    with the relevant jurisprudence.

 5. The Judge was required to assess the human rights claim on the facts as
    they stood at the date of the hearing. [H] was not a British citizen at
    the date of the hearing, and the Judge directed  himself  appropriately
    in holding that he was  not  determining  an  application  by  [H]  for
    citizenship. The Judge was right not  to  treat  [H]  as  a  qualifying
    child, and thus right not to treat s117B(6) of the 2002  Act  as  being
    engaged.

 6. On the facts as they stood at the date of the  hearing,  neither  child
    was a qualifying child. In addition, the Judge found at  [32]  that  on
    the available evidence the sponsor was a long way off meeting  the  MIR
    for the appellant,  let  alone  for  the  appellant  plus  one  or  two
    children.

 7. The Judge made a sustainable finding that the appellant  did  not  meet
    the requirements of the Rules for leave to remain,  and  there  was  no
    imminent prospect of her doing so. In the circumstances, it was clearly
    open to him to find that the parents faced a reasonable choice:  either
    to relocate to Pakistan as a family on a permanent  basis  or  for  the
    sponsor to remain here to grow his business and to support  an  out  of
    country application by the appellant when the MIR was met.

 8. With regard to the latter option, the Judge noted at [35] the sponsor's
    evidence that he did not have a difficulty  with  it.  The  Judge  also
    noted at [37] that in the period 2010 to 2013 the family had  lived  on
    separate continents, with the  appellant  remaining  in  Pakistan  with
    their first child, and family life  being  maintained  by  the  sponsor
    making return visits.

 9. Mr Goldborough pleaded that the Judge failed to take into account  that
    the sponsor would  need  to  arrange  child  care  for  [H]  while  the
    appellant and their first child were in Pakistan. But the appellant was
    not being forced to leave [H] behind in the United Kingdom, contrary to
    his best interests. It was open to the Judge to find at  [41]  that  it
    was in the best interests of both children to remain with their mother,
    and hence to return with her to  Pakistan  on  either  a  permanent  or
    temporary basis. The Chen jurisprudence was not engaged, as  (a)  there
    was good reason under the Rules to require the appellant to  return  to
    Pakistan and (b) it could not be said that she was likely to succeed in
    an out of country application in the immediate future.  The  fact  that
    the second child might have obtained a British passport by the time  of
    such an application was not in itself going to be determinative of  its
    success. The key issue was and is compliance with the MIR.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and so the decision stands. This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not
consider that such a direction is required  for  these  proceedings  in  the
Upper Tribunal.


Signed                              Date 7 October 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge








