
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16234/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 February 2019                   |On 01 March 2019                     |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                            Mr Naveed ahmed awan
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who appealed against a  decision
    of the Respondent refusing  further  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of  his  relationship  with  his  partner.  He  is
    married to [BA], a national of Mauritius, who is settled in the  United
    Kingdom. She has two children from her first marriage.

 2. His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Siddall  who,
    in a decision promulgated on 16 October 2018, dismissed it.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was initially  refused.
    However, a renewed application was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McWilliam. That application was granted on  17  January  2019  and  the
    Judge's reasons for giving permission are: -

         "The appellant seeks permission to appeal against the  decision  of
         Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Siddall to dismiss his appeal.

         It is arguable that the judge addressed his  mind  to  whether  the
         relationship was genuine and "loving" rather than subsisting. It is
         arguable that the judge did not give adequate reasons in the  light
         of the appellant at the time of the hearing having lived  with  the
         sponsor for 3 years despite having lived apart for a time."

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 5. Ms Reid relied upon the grounds seeking permission to  appeal.  Therein
    it can be seen that the only issue before the Tribunal was whether  the
    Appellant was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with his sponsor
    and whether they intended to live together permanently  in  the  United
    Kingdom. At paragraphs  50  and  51  of  the  decision  the  Judge  had
    concluded that these requirements were not met.  At  paragraph  50  the
    Judge  takes  into  account  WhatsApp  messages  which  she   concluded
    demonstrated that the Appellant and Sponsor were  not  living  together
    for much of the  time  until  around  April  or  May  2015.  There  was
    discussion about the moving of his clothes to  the  Sponsor's  home  in
    April of that year. The Judge took into account evidence in relation to
    the  Appellant  working  night  shifts  to  secure  better  income  and
    different jobs in the Hatfield area to  "make  ends  meet".  The  Judge
    concluded that the messages suggested a "reluctance to move in" on  the
    part of the Appellant coupled with a degree  of  frustration  from  the
    sponsor. The Judge also found that there were points in time when  both
    the Appellant and sponsor were considering moving away with no apparent
    commitment to moving house together. The Judge rejected the Appellant's
    explanation for why he was  staying  in  Hatfield  as  a  "good  reason
    consistent with a continuing intention to live together permanently  in
    the United Kingdom". The Judge found that the Appellant appeared to  be
    avoiding living with his wife in the period from the summer of 2013  to
    spring of 2015 and that this evidence did not demonstrate an  intention
    to live together permanently thereby  not  satisfying  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 6. However, Counsel referred me to paragraph 35 of  the  Judge's  decision
    and the findings therein relating to the Appellant spending  more  time
    with the sponsor in Leytonstone and at paragraph 36  of  the  decision,
    messages suggesting that at this point the Appellant  and  the  sponsor
    were cohabiting to a greater  extent.  This  is  also  referred  to  at
    paragraph 55 of the Judge's decision where  in  addition  there  is  an
    acceptance that there had been "a sexual element" to  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and sponsor. I will record here though  that  the
    Judge also found within paragraph 55 of the decision  a  reluctance  on
    the part of the Appellant to move to  Leytonstone  from  the  point  at
    which his studies finished in Spring of 2015 and a recording  that  the
    Appellant's initial leave to remain as a spouse "ran  out  in  December
    2015".  Counsel  urged  me  to  accept  that  the  Judge   has   placed
    "disproportionate weight" on the  Appellant's  apparent  reluctance  to
    move  in  with  the  sponsor.  The  Appellant  explained  that  he  was
    continuing to live in Hatfield as he was  earning  more  at  Sainsburys
    there than he would in  Leytonstone.  In  considering  the  Appellant's
    explanation the Judge had erred in failing to  take  into  account  the
    fact that one of his other  employers  "Sweet  Gallery"  was  based  in
    London and not Hatfield. This is an erroneous finding which  undermines
    the Judge's conclusion. It is often the position that couples  have  to
    live  separately  for  extended  periods  of  time  in  order  to  find
    employment and support their families. It was not open to the Judge, on
    the evidence, to conclude that the Appellant did  not  intend  to  live
    permanently with the sponsor.

 7.  Mr  Bramble  urged  me  to  consider  the  decision  as  a  whole  and
    particularly paragraphs 29 to 31 where the Judge  analyses  transcripts
    of Facebook and WhatsApp messages. He asked me to accept that the Judge
    had "done sufficient" and had come to a conclusion that was open to  be
    made.

 8. I find that to be the case. The decision, when looked at  as  a  whole,
    shows that the Judge has considered the totality of the evidence before
    coming to conclusions that were open to be made. I appreciate  that  at
    paragraph 56 of his decision the Judge  refers  to  the  Appellant  not
    having demonstrated to the required standard that he had entered into a
    "genuine and loving relationship" with the sponsor. This was a  further
    point of criticism raised by Ms Reid. However, it is  plain  that  from
    any reading of the decision as a whole that the Judge has  applied  the
    correct tests.

 9. At paragraph 51 of the decision the Judge finds that the  Appellant  is
    not "in a genuine and subsisting relationship". The Judge has  gone  on
    to adequately reason why she came  to  that  conclusion.  Likewise,  in
    relation to whether the Appellant and sponsor intended to live together
    permanently in the United Kingdom.

10. Contrary to the grounds the Judge has considered the  totality  of  the
    evidence and made findings which were open to be made on the  evidence.
    The Judge had the benefit of both oral evidence  on  the  day  and  the
    written material. It was always open for the  Judge  to  consider  what
    weight she felt it appropriate to place on the evidence that was before
    her. Adequate reasons have been given as to why the Judge came  to  the
    conclusion that she did. The grounds are no more  than  a  disagreement
    with the Judge's findings.

11. There is here no material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard                          Date: 26
February 2019
