
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16953/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 May 2019                       |On 10 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                 melly begum
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Chaudhary, Kingdom Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Freer
    which was promulgated on 26 February 2019.  The appellant is a national
    of Bangladesh.  She was born on 10 June 1994.  Her appeal  required  an
    examination of whether her English language test had been  carried  out
    fraudulently and whether, irrespective of that, there were human rights
    grounds which would entitle her to leave to remain.

2.   The judge's assessment of the principal  issue  regarding  the  English
    language examination is less than satisfactory.   In  the  findings  at
    paragraph 30 the judge says this.

         "The [appellant] was speaking in her own cause and her husband  was
         not tendered for cross-examination.  Nobody else who saw  her  take
         the TOEIC examination was  tendered  in  evidence.   The  husband's
         account is extremely brief.  He must  have  known  she  was  not  a
         British citizen when he decided to marry her and must have had some
         realistic  idea  about  her  various  achievements.   Her   husband
         specifically chose Elizabeth College for her, she  stated  in  oral
         evidence and as history shows the test turned  out  to  be  run  by
         crooks.  She  gave  a  conflicting  explanation  that  she  saw  it
         advertised in a newspaper in her college.  I conclude that the only
         witness was unreliable on a number of questions of importance.  The
         impression is wholly consistent with the respondent's view  of  her
         ETS test result.  There are no reliable test results in the  cohort
         to which she belongs."

3.   The judge went on at paragraph 56 to express his decision as follows:

         "The  Appellant  gave  a  fraudulent  test  result  in   2012   and
         consequently  all  her  leave  to  remain  after  that  was  on  an
         unsupportable basis.  This was about five years after  her  arrival
         in the UK.  The contextual  evidence  was  strongly  suggestive  of
         fraud with the knowing co-operation of the Appellant and goes  well
         above the 50/50 level towards the  respondent.   Alternatively,  if
         she took the test but the result was over written unknown to her, I
         do not find it probable that she would have passed it otherwise."

4.   I tend to agree with the observation made to me  this  morning  by  the
    Secretary of State's representative that this is a case where the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge may well not have been assisted by  the  manner  in
    which the case was  presented  before  that  First-tier  Tribunal.  For
    example not absence of evidence from the husband left the judge with  a
    very thin context within which to make findings of fact.  But this is a
    case where the Secretary of State is alleging  fraud,  something  which
    must be properly particularised and proved.  The civil  standard  still
    applies but fraud must be made out on cogent and convincing evidence.

5.   I find nothing in the decision  to  suggest  that  the  judge  properly
    turned his mind to the issue of  active  fraud  on  the  part  of  this
    appellant, as opposed  to  an  institution  generally  believed  to  be
    responsible questionable test results across the board.  The fact  that
    a language school itself has questions to answer about the propriety of
    its conduct is not (without more) evidence of fraud on the  appellant's
    part.  I consider that the reasoning of the judge in  relation  to  his
    finding of fraud is insufficient and that the decision  should  be  set
    aside.

6.   The principal issue which was recognised when permission to appeal  was
    granted was in the judge's approach to the  statutory  public  interest
    considerations under Section 117B(6) and  reference  was  made  in  the
    grant of permission to  the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  JG
    (Section 117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey  [2019]  UKUT  00072
    (IAC) (Rev 1).  I am grateful to Mr Chaudhary for providing me  with  a
    full copy  of  that  decision.   Put  shortly,  where  public  interest
    considerations are to be considered under 117B it  should  be  done  in
    full, taking into account all relevant matters.

7.   Section 117B(6) strongly suggests that where there  is  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  relationship  with  a  qualifying   child   it   would   be
    unreasonable to require the individual to leave.  Qualifying child, for
    these purposes, is a British citizen; and in this instance,  there  are
    two children who have the status of British citizens.  This factor  was
    not considered at all by  the  judge.  In  fact,  paragraph  67  is  an
    extremely superficial assessment of  Section  117B,  rendered  entirely
    nugatory by the lack of any reference  to  sub-section  (6),  which  is
    direct relevant  in  this  case.   The  judge  gave  no  or  inadequate
    consideration to the best interests of the children or  indeed  to  the
    delicate balancing exercise which must be  carried  out  following  the
    well-known principles in Razgar.  For this further error  of  law,  the
    decision must be set aside.

8.   I concur with the view expressed  by  both  representatives  before  me
    that the proper course in this instance is to remit the matter  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be made afresh by a judge other
    than Judge Freer.  The errors identified  are  so  fundamental  that  a
    complete rehearing is necessary.   It  is  perfectly  conceivable  that
    another judge may well come to exactly the same conclusion, but  it  is
    important that the correct approach is adopted  and  the  law  properly
    applied.

Notice of Decision

    1) The appeal is allowed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is
       set aside;
    2) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh
       by a judge other than Judge Freer.
    3) No findings of fact are preserved.
    4) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Mark Hill                 Date     5 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

