
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16135/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 June 2019                      |On 24 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                ALTANTUYA [D]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Ubah Dirie of Counsel instructed by J McCarthy
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals against  a  decision  made  by  First-tier  Judge
    Kimnell (FtT) promulgated on 6th March 2019 in  which  the  appellant's
    applications under the Immigration Rules and on  human  rights  grounds
    were dismissed.

2.   The grounds of appeal argue that the FtT failed  to  consider  material
    evidence  pertinent  to  the  assessment  of  the  existence  of   very
    significant obstacles to the  appellant  and  her  son  integrating  in
    Mongolia and in the consideration of best interests of the child.   The
    appellant had suffered from domestic violence from her  ex-partner  who
    had since been deported to Mongolia. The appellant's son suffered  from
    a congenital kidney disorder and would not be able to  live  safely  in
    Ulaanbaatar and/or Mongolia because of  the  high  level  of  pollution
    which would be contrary to his best interests.

Permission to appeal

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by FtTJ PJ  Hollingworth  on  3.5.2019
    who found arguable grounds that the  FtT's  analysis  was  insufficient
    before finding that paragraph 276ADE was not  met.   The  FtT  arguably
    ought to have considered the evidence as to the degree of risk from the
    ex-partner now living in Mongolia.  The FtT's consideration of the best
    interests of the child failed to sufficiently analyse  the  feasibility
    of living away from a polluted area having accepted that the  appellant
    would in the short term live with her parents in Ulaanbaatar.  The  FtT
    failed to assess the continuing risk of deterioration  in  the  child's
    condition and whether  this  would  require  treatment  as  opposed  to
    continued monitoring.

Error of law hearing

4.   At the hearing Ms Dirie expanded on the grounds of appeal and  referred
    to her skeleton argument prepared for the FtT and an  article  entitled
    "Environment pollution and kidney diseases" published  in  "Nature"  in
    February 2018 and UNICEF evidence on pollution levels in Mongolia.  She
    argued that the appellant's son's kidney condition  required  continued
    monitoring in the UK.  There was expert evidence from UNICEF  WHO  that
    there was an environmental crisis in Mongolia.  Half of the  population
    in Mongolia lived in Ulaanbaatar  and  it  was  not  feasible  for  the
    appellant and her son to live away from her  family  who  lived  there.
    The appellant did not know where her ex-partner lived in  Mongolia.  It
    was not adequate for the FtT to conclude that treatment  was  available
    in the event that the health of the child would be damaged  and  harmed
    by environmental pollution.

5.   Mr Tarlow opposed the application submitting  that  the  appellant  and
    her son  could  live  outside  of  Ulaanbaatar  where  there  was  less
    pollution.  The FtT had considered all the relevant evidence  and  made
    sustainable findings open to it at [36- 37].

Discussion and decision

6.   I find that there was an error in law by the FtT  in  failing  consider
    material evidence.  The FtT failed to  adequately  consider  where  the
    best interests of the appellant's child lie having little regard to the
    health risks associated with kidney disease by exposure  to  pollution.
    The FtJ's section 55 analysis was insufficient as it failed to properly
    consider the feasibility of the appellant living away from  excessively
    polluted areas having accepted that in the  short  term  the  appellant
    would likely reside with her parents who live in Ulaanbaatar.  The  FtT
    did not consider the risks of deterioration in  the  child's  condition
    which would require monitoring.  There was no consideration by the  FtT
    as to the risks posed by the appellant's former  partner  but  (as  was
    accepted by Ms Dirie) given  that  there  is  no  evidence  as  to  his
    whereabouts in  Mongolia,  realistically  this  point  has  less  merit
    although there was evidence that the ex-partner had been contacting the
    appellant.

7.   I am satisfied that the FtT whilst accepting  the  background  evidence
    as  to  the  dangers  posed  by  pollution  failed  to  give   adequate
    consideration to  the  child's  vulnerability  because  of  his  health
    complications which were a material factor in the assessment  of  where
    the best interests lie.  The FtT's approach was flawed  to  the  extent
    that it concluded that medical treatment was  available  should  it  be
    needed [37], which failed to encompass a  holistic  view  of  the  best
    interests of the child which  in  the  first  instance  ought  to  have
    considered that it would not be in his best  interests  to  become  ill
    from the high levels  of  pollution.  Further  there  was  no  adequate
    assessment of the feasibility of living outside of Ulaanbaatar.

8.   There is a material error in law and the decision and  reasons  is  set
    aside.

Re making the decision

 9.  I decided to I go on to re make the  decision  and  heard  submissions.
    After submissions I decided that a medical report  on  the  appellant's
    son's health and the impact  of  pollution  thereon  would  assist.   I
    issued directions accordingly for the report to be filed and served  on
    the UT by 12th July 2019.  I have not received any medical  report  nor
    explanation for why it is not forthcoming.  Instead I was provided with
    written  "post  hearing"  submissions  which  simply  repeat  what  was
    submitted at the hearing. I make my decision in the absence of  further
    medical evidence.

10.  On the evidence before the FtT I am satisfied that  the  assessment  of
    where the best interests of the child lie failed to take  into  account
    that in returning to Ulaanbaatar even for a short period of  time,  the
    level of pollution; the highest in the world, would have a  significant
    impact on the child's health and kidney condition.   The  evidence  was
    accepted by the FtT and was not disputed by the respondent. There is  a
    link  as  between  environmental  pollution  and  kidney  diseases   as
    evidenced in the article "Environmental pollution and  kidney  disease"
    (A/B).  At page 47 (A/B) it is reported  that  "Pneumonia  is  now  the
    second leading cause of death for children under five in  Mongolia.  In
    Ulaanbaatar respiratory infections have increased at  a  rate  of  270%
    over the last 10 years and children living in the city have a 40% lower
    lung function than those living in rural areas. "At page 48  it  stated
    that UNICEF  warned  that  a  "child  health  crisis"  was  looming  in
    Mongolia. There was no consideration by the FtT of what "in  the  short
    term" could mean and given the high pollution it would seem  reasonable
    that the impact of the pollution would be immediate. I  find  that  the
    child risks an immediate deterioration in his health, which is  already
    vulnerable, on  return.   The  appellant  has  no  links  elsewhere  in
    Mongolia where she has not lived for 15 years.  The  appellant's  child
    has a  particular  disease  which  is  currently  stable  and  requires
    monitoring to check the  growth  of  the  kidneys  and  any  subsequent
    dilation, which at present takes place at  6  monthly  intervals.   The
    medical report dated 22.10.2018 states  "I  explained  to  parents  the
    importance of surveillance ultrasound in order to  monitor  his  kidney
    growth and any subsequent dilation." On return to a such  an  extremely
    polluted environment it is likely that his health would deteriorate and
    he would require treatment.  It cannot be found in those  circumstances
    that his best interests lie in returning with his mother to Ulaanbaatar
    even of for a short period of time.  The appellant has lived in the  UK
    for some 15 years and her sister has settled status  in  the  UK.   The
    child, now 3 years of age, was born in the UK. The  appellant  has  not
    lived or worked in Mongolia for years and her  family  live  in  a  two
    bedroomed flat where there are 6 people already living and  accordingly
    the conditions would cramped and unsuitable.

11.  In addition the appellant's biological father is resident  in  the  UK;
    his status is precarious but he has had lawful leave and is awaiting  a
    decision from the respondent.  The child has a relationship  with  both
    him  and  his  children  from  a  new   relationship.    Those   family
    relationships would be severed in the event of return to Mongolia.  All
    of these factors lead me to conclude that the child's  best  interests,
    which are a primary consideration, are to remain in  the  UK  with  the
    appellant.

12.  As to the appellant's former partner I find that the evidence fails  to
    show any real risk to her of further abuse given that it was  not  know
    where he was living in Mongolia. However, I find that  he  was  charged
    with assault in December 2015 and it was not disputed that he had  been
    contacting her, which indicates that he may attempt to make contact  in
    Mongolia.

13.  Having regard to all the circumstances I am satisfied that there  would
    be very significant  obstacles  to  integration  in  Mongolia  for  the
    appellant and her child. The Immigration rules under  paragraph  276ADE
    are met.

14.  For  the  same  reasons  I  am  satisfied  that  there  are  compelling
    circumstances such that Article 8 ECHR is engaged outside of the Rules.
     The appellant and her child have established family life  in  the  UK.
    The child was born here and the appellant has resided for a significant
    period of time.  There would be  an  interference  to  the  health  and
    wellbeing of the child's family /private  life.   The  decision  is  in
    accordance with the law as  paragraph  276ADE  is  met.   In  terms  of
    proportionality  the  best  interests  of  the  child  are  a   primary
    consideration.  The appellant has the support of  her  sister  and  the
    child's father who is lawfully resident in the UK and  he  has  contact
    with his son. There are no countervailing  reasons  why  such  interest
    should not be followed or displaced (ZH (Tanzania).  The  appellant  is
    not reliant on  public  funds.   The  public  interest  in  immigration
    control fails to outweigh the  private  interests  of  the  appellant's
    child. I have taken into account that the precarious nature of  private
    life carries little weight (section  117B(5))  but  conclude  that  the
    interests of the appellant and her child outweigh any public interest.

Decision

15.  In remaking the decision I allow the appeal on human rights grounds.


Signed                                  Date 18.7.2019

G A Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

