
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16722/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 December 2018                  |On 23 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                Abubakar [F]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji, Counsel, instructed by Mayfair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 23 February 1993.  He first
arrived in the UK on 3 April 2011 and subsequently met and married a
British citizen, who gave birth to a British child on 22 May 2017.  On 14
November 2017 the Appellant applied for leave to remain on the basis of his
family life.  This application was refused in a decision dated 27 November
2017.

The Appellant appeals against that decision and his appeal came before
First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker for hearing on 12 April 2018.  In a
Decision and Reasons promulgated on 5 June 2018, the judge dismissed the
appeal both in respect of the Appellant's family life and also in relation
to an allegation of deception in taking the English language test.
Permission to appeal was sought on the basis that the judge had erred both
in relation to the failure to give adequate reasons in respect of the TOEIC
issue and in the alternative in failing to engage with the best interests
of the child.

Permission to appeal was granted by Dr Storey in a decision dated 7
November 2018 on the basis that there was no arguable merit in the
challenge to the judge's findings relating to the deception in the TOEIC
test but there was an arguable error of law in relation to the judge's
assessment of the best interests of the child, as there is nothing to
indicate that consideration was given to Home Office policy that it was not
reasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the UK and that the
parents were entitled to remain absent significant criminal or immigration
issues.

At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Jafferji submitted that there
had been a failure by the judge to take account of the best interests of
the child and to address the reasonableness of expecting that child to
leave the UK.  He drew attention to [50] of the decision, where the judge
held:

"The Appellant and the Sponsor are first cousins and it is reasonable to
conclude that the wider family will give the Sponsor, her son and the
Appellant considerable support in Pakistan and if necessary in the UK.
Given the age of the Appellant's son he will be able to adapt to life in
Pakistan with his parents.  He is still only aged 1 year old and he will be
able to absorb the local language in Pakistan with the assistance of both
his parents.  He has not started his schooling yet and his private life and
family life are entirely dependent on his parents because of his age.  It
follows that it will be reasonable to expect the Appellant's son to leave
the UK should his parents so wish it."

Mr Jafferji submitted that the judge had materially erred in failing to
consider all the relevant factors, for example, those set out in ZH
(Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, that there was no reference whatsoever to the
child being British or what he would lose if not brought up in the UK.
There was no consideration of Section 117B(6) of the NIAA 2002 and the
judge entirely failed to appreciate the question she was required to
answer.  Mr Jafferji submitted that when one looked at the refusal letter,
this itself concedes at page 3 that it would not be reasonable when
considering the appeal under the Rules for the child to leave the UK,
albeit he accepted that as part of the consideration of exceptional
circumstances at page 4 that the child could go to Pakistan.

Mr Jafferji acknowledged that although EX.1 would not result in a
successful appeal under the Rules because the suitability requirements were
not satisfied, section 117B(6) still needed to be addressed and applied by
the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Although the judge at [10] had set out the
text of Section 117B this had not been addressed at all in the findings,
which was a fundamental error.

In her submissions, Ms Pal submitted there was no material error of law.
The judge found at [49] that the Appellant's leave was precarious in that
he chose to marry the Sponsor, knowing full well that he would require
further leave to remain.  The judge found at [50] that the Appellant's son
was aged only 1 at the time, that he was very young and would be returning
to Pakistan with his parents.  He was not in school and his private life
was entirely dependent on his parents because of his age.  The judge at
[52] factored in that the Appellant had cheated in order to avoid leave to
remain under the Rules and incorporated this into the balancing exercise
and it was reasonable to expect the Appellant's son to leave the UK with
his parents.  There was no material error of law.

In reply, Mr Jafferji submitted that Ms Pal's points were all good ones.
However, they were irrelevant in respect of this key issue that the judge
had to grapple with.  He submitted the difficulty with the judge's decision
and reasoning is that it was freestanding and there was no reference to the
nationality of the child, which was one of the most fundamental
considerations that needed determining.  He submitted there was no
reference in the Decision and Reasons to the judgment in SF & others [2017]
UKUT 120 (IAC) and the Respondent's own policy, which was that unless there
was something exceptional the child should not be expected to leave.

    Decision and Reasons

I find material errors of law in the Decision and Reasons of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Walker for the reasons identified in the grant of permission
to appeal.  The Appellant's son is a British citizen, albeit he is still at
a very young age.  It was still incumbent upon the First-tier Tribunal
Judge to consider the appeal in light of the Respondent's policy and the
related jurisprudence.  The position as set out in those policies is that
very strong reasons are required to expect the child to leave.  Thus, the
task for the judge was to balance the fact that the Appellant had used
deception in his English language test against the best interests of the
child and the reasonableness of expecting him to leave.  That was not done
and it is required to be done.

I therefore remit the appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing
confined to consideration of that issue, essentially Article 8 outside the
Rules.  Given that the Appellant resides now in Manchester I remit the
appeal to be heard in the First-tier Tribunal in Manchester.  This should
be listed for an hour and a half

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent of being  remitted  to  the  First  tier
Tribunal for a hearing de novo confined to consideration  of  Article  8  of
ECHR.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 10 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
