
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/16328/2017
     HU/16332/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th January 2019                          |On 30th January 2019          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                  Mr K C A
                                   Ms K A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Gore of Counsel, direct access
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  Anonymity  Order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This prohibition applies to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties.  Failure to comply with this order could lead to  contempt  of
    court proceedings.

 2. These Nigerian Appellants appeal, with permission granted in the First-
    tier Tribunal, a decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  (Judge  Lucas)
    promulgated on 26 October 2018, in  which  the  judge  dismissed  their
    appeals, brought on human rights grounds, against the refusal of  their
    entry clearance applications. The applications were made  in  order  to
    leave their father with whom they lived  in  Nigeria  and  settle  with
    their mother here. The appellants are twins born on 01 May 1999, and so
    just shy of their 18th birthdays at the date of  application  in  March
    2017 and just over 19 as at the date of hearing before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. At the start of the hearing both representatives were in agreement that
    while permission to appeal had been granted according to the head  note
    of the First-tier Tribunal decision form the reasoning in the  body  of
    the decision showed that the deciding judge had concluded that none  of
    the grounds showed an arguable error of law. In the  circumstances  the
    "grant" offered no assistance. I was invited to  proceed  to  determine
    whether there was an error of law as argued for in the grounds. Ms Gore
    clarified that she was not making any  application  to  adduce  further
    evidence, as implied by the grounds. Accordingly, I  make  my  decision
    based on the evidence which was before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The grounds assert that the judge was wrong to find that the sponsoring
    mother did not have sole responsibility in the context of the  test  of
    the Immigration Rules at paragraph 297 (1) (e). The evidence before the
    judge showed that she had sole responsibility, including that  she  had
    paid their school fees, and that they  continue  to  follow  the  Roman
    Catholic faith which was her preference, whilst their father went to  a
    different church.

 5. I find that contrary to the grounds the evidence provided to the  Judge
    was not determinative to show that the decision is perverse. The  judge
    has considered all the  evidence,  setting  it  out  carefully  between
    paragraphs 4 to 13, including the matters referred to in  the  grounds.
    The submission that the judge has failed to consider  the  evidence  of
    mistreatment overlooks that the judge has shown a very good familiarity
    and understanding of the evidence presented on behalf of the appellants
    in this regard setting it out specifically at paragraphs 7 and 14.  The
    judge noted that the teenage children continued to be left in the  care
    of their father even following the assertion  of  concern  about  their
    wellbeing (set out in the  witness  statement  evidence,  the  father's
    correspondence and the police report of  March  2017).  The  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the evidence of  the  male  appellant  having
    complained in March  2017  to  the  police  of  mistreatment,  and  the
    father's subsequent correspondence stating that as a  result  the  step
    mother had left home, did not establish any genuine concern  about  the
    welfare of the appellants because they still remained in his house. The
    judge noted that there were other options open to the  sponsor  if  she
    had been significantly worried, bearing in mind the age of the children
    (almost 18), and the fact that another sibling was in boarding school.

 6. As the judge noted in his discussion of the evidence at 19, the sponsor
    left the appellants in Nigeria in the care of their father in 2007  and
    did not visit them between 2008 and 2014, and they remain in  the  care
    of their father. The judge's conclusion that the father has  played  an
    equally significant role in their lives  is  unassailable.  It  follows
    that I find that that the appellant had failed to establish  any  error
    of law in the judge's decision.

 7. Counsel in her submission argued a massive which were  not  encompassed
    in the grounds. Firstly, counsel  argued  a  structural  fault  in  the
    reasoning of the judge from the failure to make  express  reference  to
    the alternative requirement to sole responsibility at 297 (1) (e),  set
    out in the next subparagraph of the rule at 297 (1) (f), of  compelling
    family  or  other  considerations  making  exclusion  of  the  children
    undesirable. The argument exceeds the  grounds  but  in  any  event  is
    without material merit.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  point  is  merely
    semantic, not least because the ground of appeal is that  the  decision
    constitutes a breach of human rights not that the decision is  "not  in
    accordance with the rules", so that an express reference to the rule is
    not required, but in any event a fair reading  of  the  decision  shows
    that the judge considered the issue of compelling circumstances  beyond
    the issue  of  sole  responsibility,  so  that  the  substance  of  the
    subparagraph at 297 (f) has been encompassed.

 8. Secondly, Ms  Gore  sought  to  extend  the  grounds  by  arguing  that
    insufficient regard has been paid to what must  have  been  a  positive
    credibility finding when the judge accepted that  the  appellants  were
    related as claimed,  contrary  to  the  entry  clearance  officer.  The
    submission overstates the point which at its highest is that  with  the
    application the evidence submitted was insufficient, but  that  by  the
    time of the hearing and with the presence  of  the  sponsor,  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer did not dispute the relationship. Again,  the
    submission fails because the matter is not in the grounds, but  it  too
    is without merit. The falling away of the relationship  point  did  not
    result in a positive credibility finding which required  the  judge  to
    accept the credibility of the  evidence  about  the  claimed  abuse  in
    Nigeria. They are discrete points.  The  argument  garners  no  further
    sustenance from the absence of a mention of  cross-examination  in  the
    decision on the evidence of abuse. Contrary  to  Ms  Gore's  submission
    that cannot be characterised as  undisputed  evidence  amounting  to  a
    concession  that  they  have  been   abused,   so   as   to   establish
    determinatively that they live in circumstances which compelled  entry,
    because quite clearly the presenting officer's submission was that they
    did not.

 9. There is apt guidance in AS (Iran) [2017] EWCA  1539:  "In  approaching
    criticism of reasons given by a  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Respondent
    correctly reminds us to avoid a requirement of perfection. As Brooke LJ
    observed in the course of his decision in R (Iran) v The  Secretary  of
    State for  the  Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982,  "unjustified
    complaints" as to an alleged failure to give adequate reasons  are  all
    too frequent. The obligation on  a  Tribunal  is  to  give  reasons  in
    sufficient detail to show the principles  on  which  the  Tribunal  has
    acted and the reasons that have led to the decision. Such reasons  need
    not be elaborate, and do not need to address every  argument  or  every
    factor which weighed in the decision. If a Tribunal has  not  expressly
    addressed an argument, but if there are grounds on which  the  argument
    could properly have been  rejected,  it  should  be  assumed  that  the
    Tribunal acted on such grounds. It  is  sufficient  that  the  critical
    reasons to the decision are recorded."

10. I find that the decision of the First-tier tribunal reveals no error of
    law.

Decision

The decision of the First -tier Tribunal dismissing  these  appeals  against
entry clearance reveals no error and stands.





Signed                              Date 08 January 2019



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

