
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16905/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 January 2018                     |On 30 January 2018                   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                  Ashuk [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Shah of Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Hillis of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated  on  14th  August  2017.   The  FTT
    dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision
    dated 27th June 2016 to refuse his application for leave to  remain  in
    the UK based upon his private and family life.

 2. The Appellant's immigration history is not in dispute.  He entered  the
    UK illegally in June 2003 having previously claimed asylum  in  France.
    In May 2006 the Appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain in the
    UK, and this application was refused on 31st October 2009.

 3. On 3rd July 2012 the Appellant applied for leave to remain on the basis
    that he had married a British  citizen  who  was  pregnant  with  their
    child.  This application was granted from 14th October 2013 until  27th
    February 2016.

 4. The Appellant and his partner separated at the end of 2015 and  he  had
    doubts as to whether he is the biological father of their daughter  who
    was born on [ ] 2012.

 5. Prior to expiry of his leave, the Appellant on 25th February 2016  made
    an application for further leave to  remain  using  form  FLR(FP).  The
    application was made on the basis that the Appellant  had  family  life
    with a British child,  and  he  also  wished  to  rely  upon  paragraph
    276ADE(1) in relation to his private life, and Article 8  of  the  1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 6. The application was refused on 27th June 2016.   The  Respondent  noted
    the Appellant's relationship with his partner had broken down and  that
    he did not live with her or the child.  There was no evidence  that  he
    had direct access to the child or that he was involved in  the  child's
    life and upbringing.  It was not accepted that the Appellant had proved
    that he had a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with  the
    child.  It was therefore not accepted that he was entitled to leave  to
    remain under the ten year parent route.

 7.  The  Respondent  considered  paragraph  276ADE(1)  stating  that   the
    Appellant had not lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  twenty
    years.  It was not  accepted  that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration into Bangladesh therefore his  application
    was refused with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1).

 8.  The  Respondent  considered  whether  there   were   any   exceptional
    circumstances outside the Immigration rules and  concluded  that  there
    were not.

 9. The Appellant appealed to the FTT.   At  the  hearing  the  Appellant's
    representative confirmed that  the  Appellant  had  not  initiated  any
    contact proceedings in the Family Courts regarding his daughter, and no
    DNA test had been conducted to establish paternity.  It was made  clear
    to the FTT  that  the  appeal  proceeded  on  the  basis  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) and Article 8 outside the Immigration rules only.

10. The FTT found that the Appellant had failed to prove that he had family
    life with his daughter and therefore Article 8 was not engaged  on  the
    basis of family life.  With reference to the Appellant's  private  life
    it was noted that the Appellant suffered from depression, but  the  FTT
    found at paragraph 29 this would not "cause insurmountable obstacles in
    his integration into Bangladeshi society on his return."  The FTT noted
    that the Appellant was currently working in the UK as a  chef  and  had
    done so consistently over the last fourteen years.  The  FTT  dismissed
    the appeal with reference to Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

11. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The grounds are summarised below.  It was contended the  appeal  before
    the FTT was concerned with only  one  issue,  that  being  whether  the
    Appellant should be granted leave based upon his private life, and  his
    long residency in the UK.  It had been agreed at  the  commencement  of
    the FTT hearing, the appeal was not pursued with reference to  Appendix
    FM, and family life with the Appellant's daughter.

12. It was contended that the FTT had failed to  carry  out  an  assessment
    under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  It was further contended  the  FTT  had
    failed to give adequate consideration to the Appellant's  private  life
    in the UK, and failed to carry out any balancing exercise  in  relation
    to proportionality.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by  Judge  Bird  of  the  FTT  in  the
    following terms;

         "2.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal against this decision
             on the grounds that the judge made arguable errors of  law  in
             the assessment of the Appellant's private life under paragraph
             276ADE(vi) and the significant obstacles  and  undue  hardship
             that would  be  faced  by  the  Appellant  on  his  return  to
             Bangladesh after fourteen years.

         3.   The judge considered the evidence that was  presented  at  the
             hearing which he refers to in the body of his decision.  It is
             arguable that the reasons he gives for finding that there were
             no insurmountable obstacles  to  the  Appellant's  integration
             into Bangladeshi society are brief, but these have to be  read
             with his findings overall about  the  Appellant's  immigration
             history.  No arguable error of law arises on this ground.

         4.   The grounds further allege that the judge failed to carry  out
             a balancing exercise under Razgar in light of the private life
             that the Appellant had established here.

         5.   It is arguable that the judge has failed to carry out a proper
             proportionality assessment in  accordance  with  the  guidance
             given by the House of Lords in Razgar in dismissing the appeal
             under Article 8 ECHR."

14. Following the grant of  permission  the  Respondent  did  not  lodge  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

15. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Error of Law

16. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Tarlow accepted that the FTT  had
    materially  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  adequately  consider   the
    Appellant's private life under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

17. I found that concession to be rightly made.  Mr Shah accepted that  the
    grant  of  permission  related  only  to  Article  8,   not   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).  There had been no challenge to the findings made by the
    FTT in relation to family life.  I therefore set aside the decision  of
    the FTT having found a material error of law because of the failure  to
    adequately consider the Appellant's private life under Article 8 of the
    1950 Convention.

18. The representatives agreed it would be appropriate for the decision  to
    be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.

Re-making the Decision

19. Mr Shah confirmed that no further  evidence  was  to  be  called.   The
    decision was to be remade based upon the evidence given to the FTT.

20. I ascertained that I had received all the documentation  to  be  relied
    upon.  This amounted to the Respondent's bundle with Annexes  A-E,  and
    the Appellant's bundle comprising 44 pages.  No further documents  were
    submitted.

21. I heard submissions from Mr Tarlow who submitted  that  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances.  It was submitted that the  Appellant  still
    has links with Bangladesh, and has been working in the UK  as  a  chef,
    and could reintegrate into Bangladesh and carry  on  employment  there.
    Mr Tarlow submitted the appeal should be dismissed.

22. I then heard submissions from Mr  Shah  who  relied  upon  the  written
    submissions contained at pages 1-8 of the Appellant's bundle.   It  was
    accepted that the Appellant's relationship with  his  wife  had  broken
    down, and that she had left him at the end of 2015.  The Appellant  had
    made a financial contribution towards his daughter.  The  Appellant  is
    in full-time employment, and I was  asked  to  take  into  account  his
    length of  residence  since  2003.   The  Appellant  has  some  working
    knowledge of English, and  I  was  asked  to  find  that  this  was  an
    exceptional case, on the basis that  the  Appellant  had  been  granted
    leave to remain in the UK between 14th October 2013 and  27th  February
    2016, so it was not the case that he  had  been  here  unlawfully  ever
    since arrival in June 2003.

23. I was asked to allow the appeal with reference to Article 8 outside the
    Immigration rules.

24. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

25. I firstly set out my reasons for finding a material error of law.   The
    FTT  erred  materially  in  law  by  not  considering  adequately   the
    Appellant's private life.  I accept that the Appellant's representative
    stated at the outset of the appeal before the FTT, that the appeal  was
    based upon the Appellant's private life.  The FTT went on  to  consider
    whether or not there was family life, finding that there  was  not,  in
    relation to the Appellant and his daughter.  That finding has not  been
    challenged.  There was no adequate  consideration  of  the  Appellant's
    private  life.   There  was  a  brief  reference  at  paragraph  29  to
    insurmountable obstacles to integration into Bangladesh, which  is  not
    in fact the correct test.  The test under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  is
    whether there are very significant obstacles to integration.

26. I now make my findings to re-make the decision.

27. I must take into account that only one ground of appeal  is  available,
    and that is whether the decision made by the Respondent is contrary  to
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998.   The  Appellant  relies  upon
    Article 8.  In deciding this appeal I adopt the balance sheet  approach
    recommended by Lord Thomas at paragraph 83 of Hesham Ali v SSHD  [2016]
    UKSC 60, and in so doing,  have  regard  to  the  guidance  as  to  the
    functions of this Tribunal given by Lord Reed at paragraphs 39 to 53.

28. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant  to  establish  his  personal
    circumstances in the UK and why the decision to refuse his human rights
    claim  interferes  disproportionately  in  his  private  life  in  this
    country.  It is for the Respondent to  establish  the  public  interest
    factors weighing against the Appellant.  The standard  of  proof  is  a
    balance of probabilities throughout.

29.  Permission  to  appeal  was  not  granted  in  relation  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) and that decision was not challenged  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  I  note  that  the  Appellant  has  in  fact  travelled  to
    Bangladesh, and then returned to the UK.

30. It was disclosed in his  application  form  at  page  37,  and  in  the
    covering letter from his solicitors dated 25 February  2016,  that  the
    Appellant returned to Bangladesh and remained there between 2  December
    2013 and 2 February 2014.  His reason for returning was that his father
    was unwell and sadly his father subsequently passed away.  At the  time
    of that visit, the Appellant's mother was described as elderly.  This I
    find supports the finding made by the FTT, that there would be no  very
    significant obstacles to the Appellant's reintegration into Bangladesh.
     He would have no language or cultural difficulties,  and  no  adequate
    reason has been given to indicate that the Appellant would not be  able
    to find employment in Bangladesh.  The FTT found as fact  that  he  has
    been working as a chef in this country.

31. With reference to Article 8, I accept that the Appellant has  formed  a
    private life in this country so that Article 8 is  engaged.   I  accept
    that he has studied English, receiving an entry  level  certificate  in
    ESOL,  Skills  for  Life  (Speaking  and  Listening)  (Entry  1),   the
    certificate  being  awarded  on  10th  March  2015.   In  addition   to
    employment, I  accept  that  the  Appellant  will  have  made  friends,
    although there is no comprehensive evidence of his private life.  There
    are no letters or statements from any friends or family in the UK,  and
    no  witnesses  gave  evidence  before  the  FTT  in  relation  to   the
    Appellant's private life.

32. I take into account that the Appellant arrived in the UK illegally  and
    that he remained without leave, until he was granted limited  leave  to
    remain as the partner of a British citizen on 14th October 2013,  which
    leave was valid until 27th February 2016.

33. I accept that the relationship with his partner  broke  down  when  she
    left him at the end of 2015, and he has had no meaningful contact  with
    her since then, and no contact with his daughter since the beginning of
    2016.  I accept that he has doubts as to whether he is  the  biological
    father of his daughter.

34. I take into account that the Appellant wishes to remain in the UK.

35. I must also however consider the public interest, and  have  regard  to
    the  considerations  listed  in  section  117B  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

36. Sub-section (1) confirms that the maintenance of effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest.

37. Sub-section (2) confirms that it is  in  the  public  interest  that  a
    person seeking to remain in the UK can speak  English.   I  accept  the
    Appellant has a basic  grasp  of  English  as  evidenced  by  the  ESOL
    qualification he has achieved.

38. Sub-section (3) confirms that it is  in  the  public  interest  that  a
    person seeking leave to remain is financially  independent.   I  accept
    that the Appellant  has  employment  and  is  financially  independent.
    However,  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  can  speak  English  and  is
    financially independent are neutral factors when considering the public
    interest.

39. Sub-section (4) states that little weight should be given to a  private
    life or a  relationship  formed  with  a  qualifying  partner  that  is
    established by a person at  a  time  when  the  person  is  in  the  UK
    unlawfully.  Therefore I must attach little weight to  the  Appellant's
    private life established when he was in  this  country  without  leave,
    which was between 2003 and October 2013.

40. Sub-section (5) states that little weight should be given to a  private
    life established by a person at a time when  the  person's  immigration
    status is precarious.  The Appellant  has  had  precarious  immigration
    status since October 2013 as he has only had limited leave  to  remain.
    I therefore must attach little weight to the private life that  he  has
    established since October 2013.

41. Sub-section (6) states that in  a  case  of  a  person  not  liable  to
    deportation the public interest does not require the  person's  removal
    if he has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child, and it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
    leave the UK.  The FTT has found, and this finding was not  challenged,
    that the Appellant does not have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child.  Therefore he  cannot  rely  upon
    sub-section (6) of section 117B of the 2002 Act.

42. I must therefore balance the Appellant's wish to remain in the UK,  and
    his length of residence, with the considerations  set  out  in  section
    117B.  It is significant, that I must, by virtue of section 117B attach
    little weight to the private life that the Appellant  has  established.
    This does not mean that I attach no weight, but it  does  mean  that  I
    find the weight that  must  be  attached  to  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining effective immigration control, outweighs the weight  to  be
    placed upon  the  Appellant's  private  life  and  the  wishes  of  the
    Appellant to remain in the UK.

43.  I  conclude  the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the  Appellant's
    application for leave to remain in the UK, does not breach  Article  8,
    and is not contrary to section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act  1998.   The
    appeal must therefore be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.

I re-make the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The FTT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity and I see no need to make an anonymity order.


Signed                              Date 12th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 12th January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
