
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16410/2019
                                                               HU/16412/2019
                                                               HU/16414/2019
                                                               HU/16417/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 December 2020                  |On 26 January 2021                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                     S K
                                     M Y
                                     A M
                                N M (A MINOR)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    Mr Abu Sadat Islam, solicitor with Fountain
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of S K, M Y, A M, or the child N M, who are the  subject
of these proceedings or publish or reveal any  information  which  would  be
likely to lead to the identification of any of them  or  of  any  member  of
their family in connection with these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The appellants appeal with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier  Tribunal  dismissing  their  appeals  against  the   respondent's
    decision on 20 September 2019 to refuse them leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on human rights grounds, pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(1)
    and in the case of the third and  fourth  appellants,  with  regard  to
    section 55 of the UK Borders Act 2007 and section 117B and 117D of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

 2. The appellants are all Pakistani citizens:  the first appellant is  the
    mother of the second, third and fourth appellants. The first  appellant
    was born in 1972, so she is 48 years old now.  The second appellant was
    born in 1995 and is 25 years old.  The  third  appellant  was  born  in
    1999, so she is 21 years now and  the  fourth  appellant,  who  is  the
    youngest, was born in 2003 and is now 17 years old.

Mode of hearing

 3. The appeal was heard by Skype for Business, there  being  no  objection
    from either party to a  remote  hearing.   There  were  no  significant
    technical difficulties, although  Mr  Islam  had  difficulty  with  his
    received sound at times: on those occasions, I repeated what I had said
    and he heard it on the second repetition.

 4. I am satisfied that this was a fair hearing.

Background

 5. The appellants say they came to the United Kingdom from the Republic of
    Ireland on 1 March 2012, when the  third  and  fourth  appellants  were
    still minors:  the second appellant was 17, the third appellant was  13
    and the fourth appellant was just 8 years old.   The  second  appellant
    reached adulthood in 2013, the third appellant did so in 2017:  neither
    of them has been in the United Kingdom as a child  for  7  years.   The
    fourth appellant became a section 117D qualifying child in March  2019,
    after 7 years in the United Kingdom as a minor. The  second  appellant,
    it seems, has a partner although they are not  married:  she  says  she
    does not want to marry him.  The partner did not give evidence, save in
    a witness statement, at the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. In these proceedings, the appellants say they arrived together from the
    Republic of Ireland, but it seems that, at least for a time, the  third
    and fourth appellants were living with an aunt and their mother was not
    with them.  In August 2012, the third and  fourth  appellants  made  an
    asylum application as unaccompanied asylum-seeking children, which  was
    refused.  As both were still minors,  the  respondent  granted  them  3
    years' discretionary leave, expiring on 19 October 2015.  In  February,
    March and August 2016, all four appellants made joint applications  for
    further leave to remain on private and family  life  grounds  together,
    which were refused.

 7. The appellants did not embark for Pakistan, nor did they return to  the
    Republic of Ireland.  Instead, they remained unlawfully in  the  United
    Kingdom and on 29 March 2019, they made a human rights claim  based  on
    their private life in the United  Kingdom,  which  was  refused  on  20
    September 2019.  It is against that decision that they appealed to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 8. On 18 November 2019, the appellants' appeals were heard  by  First-tier
    Judge Thapar, sitting at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision was sent to the parties on 14 January 2020.

 9. The core of the First-tier Judge's decision is at [24]-[27]:

         "24. I note that  the  evidence  to  demonstrate  that  the  second
         appellant and the first appellant are living together are  of  some
         receipts for items sent. ...The sender therefore has the option  of
         including whatever name they wish when  requesting  delivery.   The
         utility bills produced for the second appellant dated  2015,  2016,
         and in an undated letter, show him to be residing  at  a  different
         address.  The second appellant was additionally recorded as  living
         at the alternative address  as  stated  in  the  utility  bills  in
         November 2018, and the first appellant and fourth appellant  living
         at another address at the same time. ...  Although  the  appellants
         state that they are living  together,  it  would  appear  that  the
         second appellant is living independently.

         25.  I acknowledge that the fourth appellant has now been  residing
         in the United Kingdom for over seven years and that  she  will,  in
         the next months, be completing her GCSEs. I have found  above  that
         it would not be unreasonable to expect the first, second and  third
         appellants to return to  Pakistan  and  there  are  no  significant
         obstacles to their integration in Pakistan.  The  fourth  appellant
         has always lived with her mother and sister, and I do find them  to
         be a close  family  unit.   I  accept  that  requiring  the  fourth
         appellant to return to Pakistan would cause disruption  in  respect
         of her studies, and potentially interfere with the friendships  she
         has formed in the United Kingdom, however, I find  that  separating
         her from the family would caused greater distress, instability, and
         would not be in her best  interests.   The  welfare  and  the  best
         interests of the fourth appellant would be maintained by  remaining
         with her  mother  and  siblings,  and  family  life  can  therefore
         continue in Pakistan.  I find that the  fourth  appellant's  mother
         and siblings would be able to continue  to  provide  the  emotional
         support and comfort to the fourth appellant in  Pakistan,   I  have
         also found that the appellants do have extended family members  who
         may assist and therefore the appellants  would  have  available  to
         them a support network in Pakistan.  There is an educational system
         in Pakistan and the appellants have produced no  evidence  to  show
         that the fourth appellant cannot continue her studies in  Pakistan.



         26.  I therefore find that there are no  significant  obstacles  to
         the appellants' integration in Pakistan for  the  reasons  provided
         above.  I find that  the  appellants  are  unable  to  satisfy  the
         relevant requirements under the Immigration Rules.

         27.  I find that the private life  established  by  the  appellants
         during their residence in the United Kingdom does not outweigh  the
         public  interest  in  maintaining  a  firm  and  fair   system   of
         immigration control and therefore the decision of the respondent is
         a proportionate  response.   The  appellants'  appeal  under  human
         rights therefore fails."

10. The human rights appeal was dismissed and the  appellants  appealed  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

11. The grounds of appeal relate only to the fourth appellant.  The  first,
    second and  third  appellants  have  not  challenged  the  findings  in
    relation to them, though Mr Salam said frankly that  he  would  expect,
    should the fourth appellant succeed on her challenge to the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision, that all four appellants would be given  appropriate
    leave.

12. Four categories of error of law were posited.  The appellants  contend,
    in relation to the fourth appellant, that the First-tier Tribunal erred
    by:

      1) Failing properly to apply paragraph 276ADE(iv): at [25], they argue
         that  insufficient  weight  was  given   to   her   upcoming   GCSE
         examinations; at [29] they accept that it is factually correct that
         the fourth appellant could resume her studies in Pakistan, but  did
         not have regard to the subjective effect on the fourth appellant if
         she were to be returned before taking her exams; and the appellants
         contend that the fourth  appellant's  8  years'  residence  in  the
         United Kingdom had not been adequately considered, given  that  she
         had been to primary school,  junior  school  and  secondary  school
         here.

      2) Failing properly to assess the fourth appellant's section  55  best
         interests, given the potential disruption to her studies by removal
         to Pakistan and the interference with friendships formed by her  in
         the United Kingdom.  It would not be reasonable to  expect  her  to
         leave the United Kingdom until her education was complete,  and  if
         she were allowed to remain, the first appellant as her mother would
         also need to be given leave to remain too.

      3) Failing to consider the family unit holistically; it would  not  be
         reasonable to expect the second or third appellants  to  return  to
         Pakistan, as they had established substantial privately life in the
         United Kingdom over the  last  8  years  and  enjoyed  family  life
         together during that period.  If the second  and  third  appellants
         had to return to Pakistan without their  mother  and  sister,  that
         would be an  unreasonable  and  disproportionate  breach  of  their
         family  life.   The  appellants  had  not  been  considered  on  an
         individual basis; and

      4) Failing properly to apply the proportionality test and to strike  a
         fair balance between the competing interests of the state  and  the
         individual:  see GM (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
         Department  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1630  and  the  relevance   of   the
         insurmountable obstacles case.  The facts had not been evaluated in
         a 'real world' sense.  Permission should be granted.

13. First-tier Judge Keane granted permission, on the basis that there  was
    a Robinson obvious point: the First-tier Judge had  failed  to  make  a
    finding as to whether it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  fourth
    appellant to leave the  United  Kingdom,  with  her  GCSE  examinations
    coming up, and all the educational disruption which would occur.

Rule 24 Reply

14. The respondent did not file a prompt Rule 24 reply, but on the  evening
    before the hearing, Mr Melvin provided written submissions to stand  as
    such a reply.  He argued that it was reasonable to  expect  the  fourth
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom.  Her personal circumstances  had
    been considered at [21], in particular her good knowledge of  the  main
    Islamic beliefs and practices,  on  which  she  could  express  herself
    clearly.  He relied on the findings in [25] and  following.   While  it
    was right to say that the requirements of section 117B had not been set
    out, the question of section 117B(6) reasonableness had  been  properly
    considered and the decision should be upheld.

15. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Evidence concerning the fourth appellant

16. The evidence about the fourth appellant's private and  family  life  in
    the United Kingdom comprises a statement made on 4  November  2019,  in
    which she says she is studying for her GCSE examinations, and wants  to
    study Law, Criminology and Health and Social Care at  'A'  Level.   The
    fourth appellant says she lives with her mother,  brother  and  sister,
    but has no contact with her father.  She has  many  friends  here  from
    school and would like to develop her career  and  continue  living  her
    life in the United Kingdom.  She has few memories of life in  Pakistan,
    having left there aged 8.

17. The documents at 137 and following are  the  fourth  appellant's  birth
    certificate, her 2012  biometric  residence  card  for  the  period  of
    discretionary leave, and  many  documents  from  her  various  schools,
    showing that she is working hard and progressing well, together with  a
    number of photocopied photographs, presumably of the  fourth  appellant
    and her friends.  There are no witness statements from her friends.

Upper Tribunal hearing

18. At the  hearing,  Mr  Islam  confirmed  that  the  complaint  in  these
    proceedings related solely to the treatment of the  fourth  appellant's
    private and family life rights.  He  then  began  to  make  submissions
    about the third appellant.  I asked whether he was seeking to vary  the
    grounds of appeal: Mr Islam confirmed that he  was  not  and  that,  as
    previously stated, it was the  fourth  appellant's  circumstances  with
    which the Tribunal should be concerned.

19. Mr Islam relied on the documents which begin at page 137 of the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  bundle,  and  which  set  out  the  fourth  appellant's
    educational attainments since arriving in the United  Kingdom,  and  to
    which he referred as demonstrating that she has a  substantial  private
    life here.  He confirmed that the  fourth  appellant  had  successfully
    completed her GCSE examinations in the  summer  of  2020  and  had  now
    embarked on a college course to continue her  education.   He  did  not
    give details of that course and we are not  concerned  with  it  unless
    this decision is set aside and remade.

20. Mr Islam relied on paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of  the  Immigration  Rules:
    the fourth appellant had lived continuously in the United  Kingdom  for
    at least 7 years and it would not be reasonable to expect her to  leave
    the United Kingdom.  Mr Islam relied  on  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed (decisions affecting children: onward  appeal)
    [2013] UKUT 197 ((IAC)).  The judge should have considered the evidence
    before her.  Mr Islam asked me to allow the appeal and to set aside the
    First-tier Tribunal and remake the decision in the appellant's favour.

21. For the respondent, Mr Melvin relied on  his  written  submissions  and
    contended that the First-tier Tribunal's reasons were adequate, if  not
    extensive: the question of reasonableness was a matter of weight and in
    this case, the fourth appellant's best interests lay in remaining  with
    her family members, even if they relocated to Pakistan  together.   She
    was still emotionally dependent on her family members.  Mr Melvin asked
    me to dismiss the appeal.

Analysis

22. The most helpful analysis of the task for the First-tier Judge  is  now
    in KO (Nigeria) & Ors v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (Respondent) [2018] UKSC  53  in  which  Lord  Carnwath  JSC  gave  the
    judgment of the Court, Lord Kerr JSC, Lord Wilson JSC,  Lord  reed  JSC
    and Lord Briggs JSC concurring. Lord Carnwath held  that  the  parent's
    illegality  or  criminality  was  not   relevant   and   approved   the
    respondent's IDI dated 22 February 2018, as follows:

         ""The consideration of the  child's  best  interests  must  not  be
         affected by the conduct or immigration history of the parent(s)  or
         primary carer, but these will be relevant to the assessment of  the
         public interest, including  in  maintaining  effective  immigration
         control; whether this outweighs the  child's  best  interests;  and
         whether, in the round, it is reasonable  to  expect  the  child  to
         leave the UK." (Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b.  Family
         Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: Ten-Year Routes,  p
         76)"

23. Lord Carnwath held that although section 117B(6) was on the face of  it
    free standing, but it was inevitably relevant to consider  whether  the
    parents (the first appellant, in this case) was expected to  be,  since
    it would normally  be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  be  with  them.
    'Reasonableness' was to be considered in the real world  in  which  the
    children found themselves.

24. I remind myself  also  that  the  reasonableness  finding,  absent  any
    misdirection in law, is a finding of fact by the First-tier Judge,  who
    had the advantage of oral evidence which has not been available  to  me
    today, as well as the documents I have mentioned.  The circumstances in
    which the Upper Tribunal may interfere with a finding of fact are  very
    narrowly drawn:  see AA (Nigeria) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2020] EWCA Civ 1296 and R (Iran) v Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982.

25. In this appeal, the judge made a robust and concise assessment  of  the
    material before him.  I have reviewed the school materials and they add
    very little  weight  to  the  appellants'  case,  although  the  fourth
    appellant is clearly a good student who is doing well.  She has  always
    lived with her (now adult) siblings and her mother, and the real  world
    analysis is that, absent consideration of her circumstances, her mother
    and brother appear never to have had leave at all, and her elder sister
    only had discretionary leave until 2015.  They have  all  been  in  the
    United Kingdom either precariously  or  unlawfully,  and  but  for  the
    fourth appellant's circumstances, they have not challenged the  finding
    of the First-tier Tribunal that they can lawfully be removed.

26. The fourth appellant's educational arguments have fallen away: the need
    to take her GCSE examinations is no longer material to this  appeal  as
    she has  already  done  so  successfully.   The  fourth  appellant  has
    embarked on further study, but the judge found that she could  do  that
    in Pakistan.

27. The grounds of appeal accordingly disclose no material error of law  in
    the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   which   is   adequately,
    intelligibly and properly reasoned.

28. This appeal is dismissed.



DECISION

29. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     22 December
2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



