
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16963/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th April 2019                           |On 10th May 2019              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                  n o l t-i
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Ojo instructed by C W Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  He appealed to a Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  6
    August 2018 refusing his human rights claim.

2.   Subsequent to a hearing on 1 February 2019  at  Cardiff  Civil  Justice
    Centre I found material errors of law in the judge's decision  and  set
    it aside, directing that it should be relisted for hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.

3.   The appellant gave evidence, identifying his witness statement and  his
    signature on it.  He had nothing to add except that he was  in  contact
    with his son now and that was fixed and things were looking up.   Dates
    had been arranged with his son's mother and he was seeing him three  or
    four days a week.

4.   The  next  witness  was  OH  who  was  the  appellant's  partner.   She
    identified her signature on her witness statement and adopted it as her
    evidence-in-chief.  There was no cross-examination.

5.   The third  witness  was  IT-I  who  is  the  appellant's  mother.   She
    identified her signature  on  the  statement  and  adopted  it  as  her
    evidence-in-chief.  There was no cross-examination.

6.   In his  submissions  Mr  Avery  relied  on  the  refusal  letter.   The
    appellant was a foreign criminal and had committed a number of offences
    including possession of a class A drug with intention to supply.   This
    was a serious offence and warranted conducive grounds for  deportation.
    There was the previous offending in any event.  He had  family  in  the
    United Kingdom including children  with  his  former  partner  and  his
    mother.  He did not meet the  unduly  harshness  test  set  out  in  KO
    (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.  There was no real argument to show  that  he
    would be unable to adapt to life in Nigeria.  He was  a  young  healthy
    male who could integrate there and there were no real obstacles to that
    and no very compelling circumstances for succeeding.  The appeal should
    be dismissed.

7.   In his submissions Mr Ojo relied on and developed points  made  in  his
    skeleton argument.

8.   The appellant has a biological son and  a  stepdaughter.   Family  life
    was to be looked at as a unit.  He had regular contact with his son and
    he looked after his stepdaughter when his partner could  not.   He  was
    involved in her school life in that he took her to school  and  brought
    her back.  She was a British citizen as were the other  parties,  other
    than the appellant.  The appellant's mother gave him financial  support
    and their relationship went beyond the Kugathas test.

9.   If the appellant were removed to Nigeria he had no special  skills  and
    had been educated only to secondary school level.   Evidence  had  been
    provided previously about the employment  situation  in  Nigeria  which
    showed that there was almost no likelihood of him  getting  work  there
    due to his lack of education and lack of special skills.  He  had  left
    Nigeria at the age of 11  in  2004  and  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    subsequently.  He had been back once for a short visit  but  not  since
    then.  His grandmother whom he had visited then had died.   He  had  no
    relatives who could support him there and there was no social  services
    support and he had no money to take with him.

10.  It was the case that his crimes are very  serious,  but  it  should  be
    noted that they were committed when he  was  a  minor  and  the  matter
    should be considered from that angle and also the most  recent  offence
    had been committed in 2004.

11.  The evidence of  family  life  could  be  seen,  for  example,  in  the
    photographs at pages 77 to 81 of the bundle and this showed very strong
    family life in the United  Kingdom.   The  family  would  be  seriously
    affected.  The impact on his partner would also be harsh.  She had come
    to the United Kingdom when very young, with her  parents,  fleeing  the
    war in Sudan.  She was currently in education.  If she  had  to  follow
    the appellant to Nigeria her education would cease.  Also there  was  a
    public investment  in  her  education  which  could  not  be  recouped.
    Further,  she  had  never  visited  Nigeria  and  had  no  ties  there.
    Relocation would be very difficult.

12.  Also, with regard to her daughter (the  appellant's  stepdaughter),  at
    present the child's father had contact  with  her  and  that  would  be
    denied if she went to Nigeria.  There would be nobody to look after her
    if she were left behind.  She saw the appellant as her father.  He  was
    always there for her.  It was clear from KO (Nigeria) and from  Zoumbas
    that children were not to  be  made  to  bear  the  brunt  of  parents'
    misdemeanours.  Undue harshness in her case was made out.

13.  With regard to the appellant's son,  he  had  contact  with  him.   The
    child's mother would not let him take the child to Nigeria and likewise
    with regard to financial ability to support it would not be life as  it
    was in the United Kingdom.  Both children were British citizens.   Also
    it would be psychologically harmful for them  and  very  difficult  for
    them to understand why they had to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  or  be
    separated from the appellant who played a  significant  role  in  their
    lives.  They would be devastated.

14.  The relationship the appellant had with his mother and sister  was  not
    necessarily one that gave rise to Article 8 protection, but in fact  it
    went beyond ordinary emotional ties.  His mother gave him support.  She
    was working full-time but  was  not  in  good  health,  suffering  from
    hypertension.  He was  her  only  son  and  separation  would  be  very
    difficult for her.  She was a single mother and paying a  mortgage  and
    the only help she gave was to top up whatever his partner was  able  to
    provide, so it would be almost impossible for her to  continue  support
    and pay for his accommodation in Nigeria.

15.   The  criteria  for  very  compelling  circumstances  were  made   out.
    Everything should be looked at cumulatively.  The impact on  the  other
    people involved was to be  considered,  including  the  fact  that  the
    children's parents would not allow them to be taken to Nigeria and  the
    stepdaughter could not be left behind.  It was in the best interests of
    the children to remain in the United  Kingdom  and  important  for  the
    appellant to continue to be involved  in  their  lives.   It  would  be
    difficult for him to integrate into Nigeria.  The relevant  tests  were
    made out, both within and outside the Rules.

16.  I reserved my decision.

17.  I will not repeat the detail of the judge's decision which  I  set  out
    in my error of law decision, since the judge's decision  has  been  set
    aside.  In sum, the judge did not  accept  that  the  appellant  was  a
    "foreign criminal"  as  defined,  but  considered  the  matter  in  the
    alternative and found that it would be unduly harsh for his partner  to
    live without him in the United Kingdom or live with him in Nigeria, and
    also it would be unduly harsh for his stepdaughter to live  in  Nigeria
    or remain in the United Kingdom without the appellant.  The evidence at
    the time was that he did not have contact with his son but he  had  met
    his son's mother and was hoping to re-establish contact.   His  partner
    had suffered from anxiety when he was in prison for five or six  months
    and his stepdaughter was also very upset.

18.  It seems that the "foreign criminal" issue is  not  of  any  continuing
    materiality.  I was satisfied that the appellant is a foreign criminal,
    bearing in mind that he  was  detained  in  an  institution  for  young
    offenders for the relevant length of time, and in  the  alternative  he
    can properly  be  regarded  as  a  foreign  criminal  since  he  has  a
    conviction for supplying a class A drug.

19.  I noted at paragraph 16 of my error of law  decision  that  as  regards
    the judge's findings on undue harshness, there was no evidence  of  the
    impact the appellant's deportation would have on  his  stepdaughter  or
    his son, nor of such adverse impact on his wife as  to  come  close  to
    crossing the relevant threshold.  Nor had the judge made  any  findings
    on the very significant obstacles to integration point.  This is one of
    the requirements of paragraph 399A of HC 395, and  the  judge  accepted
    that the appellant was lawfully resident in the United Kingdom and  was
    socially and culturally integrated into the United Kingdom but made  no
    findings on whether there would be very significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration into Nigeria.

20.  As regards the undue harshness point, there is little further  evidence
    on this.  There is the appellant's oral evidence  that  he  now  has  a
    degree of contact with his son, though there is  no  witness  statement
    from his former partner in that regard and no evidence other  than  his
    own assertion.  There is no evidence as to the impact on the child.

21.  As regards  the  impact  on  the  appellant's  partner,  there  is  the
    evidence in her witness statement which she  adopted  today,  but  that
    statement was, I think, before the judge, since its date is the same as
    the date of the hearing before the judge.  The same is  the  case  with
    the  appellant's  mother's  witness  statement  and   the   appellant's
    statement.

22.  It is a sad but inevitable  fact  of  deportation  that  it  splits  up
    families.  The test in this case is that  of  whether  there  would  be
    undue harshness to the appellant's children and his partner and  indeed
    his mother and sister were he to be deported to Nigeria.  As  was  said
    in KO (Nigeria) it seems clearly intended to  induce  a  higher  hurdle
    than that of "reasonableness" and assumes that there is a  "due"  level
    of "harshness", that being a  level  which  it  may  be  acceptable  or
    justifiable in the relevant context,  but  "unduly"  implies  something
    going beyond that level.  As was said at paragraph 23  of  the  Supreme
    Court's judgment, one is looking for a degree of harshness going beyond
    what would necessarily  be  involved  for  any  child  faced  with  the
    deportation of a parent.

23.  In my judgement that has not been shown in this case.   I  accept  that
    the consequences of the appellant's removal on his  children,  partner,
    mother and sister will be severe.  But that is not the test.  The level
    of harshness involved goes beyond, as was said by  the  Supreme  Court,
    what can normally be  expected  to  happen  where  family  members  are
    separated.  That is not made out  in  this  case  and  consequently  it
    cannot be said that the undue harshness test is met.

24.  Also, with regard to paragraph 399A(c), I do not consider it  as  being
    shown that there would be very significant obstacles to the appellant's
    integration into Nigeria.  He lived there as a child, he is a young man
    in good health who has experience of work,  and  although  I  note  the
    evidence provided and the difficulties he would face in obtaining  work
    in Nigeria, it does not seem to me that that  very  high  threshold  of
    very significant obstacles is met.  No doubt there will  be  obstacles,
    and it is possible that they will be significant, but very  significant
    obstacles are as the phrase implies, obstacles of  a  very  high  order
    indeed.  That is not shown in this case.  Accordingly, the  appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision falls to be dismissed.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 08 May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 08 May 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

