
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/16203/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 August 2019                     |On 13 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       NAGAT ABDELWHAB ADALLA ELAAGIB
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, instructed by Maguire, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan.  Her  date  of  birth  for  record
    purposes is 1 January 1960.  On 4  June  2018  she  applied  for  entry
    clearance to the UK.  She stated her type  of  application  as  "family
    reunion under part 11, asylum, immigration rules".

 3. The ECO refused the application  because  (i)  refugee  family  reunion
    extends only to spouses, other partners, and minor children;  (ii)  the
    appellant had not paid the fee for consideration as an adult  dependent
    relative under appendix FM of the rules, and, even if she had, she  did
    not meet those  requirements;  and  (iii)  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances to warrant a grant of leave,  outside  the  rules,  under
    article 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The appellant appealed to the FtT.  Judge Green allowed her appeal by a
    decision   promulgated on 22 March 2019.

 5. The SSHD's grounds of appeal to the UT are set out  in  an  application
    for permission dated 4 April 2019.  Permission was granted  on  14  May
    2019.

 6. Mr Govan relied on the grounds.  The  main  points  I  noted  from  his
    submissions were these:

      i) The case disclosed  compassionate  factors,  the  appellant  having
         disabilities  and  living  alone,  but  no  strong  and  compelling
         features which might constitute exceptional  circumstances  outside
         the rules.

     ii) The applicant was not within the  eligible  group  of  core  family
         members who benefit from rules designed for refugee cases,  without
         payment  of  a  fee,  and  regardless  of   financial   and   other
         considerations.

    iii) The appellant's case was governed by the rules for adult  dependent
         relatives, which are designed to comply with article  8.   She  did
         not assert that those rules are not compliant.

     iv) The  judge  might  have  described  the  appellant's  circumstances
         correctly in Sudan, but he said nothing on the other hand about her
         lack of financial support, and the burden she was likely to  impose
         on the taxpayer.

      v) On family life, the judge at [29] did not  specify  anything  which
         took the case beyond the  normal  ties  between  parent  and  adult
         child.

     vi) The judge did not specify anything which gave the appellant a right
         to enter the UK, without  meeting  the  rules  designed  for  adult
         dependent relatives.

    vii) There was nothing in the decision which justified the outcome,  and
         it should be reversed.

 7. The appellant filed a response under rule  24  to  the  grounds,  going
    through each of their  17  paragraphs.   Mr  Winter  relied  upon  that
    response and made further submissions.  The main points  I  noted  were
    these:

      i) The judge finally  at  [30]  found  there  to  be  very  compelling
         circumstances outside  the  rules,  the  correct  legal  threshold,
         having conducted a balancing exercise.

     ii) The grounds were only a disagreement with that assessment.

    iii) The grounds were misleading in their  heavy  reliance  on  Kugathas
         [2003] EWCA Civ 31, which should no longer be taken as setting  out
         the test for family life among adults.

     iv) The correct approach is to be found in Ghising [2012] UKUT 160  and
         Gurung [2013] 1 WLR 2546.

      v) The sponsor lived with the appellant until 2016 [or 2017, according
         to the decision].  The narration of the circumstances was enough to
         justify the finding of family life.

     vi)  There  was  also  a  psychological  report  about  the  impact  of
         separation on the sponsor, to which the judge had not referred

    vii) The grounds at [12] were "something of a rant".

   viii) MA (Somalia) [2011] Imm AR 292 at [45] was instructive, "The  court
         should not be astute to characterise as an error of  law  what,  in
         truth, is no more than a disagreement with the AIT's assessment  of
         the facts".  The grounds were an example of such disagreement.

     ix) The UT should not interfere with primary findings of  the  FtT;  YZ
         [2017] CSIH 41.

      x) A decision  did  not  need  to  rehearse  every  detail  or  issue;
         Budhathoki [2014] UKUT 00341.

     xi) The judge had not made the mistake of embarking on  a  freewheeling
         exercise, but had noted the ambit of the rules for adult  dependent
         relatives.  The  finding  that  family  life  existed  led  to  the
         appellant having a right in terms of article 8 to enter the UK.

    xii) The decision should stand.

 8. I reserved my decision.

 9. It was common  ground  between  representatives  that  to  succeed  the
    appellant had to prove both the existence of  family  life  within  the
    ambit of article 8, and exceptional circumstances, as explained in  the
    case law.

10. As both sides said their position was supported by Agyarko, it  may  be
    useful to look at authority on the general  approach  to  be  taken  to
    article 8.

11. Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and Huang [2007] UKHL 11 are now to  be  read  in
    light both of the amendment of the immigration rules to reflect article
    8 (effective from 9 July 2012) and of the setting out in Part 5A of the
    2002 Act of public interest  considerations  (effective  from  28  July
    2014).

12. In Agyarko and Ikuga [2017] UKSC 11 two applicants challenged decisions
    of the SSHD that there were no  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  family
    life being carried on outside the UK, in terms of  the  rules,  and  no
    "exceptional circumstances" to warrant leave outside the  Rules.   Lord
    Reed, giving the judgement of the court, considered  the  decisions  of
    the European court and the approach approved in  deportation  cases  in
    Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60, and continued:

         "[57]    That approach is also appropriate when a court or tribunal
         is considering whether a refusal of leave to remain  is  compatible
         with  article  8  in  the  context  of  precarious   family   life.
         Ultimately, it has to decide whether the refusal  is  proportionate
         in the particular case before it, balancing  the  strength  of  the
         public interest in the removal of the person  in  question  against
         the impact on private and family life. In doing so, it should  give
         appropriate weight to the Secretary of State's policy, expressed in
         the Rules  and  the  Instructions,  that  the  public  interest  in
         immigration  control  can  be  outweighed,  when   considering   an
         application for leave to remain brought by a person in  the  UK  in
         breach of immigration laws, only where  there  are  "insurmountable
         obstacles" or "exceptional circumstances" as defined. It must  also
         consider all factors relevant to the  specific  case  in  question,
         including, where relevant, the matters  discussed  in  paras  51-52
         above. The critical issue will generally  be  whether,  giving  due
         weight to the strength of the public interest in the removal of the
         person in the case before it, the article 8 claim  is  sufficiently
         strong  to  outweigh  it.  In  general,  in  cases  concerned  with
         precarious family life,  a  very  strong  or  compelling  claim  is
         required to outweigh the public interest in immigration control.

         [58]     The expression "exceptional circumstances"  appears  in  a
         number of places in the Rules and the Instructions. Its use in  the
         part of  the  Rules  concerned  with  the  deportation  of  foreign
         offenders was considered in Hesham Ali. In the present context, as
         has been explained, it appears in the Instructions dealing with the
         grant of leave to remain in the UK outside the Rules.  Its  use  is
         challenged on the basis that the Secretary of State cannot lawfully
         impose  a   requirement   that   there   should   be   "exceptional
         circumstances", having regard  to  the  opinion  of  the  Appellate
         Committee of the House of Lords in Huang.

         [59]     As was explained in para 8 above, the case  of Huang was
         decided at a time when the Rules had not been  revised  to  reflect
         the requirements of article 8.  Instead,  the  Secretary  of  State
         operated arrangements under which effect was  given  to  article  8
         outside  the  Rules.  Lord  Bingham,  giving  the  opinion  of  the
         Committee, observed that the ultimate question  for  the  appellate
         immigration authority was whether the refusal of leave to enter  or
         remain, in circumstances where the life of  the  family  could  not
         reasonably be expected to be enjoyed elsewhere, taking full account
         of all considerations weighing in favour of the refusal, prejudiced
         the family life of the applicant in a manner  sufficiently  serious
         to amount to a breach of article 8. If the answer to that  question
         was affirmative, then the refusal was unlawful. He added:

             "It is not necessary that the appellate immigration authority,
             directing itself along the lines indicated  in  this  opinion,
             need ask  in  addition  whether  the  case  meets  a  test  of
             exceptionality. The suggestion that it should is based  on  an
             observation of Lord Bingham in Razgar [ R (Razgar) v Secretary
             of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27; [2004] 2 AC
             368] , para 20. He was there expressing an expectation, shared
             with the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal,  that  the  number  of
             claimants  not  covered  by  the   rules   and   supplementary
             directions but entitled to succeed under article 8 would be  a
             very small minority. That is still his expectation. But he was
             not purporting to lay down a legal test." (para 20)

         [60]     It remains the position that the ultimate question is  how
         a fair balance should be struck between the  competing  public  and
         individual interests involved, applying a proportionality test. The
         Rules and Instructions in issue in the present case do  not  depart
         from that position. The Secretary of State has not imposed  a  test
         of exceptionality, in the sense which Lord  Bingham  had  in  mind:
         that is to say, a requirement that the  case  should  exhibit  some
         highly unusual feature, over and above the application of the  test
         of proportionality. On the  contrary,  she  has  defined  the  word
         "exceptional", as already explained, as meaning  "circumstances  in
         which refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for
         the individual such that the refusal of the application  would  not
         be proportionate". So understood, the provision in the Instructions
         that leave can be  granted  outside  the  Rules  where  exceptional
         circumstances  apply  involves  the  application  of  the  test  of
         proportionality to the circumstances of the  individual  case,  and
         cannot be regarded as incompatible with article 8. That  conclusion
         is fortified by the express  statement  in  the  Instructions  that
         "exceptional" does not mean "unusual"  or  "unique":  see  para  19
         above."

13. KO (Nigeria) and others [2018] UKSC 53 was  a  case  mainly  about  the
    treatment of qualifying children and their parents under part 5A. Under
    the heading "general approach" Lord Carnwath, giving the  judgement  of
    the court, said:

         "[12]    This group of sections  needs  to  be  looked  at  in  the
         context of the history of attempts  by  the  Government,  with  the
         support of Parliament, to clarify the application of article  8  in
         immigration cases. In Hesham Ali ... this court had  to  consider
         rule changes introduced with similar objectives in July  2012.  The
         background to those changes was explained by Lord Reed  (paras  19-
         21),  their  avowed  purpose   being   to   "promote   consistency,
         predictability  and  transparency"  in  decision-making,  and   "to
         reflect the Government's and Parliament's view of how, as a  matter
         of public policy, the balance should be struck ..." (para 21).

         [13]     In a case heard shortly afterwards, ... Agyarko ... paras
         8-10, Lord  Reed  referred  to  the  previous  law  as  established
         in Huang ... where it was held that non-compliance with the Rules,
         not themselves reflecting the assessment of  proportionality  under
         article 8, was "the point at which to begin, not end" consideration
         of article 8. The new Rules, as he said by reference to  government
         policy  statements,  were   designed   to   change   the   position
         comprehensively by "reflecting an assessment  of  all  the  factors
         relevant to the application of article 8" (para 10).

         [14]     Part 5A of the 2002 Act takes that process a stage further
         by expressing the intended balance of relevant  factors  in  direct
         statutory form. It is  profoundly  unsatisfactory  that  a  set  of
         provisions which was intended to provide clear guidelines to  limit
         the  scope  for  judicial  evaluation  should  have  led  to   such
         disagreement among some of the most experienced Upper Tribunal  and
         Court of Appeal judges. Rather than attempt a detailed analysis  of
         all these impressive but conflicting judgments, I hope  I  will  be
         forgiven for attempting a simpler and more direct approach.

         [15]     I start with  the  expectation  that  the  purpose  is  to
         produce a straightforward set of rules, and in particular to narrow
         rather than widen the residual area of discretionary  judgment  for
         the court to take account of public interest or other  factors  not
         directly reflected in the wording of the statute. I also start from
         the presumption, in the absence of clear language to the  contrary,
         that the provisions are intended to be consistent with the  general
         principles relating to the "best interests" of children,  including
         the principle that "a child must not  be  blamed  for  matters  for
         which he or she is not  responsible,  such  as  the  conduct  of  a
         parent"  (see Zoumbas  v  Secretary  of  State   for   the   Home
         Department [2013] UKSC 74, [2013] 1 WLR 3690, para  10  per  Lord
         Hodge)."

14. (The court went on to hold held the misconduct of a parent  was  not  a
    balancing factor, and that the reasonability  of  the  departure  of  a
    child was to be approached in "the real world" of where the parent  was
    expected to be; which of course has no bearing on this case.)

15. Mr Winter derived some  support  from  MA  (Somalia)  on  the  need  to
    distinguish between error of law and disagreement with an assessment of
    the facts. I remind myself that to apply the correct test and  reach  a
    generous conclusion is not erroneous in law.

16. In MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC 10 the Court said:

         "[107]   It is no doubt desirable that there should be a consistent
         approach to issues of this kind at tribunal level, but as  we  have
         explained there are means  to  achieve  this  within  the  tribunal
         system. As was said in Mukarkar v Secretary of State for the  Home
         Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1045, para 40 (per Carnwath LJ):

             "... It is of the nature  of  such  judgments  that  different
             tribunals, without  illegality  or  irrationality,  may  reach
             different conclusions on the same case ... The mere fact  that
             one tribunal has reached what may seem an  unusually  generous
             view of the facts of a particular case does not mean  that  it
             has made an error of law ... Nor does it create any precedent,
             so as to limit the Secretary of State's right to argue  for  a
             more restrictive approach on a similar  case  in  the  future.
             However, on the facts of the particular case, the decision  of
             the specialist tribunal should be respected.""

17. MA (Somalia) and Mukarkar date from before amendment of  the  rules  in
    2012 but MM makes it clear  that  the  principle  continues  to  apply.
    However, the extent of "generosity" or discretionary judgment available
    to tribunals lies within the limits explained in Agyarko and KO.

18. Parts of the grounds are only disagreement and insistence.  While  they
    begin in moderate terms, there was justification in  the  criticism  of
    [12], which should not have appeared in the  terms  it  did.   However,
    there are propositions of legal error in the grounds.

19. The grounds begin at paragraph 2 with the appellant's inability to meet
    the rules, in particular financial  requirements,  bringing  into  play
    "the ability to maintain oneself without recourse to public  funds,  an
    essential ... public interest consideration under s.117A-D of the  2002
    Act, which the judge fails to [consider]".

20. The appellant's response is that paragraph 2 is irrelevant, because the
    [appellant] "was granted entry clearance outside the rules".

21. That part of the response is wrong.  Although the appeal  is  on  human
    rights grounds, it is abundantly clear that the rules are the  starting
    point, and that part 5A of the 2002 Act applies in all cases.

22. The grounds properly raise the two points on which  Mr  Govan  focused:
    whether there is anything in the decision to  justify  the  finding  of
    family life, or the finding of exceptional circumstances.

23. Kugathas is to be read with other decisions, but  it  has  not,  as  Mr
    Winter submitted, been overturned.  Whether family  life  exists  among
    adult relatives is not governed by a blanket rule or a presumption  but
    by the facts of each case.  The question is fact-specific, but there is
    a need to show some inter-dependence beyond the normal.

24. The appellant obviously has family life, in the broad sense rather than
    the strict sense required to qualify for consideration under article 8,
    with the sponsor and his family.  It was not  suggested  that  she  has
    lesser links with her other two sons, her daughter, and their families.
     The fact that she is now in another country from them all  is  emotive
    but it is not an indication of stronger ties with the appellant and his
    family than between any mother and an adult son and  his  family.   The
    judge mentions the strong and genuine display of feeling by the sponsor
    in evidence, but that does not take ties beyond the normal.

25. The single feature specified as going beyond the  normal  is  that  the
    appellant "is financially dependent upon the sponsor in  providing  her
    with the essentials of life" in Sudan.  The evidence, recorded at [18],
    is that he sends �10 - 35 per month.  It is said that his brothers have
    helped only twice because they are unemployed, but that explanation and
    distinction is obscure.  The sponsor is unemployed and, with  his  wife
    and children, dependent entirely on UK  public  funds,  from  which  he
    manages to  spare  something  each  month.   So  far  as  disclosed  in
    evidence, his siblings are no worse off than he  is.   It  is  unlikely
    that the appellant can have ongoing family life within article  8  with
    all  her  descendants,  at  several  possible  locations   in   various
    countries.

26. The reason given by the judge implies that before the sponsor made  any
    remittances, the relationship did not go beyond the norm.

27. The decision fails to explain how the remittances  of  the  sponsor  so
    strengthen his ties with his mother that she is brought within the core
    protection of article 8, from which she would  not  otherwise  benefit.
    In my view, his remittances are not  capable  of  doing  so,  and  this
    aspect of the decision is not supported by legally adequate reasons.

28. The decision at [23] sets out the requirements of the  adult  dependent
    relative rule, and at [28] the several significant  respects  in  which
    the appellant falls short.

29. The rule is part of a wider scheme, designed to comply  with  the  UK's
    obligations under both the Refugee and the  Human  Rights  Conventions.
    Core family members of refuges are admitted automatically,  without  an
    application fee, and without regard to matters such as disability, need
    for care, availability and affordability of care where they are living,
    and ability to maintain, accommodate and care for themselves in the  UK
    without recourse to public funds.  Outside the family core,  the  rules
    provide for admission of an adult dependent relative,  but  subject  to
    clear criteria. That is public policy, which has not been challenged as
    incompatible with the UK's obligations.

30. I return to the issue  raised  at  [2]  of  the  grounds,  and  further
    developed at [11 - 13].  Although some of  the  language  used  in  the
    grounds is, as I have observed, intemperate, it  is  a  point  properly
    made that the appellant would almost inevitably impose substantial long-
    term cost on public funds. Mr Govan submitted that the decision glosses
    over matters on the public interest side.

31. At [28] the judge, under the heading of the rules,  is  unable  to  see
    "how the appellant could survive in this country  without  recourse  to
    public funds". His conclusion at [30], beyond  the  rules,  is  reached
    "notwithstanding that the appellant cannot speak  English  and  is  not
    financially independent".  That rather understates the factors  of  the
    "economic well-being of the UK" and the "burden on taxpayers" to  which
    he was bound by statute to have regard. However, decisions  are  to  be
    read as a whole, and this line of criticism is  not  strong  enough  by
    itself to set aside the decision.

32. The judge did not have to identify something unusual or unique, but  he
    had to find  something  very  strong  and  compelling,  such  that  the
    appellant,  unlike  other  parents  and  extended  family  members   of
    refugees, had a right of entry to the UK, not subject to the rules.

33. The decision at [30] I also find lacking in legally  adequate  reasons.
    The UK has a positive obligation to facilitate family reunion,  as  the
    judge says, very generally, but that obligation lies within the  limits
    of the rules, rather than overriding them.   The  judge  considers  the
    prospect of the sponsor's wife returning to Sudan, with or without  her
    children, which would break up the family, and  would  not  be  in  the
    children's best interests.  Enforcement of  such  an  outcome  probably
    would be disproportionate, but there was no evidence that it was likely
    to happen.  The sponsor and  his  wife  see  their  future  with  their
    children together in the UK.  I do not see in [30] any very strong  and
    compelling feature which might, within the scope open to the  tribunal,
    take the appellant beyond the rules.

34. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

35. In remaking the decision, the  evidence  does  not  disclose  that  the
    appellant has family life with the sponsor and his family for article 8
    purposes.

36. The evidence discloses no very strong or compelling  claim,  such  that
    the appellant has a right to enter the UK,  other  than  in  compliance
    with the rules for admission of adult dependent relatives.

37. The appeal, as brought to the FtT, is dismissed.

38. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      Dated 5 August 2019
      UT Judge Macleman
