
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/16515/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15th August 2019                |On 4th September 2019              |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                ANINDITA [S]
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Salim, instructed by Thamina Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Hussain promulgated on 27th March 2019, dismissing the  appeal  against
    the refusal of the Secretary of State for leave to remain as a spouse.

 2. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh born in 1976 and she  entered
    the UK on 10th November 2011 as a points-based system dependant spouse,
    with leave until 24th December 2012.  She was granted further leave  in
    this capacity until 9th May 2015.  On 29th September 2014  she  applied
    for further leave which was refused on 18th March 2015 and although she
    appealed that decision, she was appeal rights exhausted on 5th December
    2016.  On 16th December 2016 she was included as a dependant spouse  on
    an application which was  varied  on  28th  April  2018  to  an  FLR(M)
    application.  On 29th July 2018 her application was refused, and  which
    generated the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal, Judge Hussain.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain recorded that the refusal noted  that
    she  did  not  meet  the  eligibility  requirements  with   regard   to
    relationship because her partner was neither a British citizen, present
    and settled in the UK nor a refugee or  with  humanitarian  protection.
    The judge also noted that the appellant did not include  the  child  on
    her application and the child was not "applying with her".

 4. The judge noted that the Secretary of State conceded that the appellant
    was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with her partner  who  was
    also a national of Bangladesh.  However EX.1 did not  apply.   Further,
    there was no evidence that there were any insurmountable  obstacles  in
    accordance with paragraph EX.2, which would be  faced  by  her  or  her
    partner in continuing family life outside  the  UK  and  on  return  to
    Bangladesh.

 5. Additionally, it was not accepted with regards to paragraph 276ADE that
    there will be  very  significant  obstacles  to  her  integration  into
    Bangladesh because she had spent the majority of her life in  her  home
    country and would be accustomed to a way of life there.

 6. The judge noted albeit that the appellant had not included the child in
    her application that although Section 55 was applied by  the  Secretary
    of State.

 7. The hearing took place on 6th March 2019.  The judge at paragraph 7  of
    his determination identified that the  appellant  was  not  represented
    either in person or through his representative but  that  in  a  letter
    dated 5th March 2019, Thamina Solicitors wrote to the  Tribunal  asking
    for a disposal on the papers.  In a previous  letter  dated  4th  March
    2019 the representatives explained that the  appellant  relied  on  her
    husband's immigration status for the success of her  application.   His
    application to remain was refused by the  Secretary  of  State  against
    which she appealed and that appeal was heard on 19th November 2018  and
    allowed by the First-tier Tribunal.   The  letter  explained  that  the
    Secretary of State had been granted  permission  to  appeal  the  grant
    obtained leave against that decision and the  substantive  hearing  was
    held at the Upper Tribunal on  27th  February  2019.   A  decision  was
    awaited from the Upper Tribunal. The letter of 4th March 2019 requested
    an adjournment.

 8. The judge noted at paragraph 8 that  the  success  or  failure  of  the
    appellant's appeal was dependent on her  husband's  immigration  status
    and that an application had been made to adjourn the hearing  to  await
    the outcome of the husband's appeal.   The  judge  made  the  following
    findings:

         "10.     It will be apparent  from  above  that  the  Secretary  of
             State's decision to refuse the appellant's application is  not
             being challenged on the merits.  This  [is]  because,  as  was
             accepted by the appellant's  representative,  the  appellant's
             husband does not enjoy any of the statuses  mentioned  in  the
             refusal letter.  Her  case  is  in  a  nutshell  that  she  is
             enjoying  family  life  with  her  child  and  husband   whose
             immigration status remains unresolved.

         11.       Whilst  I  can  see  the   logic   of   the   appellant's
             representative's request for an adjournment, I find that it is
             not necessary for a just disposal of the appeal.

         12.      By now, the Upper Tribunal's decision may well  have  been
             promulgated and if the outcome is in the  appellant's  favour,
             then it seems to me that a request for reconsideration by  the
             Secretary of State would be  in  order.   If  his  appeal  has
             failed, then the appellant would be left in a situation  where
             neither she nor her husband have any immigration status.

         13.      For present purposes, I find that the Secretary of State's
             decision is in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

         14.      It is now well-established law that if an applicant  fails
             to meet the Immigration Rules, then their  circumstance  would
             have to be exceptional to warrant the grant of  leave  outside
             of the Immigration Rules.  Like the Secretary of State, I find
             that there are no exceptional circumstance in the  appellant's
             case to merit the grant of leave outside  of  the  Immigration
             Rules on conventional Article 8 grounds."

 9. The grounds for permission to appeal asserted the following:

         Ground (i) procedural unfairness  -  The  judge  proceeded  to  the
         hearing with the absence of the appellant and  her  representative.
         Although the judge could see the logic of the  appellant's  request
         he did not grant the adjournment which  would  contradict  his  own
         findings.  The appellant had set out in her witness  statement  the
         circumstances regarding the appellant's husband's appeal  and  that
         the Upper Tribunal had not decided the matter.   As  the  husband's
         appeal had not been decided the representative made an  application
         on 4th March to get the adjournment on her appeal and  requested  a
         new hearing date.  It was submitted that both the appellant and her
         solicitors made a request for an adjournment.  It was  not  in  the
         interests  of  justice  for  the  determination  to  be  heard   or
         promulgated in  those  circumstances  and  the  judge  should  have
         considered the adjournment application properly by giving a  reason
         and given a  new  hearing  date  and  as  such  there  had  been  a
         procedural irregularity.  That  had  led  to  the  appellant  being
         deprived of a  right  of  appeal  triggering  Nwaigwe  (adjournment
         fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418.

         Ground (ii) - The judge erred in law by improperly making  his  own
         assumptions of the sponsor's current immigration  status  including
         appending appeal.  This was evident at paragraph 12 of the  judge's
         determination.  The judge made a  completely  wrong  assumption  in
         relation to the outcome of the appending appeal.  Bearing  in  mind
         the options available to the appellant she would not be left  in  a
         situation in the near future where neither she nor her husband  had
         any  immigration  status.   The  judge  proceeded  on   the   wrong
         assumption.

         Ground  (iii)  -  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship   and
         Immigration Act did not appear to have crossed the judge's mind and
         no findings were made in that respect.

10. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that

         "It  was  arguable  that  when  considering  the  request  for   an
         adjournment greater consideration should have  been  given  to  the
         fact that the appellant's husband had been  successful  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal and as at  the  date  of  hearing  this  was  a
         relevant though potentially a temporary factor when considering the
         appellant's Article 8 rights."

11. The approach adopted at [12] namely that if  the  husband  successfully
    resisted the respondent's appeal reconsideration could be  sought  from
    the respondent arguably failed to  engage  with  the  requirement  that
    Article 8 rights be considered as at the date of the hearing.

12. Mr Melvin submitted that it was up to the appellant to  make  her  case
    and if the sponsor chose not to attend and the solicitors chose not  to
    attend it was left to the judge to assess the matter on  the  evidence.
    It was not incumbent on the judge to go looking for  information.   The
    complaint with regard to Section 55 had no merit.  This was a  separate
    appeal from that of her husband and on the evidence it was  simply  not
    possible to allow this appeal.

Discussion

13. As set out in the refusal letter of the Secretary of State on 26th July
    2018  the  appellant's  sponsor  husband  did  not  have  the  relevant
    immigration status.  The appellant was given the date, time  and  venue
    of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  and  together  with  her
    solicitor chose not to attend.  There is a letter on file from  Thamina
    Solicitors  dated  5th  March  2019  which  specifically   states   the
    following:

         "We continue to act for the appellant.  Our client's case is listed
         for an oral hearing on 6th March 2019.  She has instructed us  that
         she wishes to have a "paper hearing" instead of oral one.   In  the
         circumstance, we  sincerely  request  the  Honourable  Tribunal  to
         determine the case on the basis of submitted documents."

14. That application was received by the Tribunal on 6th March 2019 and was
    clearly before the judge. I note  there  was  no  such  repeat  of  the
    adjournment request in the covering  letter  of  5th  March  2019  from
    Thamina's Solicitors.  There was also a  witness  statement  dated  5th
    March 2019 signed  by  the  appellant  specifically  stating  that  the
    primary reason  for  her  refusal  of  her  application  was  that  her
    sponsor/husband "has not been granted indefinite leave to remain status
    in the UK yet".  At paragraph 6 of the witness statement the  appellant
    set out the history of the appellant's  husband's  appeal  and  it  was
    quite clear that the Upper Tribunal had not  yet  decided  the  appeal.
    What was clear was that the appellant's husband had not as at the  date
    of the hearing before Judge Hussain had been granted  indefinite  leave
    to remain.  The appellant could not therefore fulfil  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.

15. The appellant merely stated at paragraph 7  of  her  witness  statement
    that "she is not able to proceed with her case at  this  moment".   She
    realised a previous adjournment request had been  refused  and  in  the
    body of her witness statement repeated the request for an  adjournment.
     The Judge clearly reasoned differently and proceeded on the papers  as
    Thamina Solicitors had requested.  Although the appellant  states  that
    the legal representative had made an application on 4th March 2019  for
    an adjournment on my appeal there was in fact, as I  have  pointed  out
    the subsequent covering letter specifically  stating  that  the  matter
    should be decided on the papers.

16. Although the judge might be able to see the logic  of  the  appellant's
    representative's request for  an  adjournment  the  judge  applied  the
    correct test of whether there should be another adjournment  such  that
    it was not necessary for a just disposal. He considered the concept  of
    fairness in accordance with Nwaigwe.  He did not materially err in that
    regard.

17. As was accepted  by  the  appellant's  representative,  Mr  Salim,  the
    appellant's husband did not enjoy any of the status  mentioned  in  the
    refusal letter and  that  her  husband's  immigration  status  remained
    unresolved.  That was the position as at the date of the hearing.   The
    fact is that even though the appellant's husband  had  been  successful
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  was  known  that  this  had  been
    challenged by the Secretary of State and it was clear no settled status
    had been granted as at the date of the hearing.  The  Judge  based  his
    decision on the facts as they were at the hearing.

18. This approach was condoned and adopted in KK (India) v SSHD [2019] EWCA
    Civ 369 at [47]

         '[Counsel] sought to argue  that  the  fact  that  the  Appellant's
         mother and brother might obtain ILR was a relevant factor which the
         UT Judge ought to have taken into account. This is misconceived. It
         is axiomatic that the UT Judge was bound  to  have  regard  to  the
         facts as they stood at the  time  before  the  decision-maker  when
         determining the lawfulness of the decision in  question.  The  fact
         that the Appellant's mother and brother were granted ILR  in  April
         2018 is separate matter which may, or may not, lead  to  a  further
         application'.

19. There was no certainty that the husband, even if he  succeeded  in  his
    appeal, would be granted status.  The Judge specifically found at  [13]
    that the refusal decision was in accordance with the Immigration  Rules
    and made a specific finding at [14], knowing the position,  that  there
    were no exceptional  circumstances  outside  the  Rules.  Even  if  the
    husband were granted status that still does not undermine  the  judge's
    conclusion that there were no insurmountable obstacles on the  evidence
    as to the possibility of relocation  of  the  appellant  to  Bangladesh
    (with her partner) and thus no unjustifiably harsh consequences on  the
    appellant's refusal, R (Agyarko) [2017] UKSC 11.  I  find  no  material
    error of law.

20. Additionally, nowhere was the fact of a "new matter", of the  husband's
    potentially changed status, raised and further  Section  85(5)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  the  Tribunal  must  not
    consider a new matter unless the  Secretary  of  State  has  given  the
    Tribunal consent to do so.  The Secretary of  State's  refusal  clearly
    proceeded on the basis  that  the  appellant's  husband  did  not  have
    settled status and the change of such immigration status would be a new
    matter.

21. In relation to ground 2 the criticism that the judge  erred  in  making
    his own assumption as to regards the outcome of the sponsor's appending
    appeal is not founded because as I repeat at the date  of  the  hearing
    the appellant's husband did not have settled status.

22. Ground 3 has no merit.  I was told that the child was mentioned in  the
    application form but that specifically states in response to  "is  this
    child applying with you" and the answer given is  "no"  and  in  a  box
    outlined the application states not applying.  The judge recorded  that
    the Secretary of State had nonetheless made reference  to  Section  55.
    There was no information about this  child  on  the  file  and  in  the
    circumstances, I find no error in the judge's approach to Section 55.

23. I find no error in the decision and I note that  the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal was such  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  was
    allowed, the matter in relation to the husband  has  been  remitted  de
    novo to the First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant's  husband  still  does
    not have settled status.

24. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal in this matter contains no
    material error of  law  and  will  stand.   Mrs  [S]'s  appeal  remains
    dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed      Helen Rimington             Date 23rd August 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
