
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/16115/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |        Decision and Reasons          |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On 19 June 2019                     |        On 04 July 2019               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                                    M I O
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Iengar of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born in  1982.   Her  immigration
    history is that she entered the UK with leave as a student  in  January
    2011.  She was granted further leave as the spouse of a British citizen
    in December 2013.  She made an in time application for indefinite leave
    to remain as a spouse in December 2015.  That application  was  refused
    on 7 June 2016.

 2. The basis for the refusal was that the appellant had been  invited  for
    interview on 4 May 2016 by the respondent but  had  failed  to  attend.
    Medical evidence to confirm that the appellant had been in hospital was
    accepted by the respondent and an alternative interview date of 8  June
    2016 was stated to have been notified.  The appellant did  not  attend.
    On that basis the application was refused with reference to  paragraphs
    322(10) and 287(a) of the Immigration  Rules.   Also,  under  paragraph
    276ADE.   Further,  there  was  no  basis  to  find  that  there   were
    exceptional circumstances whereby leave should be granted on Article  8
    grounds outside the Rules.

 3. She appealed.

First-Tier Hearing

 4. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 8 December  2017  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Buckwell, having heard evidence from the appellant,
    dismissed the appeal.   His  findings  and  reasons  are  at  paragraph
    [21]ff.  In summary, (at [21]) he stated:

          "Subsequent to the appellant's application it is clear  that  the
          relationship between the appellant and her husband has completely
          broken down.  Indeed it does not appear to be in contention  that
          the appellant was the victim of domestic violence  and  that  her
          relationship with her husband no longer subsists.  Indeed, she is
          not aware of his location following police action."

 5. He went on to note that the application was refused on the ground  that
    the appellant failed to attend for the rescheduled interview on 8  June
    2016, the respondent claiming that no contact had  been  received  from
    her about that.   The  judge  added:  "...  somewhat  surprisingly  the
    respondent then decided the application on 7 June 2016." [22]


 6. The judge then found that the respondent had failed to show that notice
    was given to the appellant about the  rescheduled  interview  date  and
    that the decision under paragraph 322(10) was wrong.   Also,  that  the
    respondent should have considered the substantive provisions for ILR.

 7. He went on to state that it was  clear  from  the  appellant  that  the
    application was no longer that of  a  spouse.   The  marriage  was  not
    subsisting.  Advancing to consider domestic violence he found that  the
    appellant "did not adduce any third party statements or  correspondence
    in relation to the claimed domestic abuse.  She  provided  a  narrative
    during her evidence as to police involvement but there is  no  specific
    confirmation in that regard."  The judge,  accordingly,  did  not  find
    that "it has been established that the appellant can in the alternative
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules in relation to  domestic
    violence." [27]

 8. He, in conclusion, found that Article 8 was not engaged in  respect  of
    any private life outwith the Rules and  even  if  it  was  it  was  not
    disproportionate to expect the appellant to return to her home country.

 9. She sought permission to appeal which was granted on 7 November 2018.


Error of law hearing

10. At the error of law hearing before me on 11 December 2018 it was agreed
    by both sides that the judge's decision showed material  error  of  law
    such that the decision must be set aside to be remade.  The  judge  had
    given inadequate consideration to the domestic violence claim,  indeed,
    what  findings  were  made  were  contradictory.   Thus,  at  [21],  as
    indicated, he stated that it did not appear to be  in  contention  that
    the appellant  was  the  victim  of  domestic  violence  and  that  her
    relationship with her husband no longer  subsisted.   Yet  at  [27]  he
    criticised the lack of evidence  produced  in  support  of  that  claim
    concluding that it had not been established that she met  the  relevant
    requirements of the Rules.

11. It was agreed that the case would have to be reheard.  Mr Kandola,  who
    appeared for the respondent  on  11  December  2018,  noting  that  the
    application had changed from that of a spouse to  a  domestic  violence
    claim  consented  to  that  being  a  "new  matter"  (s85  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).

12. The case was put down for a resumed hearing before  myself.   Following
    an adjournment on 20 March 2019 to allow the appellant  more  time,  to
    which there was no objection, the matter finally came before  me  again
    on 19 June 2019.

Resumed Hearing

13. At the hearing the appellant gave evidence.  There were  three  bundles
    of documents before me. She adopted two statements (8 March 2019 and 11
    June 2019).

14.  In  cross-examination  she  was  asked  about  the  breakdown  of  her
    relationship with her husband.  She said she has a son born in 2014  by
    another man.  Her husband knew it was not his child and felt  shameful.
    The biological father who now lives in Canada, urged  her  to  try  and
    work it out with her husband.  However, the  relationship  broke  down.
    The incident just before the first interview date in May 2016  occurred
    after she had dropped off her son.  He pushed her downstairs.  Although
    he later apologised she no longer felt safe and it was not good for her
    son.   She  asked  him  to  leave  and  he  eventually  did  so.    His
    relationship with the child did not continue because he had been warned
    by the police not to return.  Also, she changed her number.

15. Asked if there had been any involvement with child  services  she  said
    they had sent a letter mentioning domestic violence in  the  house  and
    saying that if it happened again the child would be  removed.   It  was
    because she feared that her child would be removed  that  she  had  not
    mentioned earlier incidents of violence and abuse to the authorities.

16. She said no witnesses had attended the hearing.   Although  there  were
    letters from several, one had just had a baby, another was abroad.

17. In brief submissions Ms Everett  said  there  was  no  litmus  test  to
    establish whether domestic violence had occurred.  She suggested it was
    odd that neither of the claimed witnesses to violence had attended  and
    questioned whether there were other issues which might have contributed
    to the breakdown of the marriage.  These matters apart she  essentially
    left the matter for me.

18. In reply, Miss Iengar said that there appeared to be  no  dispute  that
    the incidents of 3 May 2016 and  15  June  2016  occurred.   There  was
    medical and police evidence in  the  bundles.   As  for  causality  the
    evidence of the appellant was that when the police called in  May  2016
    and arrested her husband, the domestic violence had been going  on  for
    several years getting worse after the birth of  her  child  by  another
    man.  It was significant  that  the  divorce  petition  raised  by  the
    appellant stated that it was on the grounds of  domestic  violence  and
    that her husband offered no defence to it.

Consideration

19. It was agreed that the appropriate legal provisions were Section DVILR:
    "indefinite leave to  remain  (settlement)  as  a  victim  of  domestic
    violence" which reads:


           DVILR.1.1 "The requirements ... are that -


           a) the applicant must be in the UK;

           b)  the  applicant  must  have  made  a  valid  application  for
              indefinite leave to remain as a victim of domestic violence;

           c) the applicant must not fall for  refusal  under  any  of  the
              grounds in Section S-ILR: Suitability - indefinite  leave  to
              remain; and

           d) the applicant must meet all the requirements  of  Section  E-
              DVILR: Eligibility for indefinite leave to remain as a victim
              of domestic violence."

20. It was noted that the appellant's application, although valid, had been
    as a spouse, not as a victim of domestic violence.  However, Ms Everett
    in light of the concession made by Mr  Kandola  at  the  error  of  law
    hearing that consent was given by the respondent  to  the  new  matter,
    namely the change in the nature of the application,  did  not  seek  to
    argue that DVILR.1.1 (b) was in issue.

21. Nor was suitability in issue.

22. The remaining legal issue is Section E-DVILR (Eligibility) the relevant
    section being E-DVILR.1.3 which reads:

           "The applicant must provide evidence that during the last period
           of limited leave as a partner of a British citizen or a person
           settled in the UK under paragraph D-ECP.1.1, D-LTRP1.1 or D-
           LTRP.1.2 of this Appendix the appellant's relationship with
           their partner broke down permanently as a result of domestic
           violence."
23. It is clear that the appellant had limited leave  as  a  partner  of  a
    British citizen.  I find that the relationship was  subsisting  at  the
    start of the last grant of leave as a partner  in  December  2015.   No
    suggestion was made otherwise. There is evidence, through  the  tenancy
    agreement, bills and  a  joint  bank  account  that  they  were  living
    together at the same address in Purfleet. I find that the  relationship
    was continuing during the last period of leave.

24. As for the claim that she suffered domestic violence during that period
    of leave I find to the civil standard that she did.  She  provided  two
    witness statements (8 March and 11 June 2019) in which she set out  the
    domestic abuse and violence which she claimed to have received from her
    husband. She also mentioned it in an  earlier  statement  (30  November
    2017). In these accounts she set out how the abuse and violence started
    about a year after their marriage in 2013. A factor  was  his  drinking
    with matters getting worse when he learned of her affair which resulted
    in the birth of another man's child in 2014. I  believed  her  evidence
    that she did not report such incidents and remained in the relationship
    because she still loved him and hoped that even  with  the  child  they
    would have a brighter future. I may say that she came  across  in  oral
    evidence as patently truthful.

25. She gave specific detail about two incidents, the first on 3  May  2016
    after which she attended the casualty department of the local hospital,
    the second on 15 June 2016 when the police were called.

26. The following documentary evidence was before me.  In  respect  of  the
    incident of 3 May 2016 a report from Queen's Hospital A & E  Department
    (first bundle P11).  It notes a self-referral by the appellant on  that
    date.  It comments "fell down 4-5 steps today approx 7pm".   Her  claim
    is that her husband pushed her down the stairs.  There is some  support
    for that from a letter (7 March 2019) in the third  bundle  (P32)  from
    the Advanced Nurse Practitioner at her GP  practice  who  after  noting
    that the appellant had been registered  with  them  since  2014  stated
    "(she) was a victim of domestic abuse and attended  A  &  E  on  3.5.16
    having sustained a back injury from being pushed down several steps." I
    found entirely plausible her claim in her statement (8 March 2019) that
    the starting point of that incident was when they were  discussing  the
    pending Home Office interview set for the next  day  when  her  husband
    "got agitated, he said he loves (the child) as his own but  he  doesn't
    want anyone asking him questions about his birth as it reminds  him  of
    (her) infidelity."

27. As for the incident on 15 June 2016 there is a police  risk  assessment
    (first bundle P12).  Apart from stating that the police called on  that
    date it gives no further pertinent information.  However, there is more
    information in the police report (second bundle P99).  It confirms  the
    date, the location, namely her address, and that it involved a claim of
    assault in the context of domestic abuse investigation.  It includes  a
    brief statement given by the appellant narrating that her  husband  who
    had been spending time away, came  back,  there  was  an  argument,  he
    pulled at her top and then pushed her on the chest causing a mark.  She
    did not wish a prosecution but only wanted him to stay  away  which  is
    why she called the police.  She was asked a number of questions by  the
    officer.  Her answers included that she  was  "frightened  after  being
    assaulted today"; that the abuse was getting worse;  that  her  husband
    "accuses her of cheating and gets jealous".  There is a brief statement
    by the officer noting that she attended in response to a 999 call,  and
    the appellant was "visibly upset and crying".  She said  she  had  been
    grabbed by the t-shirt and pushed  to  the  chest.   When  the  officer
    returned  later  that  day  the  small  red  mark  on  her  chest   had
    disappeared.

28. There is also a letter from Victim Support (26 July 2016) in the  first
    bundle (P14) in which it is indicated that she had been sent a personal
    alarm.

29. Further, there is a letter from Children's Services,  Thurrock  Council
    (7 July 2016) in the second bundle at P112 stating they had  been  made
    aware by the police of the "domestic abuse  incident  of  15/6/16"  and
    would be taking no further action but reminding her of her  duty  as  a
    parent to ensure that her child is not exposed to domestic violence.

30. I note also the child's birth certificate in which the father's name is
    not given.

31. In addition, I note the divorce application  by  the  appellant  (third
    bundle P9) in which under "Reason for  the  divorce"  she  stated:  "My
    husband was violent to  me.   He  hit  me.   My  husband  was  verbally
    abusive."  Her husband in his response stated  he  did  not  intend  to
    defend the case.

32. Finally, in respect of the evidence there are  various  letters  (third
    bundle).  One (at P17) is from a woman who lives in Norwich  who  is  a
    friend and who claimed to have witnessed an incident in March 2016 when
    she  called  at  the  appellant's  house,  heard  raised  voices,   her
    screaming, her husband shouting and when the door  opened  her  husband
    left and she was "crying uncontrollably" and had a red eye.   She  said
    she had been punched.

33. As indicated I found the appellant in her evidence before me  to  be  a
    truthful witness.  She satisfies me that the incidents of May and  June
    2016 occurred in the manner claimed.  I accept  also  that  there  were
    other earlier incidents of abuse and violence.   While  it  would  have
    been helpful if the witness to the incident in March 2016 had  attended
    to support her statement, I note she lives in  Norwich  and  I  see  no
    reason to doubt the claim that her non-attendance was due to her having
    had a baby recently. I give weight to her statement.

34. The Home Office "Victims of domestic violence and abuse" document which
    was before me, defines "Domestic violence and abuse" as  "Any  incident
    or  pattern  of  incidents  of  controlling,  coercive  or  threatening
    behaviour, violence or abuse between those aged 16 or over who are,  or
    have been, intimate partners or family members regardless of gender  or
    sexuality.  This can include, but is  not  limited  to,  the  following
    types of abuse: psychological, physical, sexual, financial, emotional."

35. Whilst the onus  is  on  the  appellant  to  show  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities the relationship broke down due  to  domestic  abuse  the
    Immigration Rules do not specify which documents  should  be  provided.
    On the basis of all the evidence before me I  find  that  there  was  a
    pattern of incidents of physical and emotional  abuse  by  her  husband
    which looked at cumulatively reached  the  threshold  of  her  being  a
    victim of domestic violence or abuse. I also  find  that  the  evidence
    clearly supports the claim that the reason the relationship broke  down
    was because of domestic abuse and  violence,  and  that  following  the
    incident in June 2016, after which he left  the  house  for  good,  the
    relationship had broken down permanently with divorce later resulting.

36.  In  conclusion  the  appellant  satisfies  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules which are designed to be compliant  with  Article  8.
    Accordingly, there is no public interest in refusing leave.  The appeal
    succeeds.


Notice of Decision

37. The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal shows material  error  of  law.
    It is set aside and remade as follows:-

    The appeal is allowed.


Order regarding anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify  her  or  any  of  her  family.   The  order
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Date 02 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway




