
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal number: HU/16508/2019 (V)

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 March 2021                    |On 12 March 2021                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                               JIANGMEI ZHANG

                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr W Chowdhary, solicitor, FMB Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a Chinese national with  date  of  birth  given  as
   27.11.53, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  18.2.20  (Judge  Foudy),
   dismissing on  all  grounds  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 30.9.19, to  refuse  her  application  made  on
   20.3.19 for Leave to Remain in the UK on private and family life grounds.

2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused by the  First-tier
   Tribunal on 11.5.20. However, when the application  was  renewed  to  the
   Upper  Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley  granted   permission,
   considering it arguable that

3. The Upper Tribunal  has  received  the  appellants  further  submissions,
   dated 1.9.20 and the respondent's Rule 24 reply, dated  27.8.20.  At  the
   hearing before me, both representatives were content  to  rely  on  their
   written submissions/responses and made no further oral submissions.

4. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

5. The relevant background is that the appellant entered the UK as a  Family
   Visitor in 2010 but since then  has  illegally  overstayed  without  ever
   having valid leave to remain. The appellant has no partner  or  dependent
   children in the UK. She has adult  children  in  the  UK,  a  son  and  a
   daughter, on whom she now claims to be dependent,  and  that  she  has  a
   close relationship with her grandchildren in the UK. The evidence of  her
   children was that they suspected she was  suffering  from  dementia  and,
   therefore, that she should remain in the UK to be cared for by  them.  It
   is important to point out that there  was  no  medical  evidence  of  any
   memory, mental health, or  other  medical  problems.  Judge  Foudy  found
   inconsistency in the oral evidence as to when the alleged memory problems
   were first identified and the reasons for wanting the appellant to remain
   in the UK. For example, at [17] of the decision, the judge recorded  that
   the appellant's daughter stated that she needed her mother to  remain  in
   the UK because she could not afford to visit  China  to  see  her.  Other
   inconsistencies were pointed out as to the appellant's  circumstances  in
   China and at [19] the judge pointed  out  that  the  appellant  has  been
   accessing NHS treatment to which she was not entitled.

6. Judge Foudy acknowledged at [19] of the decision that the adult  children
   would like to care for their mother in the UK. It was  pointed  out  that
   the appellant had not made an application as a dependent relative  (which
   has to be made from outside the  UK)  and  found  that  the  evidence  of
   dependency was "scant and unreliable", and not objective. In  conclusion,
   at [20] of the decision, the judge was not satisfied that  the  appellant
   was dependent on her adult children in the UK, or that she had no home to
   return to in China. The judge was not satisfied that the  best  interests
   of any child of the family required the appellant to remain in the UK.

7. It is understandable that the children would want their mother to  remain
   in the UK. Obviously, the appellant has family life to a degree with  her
   adult children and grandchildren. However, that does not mean that she is
   entitled to remain in the UK on  article  8  ECHR  family  life  grounds.
   Whilst the grounds submit  that  there  was  "overwhelming"  evidence  of
   dependency, the fact is that there was no medical  or  other  independent
   evidence to support the claim of dementia or other mental health  issues,
   or any consequent need for care and support to be provided in the  UK  by
   her adult children. The evidence was entirely subjective and found by the
   judge to be inconsistent and to lack  credibility.  Those  were  findings
   entirely open to the judge.

8. It is accepted that the appellant could not meet the requirements of  the
   Rules for leave to remain and relied entirely on article  8  outside  the
   Rules. In reality, the appellant  was  unable  to  demonstrate  that  her
   circumstances were such that there were, exceptionally, compelling so  as
   to render her removal from the UK  unjustifiably  harsh  and,  therefore,
   disproportionate. The appellant clearly failed to discharge the burden of
   proof on her. Whilst the judge did not specifically address  family  life
   and follow the Razgar  stepped  approach  to  reach  the  proportionality
   balancing exercise, I am not satisfied that any different  outcome  could
   or would have ensued had the judge done so.

9. In consideration of the public interest, the Tribunal would have to  take
   account of s117B of the 2002 Act and that little weight is to be given to
   private life developed in  the  UK  whilst  the  appellant's  immigration
   status was both precarious and latterly unlawful. There was  no  evidence
   before the First-tier Tribunal sufficient to establish  that  the  family
   life ties with children and grandchildren in the UK were more than  those
   to be expected between adult relatives,  or  between  a  grandmother  and
   grandchildren. Nothing in the evidence suggests that  the  appellant  was
   unable to return to China and make an application from  there  for  entry
   clearance as an adult dependent relative. The evidence adduced before the
   First-tier Tribunal does not begin to address  the  requirements  of  the
   Rules for an adult dependent relative.

10. As the  grant  of  permission  pointed  out,  whilst  the  grounds  were
   considered at least arguable, "the appellant will need to explain why any
   errors of law are ultimately material to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal."
   Insofar as it is made, that explanation is inadequate. The  conclusion  I
   have reached is that any or all of  the  alleged  errors  in  failing  to
   conduct a more thorough article 8 assessment are not, in  fact,  material
   to the outcome of the appeal.

11. This was a pitifully weak claim for leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
   grounds, unsupported  by  any  independent  evidence  and  undermined  by
   contradictory and inconsistent subjective evidence. Even if the judge had
   conducted a balance-sheet assessment of the pros and cons, it is patently
   obvious that on the facts of this case the  respondent's  decision  would
   inevitably be found entirely proportionate to the appellant's private and
   family life rights. The dismissal of the appeal was, frankly, inevitable.



12. In the premises, and for the reasons set out above, I find  no  material
   error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so that  it  must
   be set aside.



Decision

      The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       8 March 2021







