
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number HU/16437/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 April 2021                     |On 22 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 BALDEV KAUR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr M Shoaib, of Shoaib Associates
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 10 June 1963.

 2. On 19 September 2019, the SSHD declined to grant the appellant leave to
    remain in the UK on grounds of her family and private life.

 3. FtT Judge P A Grant-Hutchison dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  by  a
    decision promulgated on 3 February 2020.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT on grounds set  out
    in detail under 5 headings:

      (1) irrational  finding  on  keeping  in  touch  by  means  of  modern
      communications;

      (2) assessment under article 8 outside the rules "not well reasoned";

      (3) no consideration of "the nature of  the  rights  that  risk  being
      relinquished if the appellant's husband has to  leave  ...  to  retain
      family life in India";

      (4) no findings on "very significant obstacles" in terms of  paragraph
      "276AD(iv)" [?] of the immigration rules; and

      (5)  no  findings  on  "unjustifiably  harsh  consequences"  for   the
      appellant and family members.

 5. The FtT refused permission. However, on 10 August 2020 Ut  Judge  Coker
    granted permission, on the view that although  the  evidence  might  be
    "insufficient to found a successful appeal", it was arguable  that  the
    decision was inadequately reasoned.

 6. Mr Shoaib submitted:

      i) It was disproportionate to expect the appellant to leave the family
         life she has enjoyed with her husband in the UK since 2006.

     ii)  As  well  as  her  husband,  the  appellant   has   children   and
         grandchildren here.

    iii) Both the appellant's parents now live in the UK.  Their  statements
         were before the FtT.

     iv) The judge said the appellant could go back, but he overlooked  that
         previously she had her parents in India.

      v) She is an aging woman with many medical ailments.  There  was  much
         documentary evidence about her health, and  her  husband's  health,
         before the FtT, such as their appointments at various clinics.

     vi) The judge did not  explain  how  adequate  medical  care  could  be
         provided in India.

    vii) The respondent's "rule 24 reply"  said  that  the  appellant  could
         apply to return from India, but that was  no  answer,  because  she
         could not meet the terms of the rules.  In particular, her  husband
         did not have the status required.

   viii) The judge referred to part 5A of the 2002 Act, but did not  explain
         why it was in the  best  interests  of  the  state  to  remove  the
         appellant.

     ix)  The  judge  made  no  finding  on  the  exception  in  the  rules,
         "unjustifiably  harsh  consequences",  for  those   who   did   not
         [otherwise] qualify.

      x) The decision erred in law, and should be reversed.

 7. Ms Everett submitted:

      i) If the grounds raised an issue, it was adequacy of reasoning.

     ii) The decision was short, but it showed that the judge was  aware  of
         all that was relevant, including the medical evidence.

    iii) The judge was entitled to conclude as he did.

     iv) It was not for the judge to  demonstrate  availability  of  medical
         care  in  India.   It  was  for  the  appellant  to  establish  any
         deficiency of care which might contribute to  her  case  on  health
         grounds.  The appellant did  not  specify  anything  in  the  large
         volume of medical records which the judge  should  have  considered
         further.

      v) The judge found no difficulties preventing the  appellant  and  her
         husband from returning to India and carrying on family life  there.
          No error was shown in that crucial finding.

     vi) If the appellant could not hope to succeed in an  application  from
         abroad, that did not make her case in the UK any better.

    vii) The findings and reasons were brief,  but  no  material  error  was
         shown, and the decision should stand.

 8. Mr Shoaib in reply said that it was wrong to hold that the  appellant's
    husband could return to India.  He failed in his asylum claims, but was
    granted leave after 20 years.  In 5 further years, he had not returned,
    although free to travel, because he still feared the Punjabi police who
    had  beaten  him  for  being  a  Sikh.   This   was   another   serious
    consideration in favour of the appellant.

 9. I reserved my decision.

10. The family situation is  clearly  noted  in  the  decision:  see  under
    "submissions" at [10], and under "decision" at [13, 18, 19, & 20].

11. It was, as Ms Everett submitted, for the  appellant  to  establish  any
    medical aspect pf her case.  The judge noted the health  conditions  of
    her and of her husband at [19 & 23].  He found her  health  conditions,
    although short of article 3, "worthy of some consideration".   She  has
    not shown that the medical aspect might rationally have taken  her  any
    further than that.

12. The judge took account of the allegation that the  appellant's  husband
    could not return to India - see [8 & 19].  If anything, the judge  gave
    his explanation more credit than might have been  expected,  given  the
    failure and antiquity of his claims.


13. Mr Shoaib has advanced every matter which might be called upon  on  the
    appellant's side, both in the FtT and in the UT; but the case to the UT
    is insistence and disagreement, rather than the identification  of  any
    error in the FtT's decision.

14. The grounds and submissions do  not  show  that  decision  of  the  FtT
    involved the making of any error on a point of law, such that it should
    be set aside.  That decision shall stand.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

      15 April 2021
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

