
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16148/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 September 2018                          |On 9 January 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                GERALDINE [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shastry
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Geraldine [S], was born on 3 July 1985 and is  a  female
    citizen of the Philippines.  She appealed against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 16 June 2016 refusing  her  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Beg)  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 29 November 2017, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom  on  a  visit  visa  and  then
    overstayed.  She last entered on 10 December 2015 with leave to  remain
    until 17 May 2016.  The appellant's husband (Steven [S]) is  a  British
    citizen.  The couple have a child (S) who is also a British citizen.  S
    is now 5 years old.  The appeal turned upon whether it  was  reasonable
    for S and her parents to live in the Philippines or  alternatively  for
    the appellant to return to the Philippines to make an  out  of  country
    application for entry clearance.

 3. I am rather puzzled by the grant of permission in this  instance  which
    reads as follows:

         "It is arguable that the evidence of the sponsor and the  appellant
         was that  the  sponsor's  earnings  were  sufficient  to  meet  the
         substantive  requirements  of  the  Rules.   Documentary   evidence
         submitted fell short of that required.  Although it was open to the
         judge to reject the evidence (with reasons) or  find  that  it  was
         insufficient to discharge  the  burden  of  proof  it  is  arguably
         unclear what she made of it  and  how  she  factored  it  into  the
         assessment of proportionality."

 4. The judge was well aware that the appellant did  not  comply  with  the
    Immigration Rules.  She did factor the appellant's ability (or lack  of
    ability) to comply into the assessment of proportionality.   I  am  not
    certain how the judge's  grant  of  permission  takes  the  matter  any
    further forward.

 5. Otherwise, the  submissions  centre  upon  the  familiar  authority  of
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40.  There  is  much  in  the  grounds  regarding
    Section 55 of the 2002 Act and assertions that separation of the parent
    from the mother or, indeed, a temporary removal of the child S  to  the
    Philippines would be impossible (because of limitations on visit  visas
    in the Philippines and also interference caused with S's schooling)  or
    unreasonable and disproportionate.

 6.  Surprisingly,  the  grounds  of  appeal  also  contain  the  following
    paragraph at [31]:

         "The appellant's intention was always to reside permanently in  the
         UK.  This is not just an assertion.  This intention can be inferred
         from  the  appellant's  behaviour  and  her  husband's   behaviour.
         Although the child was born in the UAE they chose for her to obtain
         only a UK passport.  At this point in time the appellant could have
         elected to obtain a Philippine passport as well as  a  passport  of
         the United Kingdom.  This  action  means  that  the  intention  was
         permanently to reside in the United Kingdom.  What is not known was
         the actual time it would occur."

 7. This paragraph is surprising given that the appellant last entered  the
    United Kingdom on a visit visa.  In her application for that visa,  the
    appellant will have made a statement or declaration to the effect  that
    she intended to leave the United Kingdom at the end of her  visit.   It
    is clear that it was never her intention to return.  In the  assessment
    of the appellant's  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds,  the  public
    interest in removing an individual who blatantly seeks  to  breach  the
    immigration laws of this country must be significant.

 8. Judge Beg has produced a detailed determination which deals  thoroughly
    with all the issues raised.  She considered Chikwamba (see  above)  and
    refers also to Chen (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary  separation  -
    proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189.  She notes that  the  appellant
    and sponsor were well  aware  of  the  consequences  of  the  appellant
    entering the United Kingdom on a visit visa and seeking  thereafter  to
    remain.  The precariousness of the appellant's immigration  status  was
    manifest.

 9. The judge has set out in some detail the provisions of Section  117  of
    the 2002 Act and has applied the provisions to the facts as  she  found
    them.  On those facts, it was open  to  the  judge  to  conclude  that,
    whilst there may be "some disruption  to  family  life"  the  appellant
    should be required to return  to  the  Philippines  to  make  an  entry
    clearance application.  She concluded (as she was clearly able to do on
    the facts) that the consequences of that course of action would not  be
    unjustifiably harsh for any member  of  the  family.   The  grounds  of
    appeal, in  essence,  seek  to  re-argue  the  case  which  the  judge,
    supporting her conclusion with clear and cogent reasons, has  rejected.
    I cannot identify any error of law in the judge's approach to this case
    or application of the law to the facts  as  she  found  them.   In  the
    circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

10. This appeal is dismissed.

11. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 20 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 20 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
