
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16067/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|(remote hearing)                   |                                   |
|On 17 May 2021                     |On 10 June 2021                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Md Nazmul Huda Khandaker
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Selvakumaran, Counsel, instructed by Lincoln's
                    Chambers.

This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have consented. The
form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face hearing was
not held because it was not practicable and all issues could be determined
in a remote hearing. I did not experience any difficulties, and neither
party expressed any concern, with the process.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. By my decision promulgated on 12 January 2021 (a  copy  of  which  is
       appended to this decision) I set aside the decision of the First-tier
       Tribunal. I now remake that decision. As in my previous  decision,  I
       will refer to the parties as they were designated in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.

    2. Ms Selvakumaran had not seen my decision of 12 January 2021  and  was
       unaware that the error of law hearing had taken place. The appellant,
       however, was aware and had seen the decision.  Despite  this,  I  was
       able to proceed because the parties  were  in  agreement  as  to  the
       outcome (see below).

  Factual Background

    3. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 31 December 1985.

    4. In 2007 he entered the UK as a student with leave until 30 June 2010.
       He was granted further leave as a student in 2010, 2011 and 2013. His
       leave granted in 2013 expired on 29 May 2016.

    5. On 26 August 2014 the appellant's leave was curtailed  on  the  basis
       that in April 2012 he obtained an English language certificate  known
       as the Test of  English  for  International  Communication  ("TOEIC")
       certificate through deception, by using a proxy test-taker.

    6. The First-tier Tribunal  found,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  18
       February 2020, that the appellant did  not  engage  in  deception  in
       order to obtain a TOEIC certificate. This finding of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal was upheld in my decision promulgated on  12  January  2021.
       The appellant, therefore, is a person who (a) did not obtain a  TOEIC
       certificate through the use of deception; and (b) has not  had  leave
       to remain in the UK since his leave was curtailed  (on  an  erroneous
       basis) in August 2014.

  Private and family life under the Immigration Rules

    7. The appellant does not have a partner or children in the UK and there
       is no route by which he can establish  an  entitlement  to  leave  to
       remain in the UK under Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules  on  the
       basis of a family life in the UK.

    8. Given the length of time the appellant has lived in the UK  (over  13
       years), I am satisfied that he has established a private life in  the
       UK that engages article 8(1) ECHR. His private life  therefore  needs
       to be considered with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1).

    9.  The  only  sub-paragraph  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)  that  he   could
       conceivably satisfy is sub-paragraph (vi), pursuant to which he would
       need to establish that there would be very significant  obstacles  to
       his integration in Bangladesh.

   10. Ms Selvakumaran did not seek to persuade me  that  the  threshold  of
       very significant obstacles was met. She was right to not  do  so,  as
       the evidence does come close to establishing this.

   11. Sales LJ in Kamara v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
       [2016] EWCA Civ 813 at [14] succinctly  summarised  what  integration
       involves. He explained:

           "The idea of "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment
           to be made as to whether the individual will  be  enough  of  an
           insider in terms of understanding how life  in  the  society  in
           that other country is carried on and a capacity  to  participate
           in it, so as to have a reasonable  opportunity  to  be  accepted
           there, to be able to operate  on  a  day-to-day  basis  in  that
           society and to build up within a reasonable time  a  variety  of
           human  relationships  to  give  substance  to  the  individual's
           private or family life."

   12. The appellant lived in Bangladesh  until  he  was  an  adult,  speaks
       Bengali, and has close family in Bangladesh. There is no evidence  to
       suggest that, on  return  to  his  country,  the  appellant  will  be
       anything other than an insider who understands how life is carried on
       and who will be able to establish himself, and develop relationships,
       both socially and professionally.

  Private life outside the Immigration Rules

   13. Ms Isherwood  drew  my  attention  to  the  respondent's  Educational
       Testing Service (ETS) casework instructions dated 18  November  2020,
       which state:

           'If an individual who has used an invalid Test  of  English  for
           International

           Communications (TOEIC) certificate in support of an  application
           wins an appeal on Article 8 grounds, then  the  grant  of  leave
           will depend upon whether the relevant rules  are  met.  Usually,
           the individual will be on the path to 5-year settlement  if  the
           rules are found to be met and the 10 -year route if  the  appeal
           succeeds on the basis of the exceptions in Appendix FM.

           If the appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds but a finding
           is made by the Tribunal that the appellant did  not  obtain  the
           TOEIC certificate by deception, you will need to give effect  to
           that finding by granting six months  leave  outside  the  rules.
           This is to enable the appellant to  make  any  application  they
           want to make or to leave the UK.'

   14. She argued that the appellant's appeal should be allowed on the basis
       that he ought to be  given,  in  accordance  with  the  ETS  casework
       instructions, six months leave outside the Rules  to  enable  him  to
       make an application for further leave should he wish.

   15. Ms Selvakumaran argued that the appellant should be granted 2.5 years
       leave, placing reliance on a  recent  consent  order  in  a  judicial
       review case in the Upper Tribunal (JR/1170/2020).

   16. I do not have jurisdiction  to  determine  the  dispute  between  the
       parties as to whether the duration of leave granted to the  appellant
       should be six months or 2.5 years. My role  is  limited  by  sections
       82(1)(b) and 84(2) of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
       to making a finding, one way or the other, on whether the appellant's
       removal would violate article 8 ECHR.  This was explained in  Charles
       (human rights appeal: scope) Grenada [2018] UKUT 89 (IAC) at [48]:

           "The task, therefore, for the Tribunal, in a human rights appeal
           is to decide whether such removal or requirement  would  violate
           any of the provisions of the ECHR. In many such cases, including
           the present, the issue is whether the  hypothetical  removal  or
           requirement to leave would be contrary to Article 8 (private and
           family life)."

   17. Although the parties are in  agreement  that  the  appellant's  human
       rights appeal should be allowed, I have summarised below  my  reasons
       for deciding the appeal in the appellant's favour.

   18. In order to determine whether removal of the appellant  from  the  UK
       would violate  article  8  ECHR,  it  is  necessary  to  undertake  a
       proportionality assessment balancing the public interest  in  removal
       against the appellant's private life.

   19. Where, as in this case, a person's private life was established at  a
       time when their immigration status was  precarious,  ordinarily  only
       little weight will attach to it: section 117B(5) of  the  Nationality
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  It  is  recognised
       that, exceptionally, this can be overridden  by  particularly  strong
       features of the private life in question:  Rhuppiah  v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 58 at [48]  -  [50].  There
       are, however, no such features  in  this  case.  I  therefore  attach
       little weight to the appellant's private life.

   20.  I  now  turn  to  the  respondent's  side  of  the  scales  in   the
       proportionality assessment.

   21. Part 5A of the 2002 Act identifies several public interests that  are
       potentially relevant where it is argued  by  an  appellant  that  his
       removal (or deportation) from the UK would breach  Article  8.  These
       are:  (a)  the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  effective
       immigration controls (117B(1)); (b) the public interest in people who
       enter or remain in the UK speaking English; (c) the  public  interest
       in  people  entering  or  remaining  in  the  UK  being   financially
       independent; and (d)  the  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of
       foreign criminals (section 117C(1)).

   22. The appellant is not  a  foreign  criminal,  speaks  English  and  is
       unlikely to be a financial burden on the  state.  The  only  relevant
       public interest, therefore, is the public interest in the maintenance
       of effective immigration controls.

   23. It is well established that where a person with a private  or  family
       life in the UK engaging Article 8(1) is found by a Tribunal  to  meet
       the conditions of the Immigration Rules such  that  under  the  Rules
       they would be entitled to a grant of leave to enter or remain in  the
       UK, there may be no  public  interest  in  their  removal.  This  was
       summarised succinctly  by  Sir  Ernest  Ryder,  Senior  President  of
       Tribunals in TZ (Pakistan) and Another v Secretary of State  for  the
       Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1109, who held at [34]:

           "Where a person satisfies the rules, whether or not by reference
           to  an  article  8  informed  requirement,  then  this  will  be
           positively determinative of  that  person's  article  8  appeal,
           provided their case engages article 8(1), for  the  very  reason
           that it would then be disproportionate for  that  person  to  be
           removed."

   24. The President of the Upper Tribunal made  the  same  point  in  Begum
       (employment income; Rules/Article 8) [2021] UKUT 0115,  the  headnote
       to which states:

           "(2)   The significance of P being  found  by  the  Tribunal  to
           satisfy  a  provision  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which   the
           Secretary of State considered  P  did  not  satisfy,  and  which
           caused her to refuse P's application, applies to entry clearance
           cases, as it does to cases where P is  in  the  United  Kingdom.
           Provided that ECHR Article 8 is engaged, the Secretary of  State
           will not be able to  point  to  the  importance  of  maintaining
           immigration controls as a factor weighing in her favour  in  the
           proportionality  balancing  exercise,  so  far  as  that  factor
           relates to the particular  rule  that  the  Tribunal  finds  was
           satisfied: OA and others (human rights; "new  matter";  s.  120)
           Nigeria [2019] UKUT 65 (IAC)."

   25. It is also well established that, even where  the  Immigration  Rules
       are not satisfied, there will be cases where the public  interest  in
       effective immigration controls is  so  diminished  that  it  will  be
       outweighed by any private life in the UK that is sufficient to engage
       Article 8(1): see Patel (historic injustice; NIAA   Part  5A)  [2020]
       UKUT 00351.

   26. The appellant's leave, which was erroneously curtailed,  was  granted
       under the points-based system (PBS),  which  prioritises  consistency
       over administrative discretion: see Pathan, R (on the application of)
       v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2020]  UKSC  41.  The
       public interest, therefore, is in a  consistent  application  of  the
       PBS. In order for the appellant to  be  treated  consistently  it  is
       necessary, so far as possible, for him to be put in the  position  in
       which he would have been but for  the  respondent's  mistaken  belief
       that he had engaged in deception. This accords with position  adopted
       by the respondent in the consent  orders  agreed  in  Khan  &  Ors  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ  1684  and
       the view expressed by Underhill LJ in Ahsan v Secretary of State  for
       the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 2009, who stated:

           "120.  The starting-point is that it seems to me clear  that  if
           on a human rights appeal an appellant were  found  not  to  have
           cheated, which inevitably means that the section 10 decision had
           been wrong, the Secretary of State would be obliged to deal with
           him or her thereafter so far as possible as if  that  error  had
           not been made, i.e. as if their leave to  remain  had  not  been
           invalidated.  In a straightforward case, for example, she  could
           and should make a fresh grant of leave to remain  equivalent  to
           that which had been invalidated.   She  could  also,  and  other
           things  being  equal  should,  exercise  any   relevant   future
           discretion, if "outside  the  Rules",  on  the  basis  that  the
           appellant had in fact had leave to remain in the relevant period
           notwithstanding that formally that leave  remained  invalidated.
           (I accept that how to  exercise  such  a  discretion  would  not
           always be easy, since it is not always possible  to  reconstruct
           the world as it would have been; but that  problem  would  arise
           even if the decision were quashed on judicial  review.)   If  it
           were clear that in those ways the successful appellant could  be
           put in substantially the same position  as  if  the  section  10
           decision had been quashed, I can see no reason in principle  why
           that should not be taken into  account  in  deciding  whether  a
           human rights appeal would constitute an appropriate  alternative
           remedy.  To pick up a particular point relied on by Mr Biggs,  I
           do not regard the fact that a person commits a criminal  offence
           by remaining in the UK from (apparently) the moment  of  service
           of a section 10 notice as constituting a  substantial  detriment
           such that he is absolutely entitled to seek to have  the  notice
           quashed, at least in  circumstances  where  there  has  been  no
           prosecution.  (It is also irrelevant that the appellant may have
           suffered collateral consequences from the section 10 decision on
           the basis that his or her leave has been  invalidated,  such  as
           losing their job; past  damage  of  that  kind  cannot  alas  be
           remedied by either kind of proceeding.)

           121.   So far so  good,  but  the  law  in  this  area  is  very
           complicated and I am not confident that  all  its  ramifications
           were fully explored before us.  I do not feel in a  position  to
           say definitively that the Secretary of State will always be able
           to exercise her discretion, in the  aftermath  of  a  successful
           human rights appeal, so  as  to  achieve  the  same  substantive
           result as the formal quashing of the section 10 decision.  There
           may, for example, be  legislation  (i.e.  primary  or  secondary
           legislation rather than simply the Rules) which would result  in
           the appellant having to  be  differently  treated  depending  on
           whether he or she  had  leave  to  remain  during  a  particular
           period.  If there were any real doubt about whether in  a  given
           case a successful human rights appeal would be as  effective  as
           the formal quashing of the section  10  decision  the  applicant
           should have the benefit of that doubt and be permitted to pursue
           judicial review proceedings."

   27.  It  follows  from  this  that  the  public  interest  in   effective
       immigration controls is served not by  the  appellant's  removal  but
       rather by the respondent endeavouring to put him into the position he
       would have been in had the ETS deception allegation and the  decision
       based upon it not been made. The position of the appellant is similar
       to that of a person who satisfies  a  provision  of  the  Immigration
       Rules: provided article 8 is engaged,  the  public  interest  in  the
       maintenance of effective immigration controls will not weigh  against
       him unless other circumstances have  come  to  light  that  mean  the
       Secretary of State can legitimately invoke a different  provision  of
       the Rules. See Begum at [36].  There are no such other  circumstances
       in this case.

   28. As the appellant has a private life in the UK  that  engages  article
       8(1) and the public interest in effective immigration controls is not
       served by his removal the article 8 proportionality assessment  falls
       firmly in his favour.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been  set  aside,  I  re-make
the decision by allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.


Signed

D. Sheridan
Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan   18 May 2021

