
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16071/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 October 2017                             |On 31 October 2017            |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                lindon bryan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Bond, Counsel instructed by Freemans Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   It was the conclusion of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Ferguson in  a
    decision sent on 28 April  2017  that  the  appeal  of  the  respondent
    (hereafter "the claimant"), a citizen of Jamaica, against a deportation
    order of 9 June 2016, should be allowed.  The judge  noted  the  SSHD's
    acceptance that the claimant had a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with his British citizen partner, Mrs Bryan and with  his  two  British
    citizen children aged 17 and 12.  At paragraph 44 the judge stated:

     "Based on that assessment of the evidence,  and  bearing  in  mind  the
         concessions in the Reasons for Decision Letter,  I  find  that  the
         Appellant has been a stable presence in the lives of Mrs Bryan  and
         their two children since being granted bail in February  2013.   It
         was noted in the earlier Determination that the Appellant's and Mrs
         Bryan's renewed commitment  to  each  other  had  not  really  been
         tested, but it clearly has been now.  They have been  in  a  stable
         relationship, living together in a  genuine  marital  relationship,
         since  February  2013.   The  Appellant  has  not  reoffended,  has
         complied with immigration law and has been the  primary  carer  for
         the children, in particular for B,  whilst  Mrs  Bryan  works  full
         time.  B is at a vulnerable age and I agree with the comments  made
         by the earlier Tribunal that there is  likely  to  be  a  long-term
         adverse impact on him if the Appellant were deported."

2.   Having  noted  that  the  appellant  (hereafter  "the  SSHD")  did  not
    actively pursue any argument that it would be reasonable to expect  the
    partner and their children to relocate to Jamaica, the judge considered
    whether it would be proportionate to separate the claimant  from  them,
    given the strong public interest in his deportation.   In  addition  to
    having overstayed between June 2002 and 9 September 2009 (when  he  was
    granted Discretionary Leave (DL)) the claimant had  been  convicted  in
    May  2011  for  supplying  a  controlled  drug  of  class  A  (heroin),
    possessing a controlled drug of class A with intent to  supply  (heroin
    and crack cocaine) and was sentenced to four  years'  imprisonment.   A
    deportation order  had  bee  made  against  him  in  2012  but  he  was
    successful in his appeal before Judge Colvin and Mrs Schmitt JP sent on
    4 February 2013.  Nevertheless the SSHD  in  a  decision  letter  of  2
    February 2016 concluded that "there continues to be significant  public
    interest in deporting you".  The subsequent decision of 9 June 2016 set
    out more detailed reasons.

3.   In deciding to allow the claimant's appeal FtT  Judge  Ferguson  noted,
    inter alia, that the SSHD could have sought to appeal the  earlier  FtT
    decision, but instead extended his initial grant of DL  and  then  took
    eighteen months to determine his application  for  further  leave.   In
    Judge  Ferguson's  view  that  has  the  effect  of  "solidifying"  the
    claimant's position in the UK.  Although  his  immigration  status  was
    always "precarious" in that his leave to remain was limited,  the  fact
    that he had been successful in his first appeal on family life  grounds
    and then  granted  two  further  periods  of  DL  without  any  further
    offending, meant that "he could have had  some  reasonable  expectation
    that he would  be  allowed  to  remain  in  the  UK  while  his  family
    circumstances remained the same and provided that he did not commit any
    further offences".  At paragraphs 50-53 the judge continued:

         "50. I also agree with Mr Waheed that the Appellant's  relationship
             with his wife and  children  has,  if  anything,  strengthened
             since the earlier Determination.  He has provided real support
             to Mrs Bryan and has developed a particularly strong bond with
             B.  The Respondent has put forward no evidence or other reason
             to suggest that the family ties are weaker than they  were  in
             2013, other than the unsupported assertion in the Reasons  for
             Decision Letter that A, at the age of 17,  would  be  becoming
             more  independent  from  any  parental  figure  and  that  her
             dependency upon the Appellant would diminish  over  time.   In
             fact the Appellant has spent considerably more time with A  in
             the period since the Determination in  2013,  when  she  would
             have been 14, than he had in the few  years  before  then.   I
             accept A's evidence that they are now close and she relies  on
             him for support.  The fact that she is now 18  is  of  limited
             relevance when there is still a 12-year-old boy in the  family
             who needs considerable parental support.


         51.  Adopting the approach suggested by Jackson LJ in NA (Pakistan)
             [2016] EWCA Civ 662, I have considered whether the  effect  of
             the Appellant's removal on his wife and/or children  would  be
             'unduly harsh' and I find that it would  be.   Notwithstanding
             the Appellant's criminal conduct in or  around  2011  and  the
             time spent in prison as a result, the family is now  a  strong
             unit and they depend on the Appellant for childcare,  as  well
             as emotional and practical support.  In light of the  findings
             of the earlier Tribunal  as  to  the  best  interests  of  the
             children which, at least in B's case, must  still  apply  with
             equal force, it would be unduly harsh for them to be separated
             from the Appellant indefinitely.


         52.  As to the second stage of the assessment,  I  also  find  that
             there are very compelling  circumstances  in  this  case  that
             outweigh the public interest.  I fully accept the strength  of
             the public interest in the Appellant's deportation as set  out
             in  the  earlier  Determination.    However,   the   Appellant
             successfully appealed the first deportation decision on family
             life grounds, and since then he has not committed any  further
             offences and his family ties have significantly  strengthened.
             The effect on  B  of  the  Appellant's  deportation  would  be
             potentially devastating.  The position is somewhat complicated
             by the fact that there has been a change in the law since  the
             earlier Determination, or at least a  change  in  the  courts'
             understanding of how  the  law  should  be  applied,  but  the
             Respondent did not take any action on that basis at  the  time
             and indeed that was not the basis of the deportation  decision
             made on 2 February 2016 or the refusal  of  the  human  rights
             claim on 9  June  2016.   I  consider  that  that  background,
             together with the  impact  on  the  family,  constitutes  very
             compelling circumstances.


         53.  In the unusual circumstances of this  case  I  find  that  the
             interference  with  the  Appellant's  Article  8   rights   is
             disproportionate  to  the  strong  public  interest   in   his
             deportation and therefore the appeal must be allowed."

4.   The SSHD's grounds of appeal contend firstly that the  judge  erred  by
    failing to indicate that he had attached weight to  the  strong  public
    interest and the failure to understand  that  the  scales  are  heavily
    weighted in favour of deportation; and secondly that the  judge  failed
    to give clear reasons as to why it was concluded that there  were  very
    compelling circumstances, particularly in the context  that  the  judge
    recognised that there had been changes to the law and  the  Immigration
    Rules affecting deportation cases since the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal in 2013.

5.   I heard clear and concise submissions  from  both  representatives,  Mr
    Deller accepting that it was difficult to say that the judge's findings
    were not properly open to him given the factual circumstances, Ms  Bond
    underlining that the SSHD raised no perversity challenge.

6.   I am not persuaded that the SSHD's grounds are made out.

7.   It is clear that the judge was fully aware of the changes  to  the  law
    and the Rules effected in 2014 and he set out the key cases  reflecting
    the  new  position,  especially  in   relation   to   very   compelling
    circumstances.

8.   The judge did not seek to allow the appeal by automatic application  of
    the findings of fact and positive evaluation of the previous  Tribunal,
    but rather paid full regard  to  the  developments  in  the  claimant's
    circumstances since that time, as well as changes in the law.

9.   The judge clearly attached considerable weight  to  the  strong  public
    interest in deportation: see paragraph 47.  It was open to the judge to
    assess that the claimant had nevertheless established  very  compelling
    circumstances.  There was: the fact that the  claimant   at  sentencing
    was described by the sentencing judge as of previous good character and
    to have shown genuine remorse; the fact that he had not  committed  any
    further offences since the positive decision of the first tribunal; the
    fact that subsequent to the first tribunal decision the SSHD  had  seen
    fit to grant him not one but two  periods  of  DL  (May-November  2013,
    February-August 2014); the fact that since the positive decision of the
    first tribunal the claimant had strengthened his family life ties  with
    his wife and children; and the fact that the  evidence  indicated  that
    the impact on his  two  British  citizen  children  (for  whom  he  was
    currently  their  "primary  carer")  of  his   deportation   would   be
    potentially devastating (the SSHD's grounds raise no challenge to  that
    finding).  In light of the Supreme Court guidance in Hesham Ali, [2016]
    UKSC 60 it is clear that family life can be a compelling  circumstance,
    especially when children are born here and have British citizenship.

10.  I remind myself that I am not entitled to interfere with  the  decision
    of the FtT unless it is vitiated by legal error and its  assessment  of
    the  particular  circumstances  is  outside  the  range  of  reasonable
    responses.  The decision of Judge Ferguson may have been generous,  but
    it was not infected with legal error.

11.  The SSHD's grounds made reference to "grounds previously  submitted  to
    FtT Judge Andrew (who refused the first  application  for  permission).
    After I adjourned to allow Mr Deller  time  totality  rack  down  these
    grounds (they were not in the UT file), he confirmed they added nothing
    substantial to the renewed grounds.

Notice of Decision

12.  For the above reasons I conclude that the FtT judge did not  materially
    err in law.  Accordingly his decision to allow  the  claimant's  appeal
    must stand.

13.  No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date: 29 October 2017
              [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


