
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16490/2018
                                                               HU/16493/2018
                                                               HU/16491/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 2 December 2019                           |On: 25 February 2020          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     rk
                                     as
                                     rsd
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Charlton, counsel instructed by Bhogal Partners
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Easterman, promulgated on 13 May 2019. Permission to appeal was granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge PJM Hollingworth.




Anonymity

 2. An anonymity direction is made owing to the vulnerability of the  first
    appellant and the sensitive nature of parts of the evidence.

Background

 3. The first appellant entered the United  Kingdom  as  a  student  on  12
    October 2004. Her leave was extended until 28 October 2010. An  in-time
    application for leave to remain as  a  Tier  1  (General)  migrant  was
    refused on 2  March  2011  and  the  appellant's  appeal  against  that
    decision was dismissed, with her appeal rights being  exhausted  on  16
    June  2011.  Thereafter  the  appellant  made  a  series   of   further
    submissions on human rights grounds, all of which were refused with  no
    in-country right of appeal. The second  appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 2 April 2007 as a dependant of the first appellant, which he
    has continued to be thereafter. The third appellant  was  born  in  the
    United Kingdom on 18 January 2010.

 4. The appellants made a human rights' claim on 19 April 2017 on the basis
    of their family life in the United Kingdom with particular reference to
    the fact that the third appellant had resided  here  for  7  years.  In
    refusing that claim, the Secretary of State decided it  was  reasonable
    for the third appellant to return to India with his parents.   Nor  was
    it accepted that there were very significant  obstacles  to  the  adult
    appellants returning to India. The respondent considered  and  rejected
    the  exceptional  circumstances  advanced.  These  included  that   the
    appellants had integrated into the British way of life; they  had  lost
    all ties and connections in India; the relationship between  the  adult
    appellants was not accepted by family in India and the appellants would
    be harassed and victimised; the appellant would be  left  homeless  and
    destitute; the first appellant donated eggs to help a  friend  conceive
    and had a relationship with that child; the third appellant  had  never
    left the UK, could not  speak  any  Indian  languages  and  had  formed
    attachments to friends and that the  first  appellant  suffered  mental
    health issues owing to suffering  rape  and  sexual  abuse  during  her
    teenage years in India.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The First-tier Tribunal judge did not accept that the families  of  the
    appellants had fallen out  with  them  or  that  the  abuse  the  first
    appellant experienced meant that she  would  be  unable  to  return  to
    India. He found that it was reasonable to expect the third appellant to
    go to India with his parents

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal argued that the judge's section 55 assessment was
    wholly inadequate and that he rejected the report of the expert  social
    worker without reasons. In addition, the  judge  identified  no  strong
    reasons why the third appellant  should  be  removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

 8. The respondent filed no Rule 24 response.



The hearing

 9. Ms Charlton argued that the best interests of the third appellant  were
    not assessed by the First-tier Tribunal judge. The third appellant  was
    aged 9 at the time of the hearing and a vast  amount  of  evidence  had
    been submitted regarding his circumstances. While the determination was
    lengthy, the only reference to best interests was the  judge's  mention
    of the child growing up in an Indian household and being familiar  with
    Indian traditions. While it was accepted  that  it  was  in  the  third
    appellant's best interests to remain with his parents,  the  judge  was
    also required to take into account the age of the child  and  the  time
    spent  in  the  United  Kingdom,  applying  MT  and  ET  (child's  best
    interests; ex tempore pilot) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 88(IAC).  Furthermore,
    no strong reasons had been provided to justify the appellants'  removal
    from the United Kingdom.

10. Ms Charlton further argued that while the judge referred to the  report
    of the social worker, much of the content  was  ignored  including  the
    third appellant's views , that his  parents  had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for many years and the fact that many of his friends  were  not
    from an Indian background. There was a  further  matter,  in  that  the
    judge took into consideration a matter which the respondent  had  taken
    no issue  with,  namely  that  there  had  been  deception  in  a  2011
    application. Suitability was not relied upon by the respondent however,
    the judge's focus on this issue may have affected the  judge's  overall
    findings. Referring again to MT and ET, Ms  Charlton  argued  that  the
    claimant in the aforementioned case  had  a  criminal  record  and  was
    unlawfully present in the United Kingdom but that  the  conclusion  was
    that it was still in the best interests of the child to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom. There was a tacit acceptance  by  the  judge  that  the
    third appellant did not speak, read  or  write  any  Indian  languages,
    however no thought was given to that by the judge or why it was  better
    for him to return to India rather than to remain in the United Kingdom.
    Furthermore, the judge engaged in speculation in  concluding  that  the
    third appellant would move away from his friends in any event  when  he
    began his secondary education. Ms Charlton pointed to the fact that the
    appellant had attended the infant and junior school  in  his  area  and
    that it was likely that he retains his circle of friends when he  moved
    to secondary school.

11. Mr Bramble argued that there was no reference to the deception issue in
    the judge's  findings  of  fact  or  conclusions.  The  judge  properly
    considered the best interests of the child in the real world,  applying
    KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53,  where  the  parents  had  no  status  nor
    expectations of remaining in the United Kingdom.  The  grounds  were  a
    disagreement with the decision. The judge appreciated  that  the  third
    appellant was 9 years old and knew no other country.  The  social  work
    report was taken account of and  the  judge  was  fully  aware  of  the
    circumstances including the impact of return. There was  nothing  wrong
    in the judge's reasoning that it was in the best interest of the  third
    appellant to accompany his parents to India. He urged me to uphold  the
    decision.

12. In response, Ms Charlton took me to [65] of  the  decision,  where  the
    judge referred to the deception issue  in  his  findings  of  fact  and
    conclusions. In addition, she emphasised  the  opinion  of  the  social
    worker as to the impact a shift in stability could have  on  the  third
    appellant; the issue of the mental health of the  first  appellant  and
    the closeness between the appellants and their immediate family in  the
    United Kingdom.

13. At the end of the hearing, I announced that there was a material  error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Decision on error of law

14. At [73], the First-tier Tribunal concluded that  it  was  in  the  best
    interest of the third appellant to remain with his parents and that  it
    was reasonable for him to return, with  them,  to  India.  The  judge's
    findings and facts and conclusions are set out between [58] and [74] of
    the decision. At no point did the judge assess whether it  was  in  the
    third appellant's best interests to remain in the United Kingdom, which
    was the crux of the case presented. There was extensive evidence before
    the judge including a detailed report  from  a  social  worker,  school
    records as well as witness statements from the  adult  appellants.  The
    judge's dismissal of the social worker's report as mere  "advocacy"  at
    [62] was also inadequately reasoned. Furthermore, the  conclusion  that
    it was in the third appellant's best interests to return to India  went
    unexplained  and  did   not   engage   with   the   third   appellant's
    circumstances. By contrast, the judge took into consideration that "the
    first appellant was found to have used deception in 2011  in  order  to
    remain in the United  Kingdom."  Yet,  the  decision  appealed  against
    raised no issues of suitability and the decision did  not  expand  upon
    the nature of the deception allegation.

15. The following passages from ME and ET are instructive in this case:



      31. "A much younger child, who has not started school or who has  only
      recently done so will have difficulty in establishing that her Article
      8 private and family life has a material element, which  lies  outside
      her need to live with her parent or parents,  wherever  that  may  be.
      This position, however, changes over time, with  the  result  that  an
      assessment of best interests must adopt a correspondingly wider focus,
      examining the child's position in the wider  world,  of  which  school
      will usually be an important part.

      32.This is why both the age of the child and the amount of time  spent
      by the child in the United Kingdom will be  relevant  in  determining,
      for the purposes of section 55/Article 8, where the best interests  of
      the child lie.

      33.    On the present state of the law, as set out in MA, we  need  to
      look for "powerful reasons" why a child who has  been  in  the  United
      Kingdom for over ten years should be removed, notwithstanding that her
      best interests lie in remaining. "


16.  There was no  wider  focus  on  third  appellant's  best  interests  on
    remaining in the  United  Kingdom,  with  particular  emphasis  on  his
    schooling and his  position  in  the  wider  world.  Having  failed  to
    adequately identify or consider the third appellant's  best  interests,
    the judge consequently failed to afford  significant  weight  to  those
    interests in conducting the  balancing  exercise.  This  amounts  to  a
    material error of law, without which the outcome of  the  appeal  might
    have been different.

17.  While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the appellants have
    yet to have an adequate consideration of their human rights' appeal  at
    the First-tier Tribunal and it would be unfair to deprive them of  such
    consideration.


Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Hatton Cross, with a time estimate of 2 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Easterman.


Signed:                                 Date 25 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara



