
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/16872/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7th February 2019                    | On 13th March 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                              mr Tahir Mahmood
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Rashid (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Miss H Aboni (Counsel), Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Place, promulgated on 25th September 2017, following a hearing at
    Nottingham on 7th September 2017.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent Secretary
    of State, applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, and was  born  on  12th
    February 1985.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 24th June 2016, refusing him leave to  remain  in  the  UK  as  a
    spouse of Mrs Nazreen Khan.  The basis of  the  refusal  was  that  the
    Respondent  had  concluded  that  the  English   language   certificate
    submitted by the Appellant at the time of his spouse's  application  of
    3rd September 2013 had been obtained by deception and that the presence
    of the Appellant in the UK was therefore not conducive  to  the  public
    good.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is  that  he  now  has  a  2  year
    daughter born to him in 2015.  Both the daughter, and Mrs Nazreen Khan,
    are British citizens.  The Appellant had married Mrs Khan in June  2013
    and had been granted a spouse's visa in October 2013.  They continue to
    live together.  He earns his living from his business as a barber.  The
    Appellant maintained that he cannot go back to Pakistan as his wife and
    daughter would not be able to live there.

The Hearing

 4. At the hearing before Judge Place,  Mr  Rashid,  who  had  appeared  as
    Counsel on that occasion as well, had

         "Conceded that the documents documented  by  the  Respondent  meant
         that the Respondent had crossed the evidential  threshold  required
         to show that there is a reasonable doubt that there had  been  some
         kind of deception by the Appellant sufficient to put the burden  of
         proof onto the Appellant ..." (paragraph 3).

 5. The judge went on to consider the  evidence  given  by  the  Appellant,
    including his response to a question as to how many people were at  the
    test centre when he replied "too many" (paragraph  12)  which  did  not
    suggest that the Appellant had taken the tests himself.  The judge went
    on to conclude that, "I find that the Appellant has not  satisfied  the
    burden upon him of showing that his certificate  was  not  obtained  by
    deception and that the decision made by the Respondent under the  Rules
    was correct" (paragraph 22).




 6. However, the judge then turned  to  the  human  rights  aspect  of  the
    appeal.  He observed that it was not in dispute that the Appellant  and
    the Sponsor are married.  It was not in dispute that the  marriage  was
    genuine and subsisting.  The  issue  remained  one  of  proportionality
    (paragraph 23).  The judge went on to consider Section 117B of the 2002
    Act (paragraph 24).


 7. Consideration was given to the view of the Home  Office  representative
    that the Appellant had obtained the test certificate fraudulently,  but
    that there had been a concession by the Respondent Secretary  of  State
    in this case, that the removal of the child of the  Appellant  and  Mrs
    Khan would not be "reasonable" if she had to go and live in Pakistan.


 8. Given that this was the case, the judge went  on  to  consider  Section
    117B(6) and observed that the  Appellant's  2  year  old  child  "is  a
    qualifying child for  the  purposes  of  that  Section"  and  that  the
    Appellant  continued  to  have  a  "genuine  and  subsisting   parental
    relationship with her".

 9. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that the judge had failed to take into
    account the countervailing considerations  of  the  Appellant's  proven
    deception, which wrongly led the judge to allow the appeal.

11. On 4th May 2018  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  on  this  basis.
    However, the grant of permission also included a further  basis,  which
    had not been highlighted in the grounds  by  the  Secretary  of  State,
    namely, that it was arguable that  the  judge  had  applied  the  wrong
    burden at paragraph 22 in stating that the burden of proof was  on  the
    Appellant.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 7th February 2019, Miss Aboni, appearing as
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer, stated  that  this  was  a  case
    where the judge had found that the Appellant had used deception.  Given
    that this was the case, it was incumbent upon the judge to then  factor
    in the use of deception into  the  proportionality  exercise  that  the
    judge had to undertake.  Yet, the judge  failed  to  do  so.   On  that
    basis, the judge was not justified in allowing the appeal under Article
    8.

13. Second, insofar as the Upper Tribunal raised an additional point  about
    the standard of proof being on the Appellant, given that this  was  the
    wrong test, the entire decision was marred by a wrong approach  to  the
    appeal, such that the appeal stood to be set aside.

14. For his part, Mr Rashid submitted that there had been  no  error.   The
    reason why the judge had expressed himself in the manner that  he  had,
    can only be understood if one reads the determination in its  entirety.
    This makes clear at the outset, that

         "Mr Rashid conceded that the documents submitted by the  Respondent
         meant that the Respondent  had  crossed  the  evidential  threshold
         required to show that there is a reasonable doubt  that  there  had
         been some kind of deception by the Appellant ..." (paragraph 3).

15. In the light of that, the burden had then shifted onto  the  Appellant.
    It was for the Appellant now to demonstrate that he  had  not  actually
    exercised deception.  He failed to do so, it is on that basis that  the
    judge had stated (at paragraph 22) that, "I  find  that  the  Appellant
    does not satisfy the burden upon him ...".  There was no error in  this
    whatsoever.




16. Second, there could be no argument about the  proportionality  exercise
    having been deprived of a consideration of the  Appellant's  fraudulent
    activity.  This is because in this  case  the  Respondent  had  already
    conceded that it would not be "reasonable" for the Appellant's child to
    go to Pakistan  with  the  Appellant.   If  that  was  the  case,  then
    inevitably the family will be split up if Mrs  Khan  and  her  daughter
    were to remain in the UK, but the Appellant were to be required  to  go
    back to Pakistan.


17. It was in this circumstance, that the judge concluded that a qualifying
    child, enjoying a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship,  would
    have to return to Pakistan with the breadwinner of the family,  namely,
    the father, if he was to be required to go to Pakistan.  It is in  this
    respect, that the decision was ultimately correct.

18. In her reply, Miss Aboni submitted that it was by  no  means  the  case
    that the family would be split up.  All that had happened was that  the
    Respondent Secretary of State had conceded that the daughter would  not
    be required to go to Pakistan.  That did not mean  that  the  Appellant
    could not himself return to Pakistan and make  another  application  to
    come to this country to join his British citizen wife and  his  British
    citizen daughter.  The failure to give consideration to this particular
    aspect of the facts before the judge was a material error of law.

No Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

20. First, the judge does give proper  consideration  to  the  exercise  of
    fraud by the Appellant.  Mr Rashid conceded that the evidential  burden
    had been satisfied by the Respondent Secretary of State  (at  paragraph
    3).  Thereafter, the  judge  looked  at  the  evidence  and  eventually
    concluded that the Appellant himself had  not  satisfied  the  shifting
    burden that had now been placed upon him (paragraph 22).  That was  the
    correct way of formulating the position.  There is no error here.

21. Second, the judge had been particularly careful to  take  note  of  the
    Respondent Secretary of State's position.  As he observed,

         "Upon clarification being sought by Mr Rashid, he [the Respondent's
         representative] agreed that he was  not  seeking  to  withdraw  the
         concession made in the refusal letter that exception EX.1(a) of the
         Immigration Rules applies and that the Appellant has a genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship with a British citizen  child  and
         that it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
         UK" (paragraph 25).

22.  The  judge  then  observed  that  "the  Appellant  is  not  liable  to
    deportation.  Section 117B(6) states that the public interest does  not
    require his removal" (paragraph 26).   Ultimately,  it  is  clear,  the
    decision was made on the basis of Section 117B(6).

23. That was a conclusion that was  open  to  the  judge  to  make  in  the
    particular circumstances of this case, where a concession  had  already
    been made.  The Appellant was the breadwinner.  He had  a  2  year  old
    child.  The child was a qualifying child.  They lived as a family  unit
    together.




24. The judge's conclusion  that,  "since  the  public  interest  does  not
    require his removal, I find that it would be disproportionate to remove
    him and allow the appeal on human rights grounds" (paragraph 27) was an
    appropriate decision for this judge to reach.

Notice of Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

26. No anonymity direction is made.

27. The appeal of the Secretary of State is refused.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th March 2019
