
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16141/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 23 November 2018                    |On 31 January 2019                |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                 HELENE [O]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Bayoumi of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Page promulgated on 23 May 2018 in which the Appellant's appeal against
    a decision of the Respondent dated 1 November 2017  refusing  leave  to
    remain in the UK was dismissed on human rights grounds.


2.   Before me Mr Howells conceded that there  was  merit  in  some  of  the
    Appellant's grounds of challenge, and accordingly  the  Respondent  did
    not seek to resist the Appellant's assertion that the decision of Judge
    Page should be set aside. It was common ground between the parties that
    in consequence the decision in the appeal should be remade  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal by a different judge with all issues  at  large.  I
    accept that this is an appropriate outcome.


3.   In the circumstances I do not propose to set out the  full  details  of
    the Appellant's immigration history, or her  criminal  history,  or  to
    explore  the  full  details  of  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, or all aspects of the Judge's  decision:  I  focus  on  those
    matters particularly pertinent to the aspects of challenge conceded  by
    the Respondent to be meritorious.


4.   The Appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo born  on
    15 April 1993. She arrived  in  the  UK  in  2010  as  a  visitor;  she
    subsequently remained as the dependent of her mother who  was  pursuing
    an asylum claim; although  the  asylum  claim  was  dismissed  and  the
    Appellant's mother became 'appeal rights exhausted' in June  2011,  the
    Appellant was subsequently granted discretionary  leave  to  remain  in
    line with her mother on 19 May 2014  until  19  November  2016.  On  21
    October 2016 she made an application for further leave  to  remain.  In
    substantial part the application was based on  the  Appellant's  family
    and private life in the UK together with  her  four  children  and  her
    unmarried partner [MK].


5.   [MK] is a citizen of Guinea  born  on  27  December  1977.  He  has  no
    current status in the UK. An application for asylum  made  in  December
    2001 was refused and a subsequent  appeal  dismissed  -  [MK]  becoming
    'appeal rights exhausted' in  June  2002.  On  8  August  2008  he  was
    sentenced  to  12  months  imprisonment  on  two  counts  relating   to
    possession  of  false   identity   documents,   and   recommended   for
    deportation. A Deportation Order was signed  on  9  December  2008;  an
    appeal was dismissed on 14 April 2009. Since  that  time  he  has  made
    further representations to the Respondent, including  placing  reliance
    upon his relationship with  the  Appellant  and,  at  the  time,  their
    firstborn child. On 31 January 2014 the Respondent  refused  to  revoke
    the Deportation Order. Again, an appeal to the IAC was unsuccessful.  I
    was told today that in the last few days  [MK]'s  representatives  have
    submitted yet further  submissions  to  the  Respondent,  although  the
    substance was not known.


6.   The couple have four children: the oldest was born  on  2  March  2012,
    the next on 22 November 2014, and the Appellant was delivered of  twins
    on 11 November 2015. None is a British citizen.


7.   The essential basis of  the  Appellant's  case  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is summarised at paragraph 12  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision as being that there would  be  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's integration if she were returned to the  DRC,  and/or  that
    leave to remain should be granted outside the Immigration Rules.


8.   As part of the Appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal  it  was
    argued that it would not be possible for the family to  relocate  as  a
    unit to either the DRC or Guinea. [MK] claimed that the Guinea  Embassy
    did not recognise him as a national of Guinea and he could  not  obtain
    travel documentation; this meant that the family could not go to Guinea
    together as a unit, and also that [MK] would not be able  to  accompany
    the Appellant and their children to the DRC.


9.   I pause to note that other arguments were also advanced to  the  effect
    that it would not be possible to obtain a visa as an unmarried  partner
    - whether that be for the Appellant to enter  Guinea  or  for  [MK]  to
    enter the DRC. However, no supporting evidence was provided in  respect
    of such a claim, and seemingly nothing was offered as to why  it  would
    not be possible for the couple  to  marry  if  that  was  necessary  to
    maintain the family unit (e.g. see paragraph 37).


10.  In respect of documentation [MK]  said  this  at  paragraph  2  of  his
    witness statement dated 12 April 2018 (Appellant's bundle pages 13-17):


         "... It is clear to me that the Guinean authorities would not  even
         let me into the country now. In June  last  year  the  Home  Office
         arrange for me to attend  a  travel  document  appointment  at  the
         Guinean embassy and when I went there they refused to accept  I  am
         from Guinea because I don't have any ID documents  and  have  never
         had a Guinean passport. After the appointment, they  wrote  to  the
         Home Office to say that they won't issue me with a travel document.
         The Home Office has previously said that they want to deport me  to
         Guinea, because in 2008 was prosecuted for  working  with  a  false
         document, but I don't think it is possible for the Home  Office  to
         deport me to Guinea due to the Guinean authorities saying this."


11.  The Judge noted the substance of this evidence at paragraph 32  of  the
    Decision. However, in unnumbered paragraphs under the heading 'Findings
    and Reasons' the Judge stated:


         "If he assisted the Guinea authorities he  could  obtain  a  travel
         document. He wants to remain here and has no  incentive  to  obtain
         one so long as the appellant and his children are here. If he had a
         travel document there would be nothing to stop him going to  Guinea
         and having his family join him there. Or he could relocate  to  the
         DRC."


12.  Mr Howells conceded that the Judge did not reconcile the  finding  that
    [MK] could obtain a travel document if he wanted to, with the evidence.
    There was nothing before the Judge that expressly  indicated  that  the
    difficulty in obtaining travel documentation  arose  because  [MK]  was
    being obstructive.


13.  Given the significance of this issue to  an  overall  consideration  of
    the appeal this was plainly a material error such  as  to  warrant  the
    setting aside of the Judge's decision.


14.  If the Respondent's concession had been limited to this single issue  I
    might have been minded to the view that  the  decision  in  the  appeal
    could be remade without the necessity for a further  hearing.  However,
    Mr Howells also conceded that the Judge had erred in his  reasoning  in
    respect of the present whereabouts of the Appellant's father: in  short
    it was conceded  that  there  was  no  evidential  foundation  for  the
    observation that the Appellant's father  "is  obviously  still  in  the
    DRC", particularly  in  circumstances  where  it  was  the  Appellant's
    evidence, and the evidence of her mother, that he was last heard of  in
    Namibia where he worked as a diplomat.


15.  Accordingly I accept that the interests of  justice  require  that  the
    appeal be remade after a new hearing with all issues at large.


16.  It was possible to ascertain from the Tribunal's  records  today  (i.e.
    at the hearing) that [MK] had no  outstanding  appeals  with  the  IAC;
    moreover Mr Howells told me a check of the Respondent's records  showed
    that he had seemingly very recently made further representations to the
    Respondent. I do not  accept  Ms  Bayoumi's  invitation  to  defer  the
    proceedings herein until  such  time  as  the  Respondent  has  made  a
    decision on  those  representations:  the  Tribunal  can  consider  the
    substance of any such representations in so far as it impacts upon  the
    circumstances of the Appellant and indeed the family unit within  these
    proceedings.  In  so  far  as  those  representations  might  be  based
    completely or in part on the issue of returnability to Guinea, that  is
    a matter that can be properly explored by the Tribunal in  the  context
    of the instant appeal.


17.  I acknowledge that the Tribunal may have to consider and make  findings
    upon, amongst other things, [MK]'s  ability  to  secure  some  form  of
    identification or travel document that would enable him to enter either
    Guinea or the DRC. In so far as it may be suggested  that  there  is  a
    problem in respect of obtaining such documentation,  the  Tribunal  may
    need to engage with the question of whether that is a  problem  arising
    by reason of the intentional obstruction of [MK], or  for  some  reason
    beyond his control.


18.  Depending on the answer to this issue, it  may  then  be  necessary  to
    consider whether the system of immigration control of either the DRC or
    Guinea will, as a  matter  of  fact,  operate  to  prevent  the  family
    relocating to one country or the other as a unit.


19.  If it is concluded that it will not  be  possible  for  the  family  to
    relocate as a unit, the Tribunal will then need to consider whether the
    removal of the Appellant and  her  children  to  the  DRC  without  her
    partner - and their father - would in all of the circumstances  of  the
    case be disproportionate.


20.  In all the circumstances I make the following Directions:


          1) The appeal is to be relisted on the first available date after
             49 days from the date shown as the promulgation date  of  this
             document, with a time estimate of 3 hours.


          2) Within 28 days of the date shown as the promulgation  date  of
             this document both parties are:


             (i)  to use their best endeavours to file and serve copies  of
                  the decisions in [MK]'s appeals in 2009 and 2014;


             (ii) to file and serve any evidence upon which  they  seek  to
                  rely in relation to the issue of 'documenting' [MK]  as  a
                  citizen of Guinea.


          3) Further, within 28 days of the date shown as the  promulgation
             date of this document the Appellant is to file and  serve  any
             evidence relied upon in support of the claim that it would not
             be possible for the Appellant and/or  her  children  to  enter
             Guinea as the family members of [MK], or for [MK] to enter DRC
             as the family member of the Appellant and/or  their  children.
             Such evidence should  not  be  confined  to  the  relationship
             between  the   Appellant   and   [MK]   but   should   include
             consideration of the children's ability to enter Guinea as the
             children of a national (and indeed the possibility  that  they
             may have dual nationality), and the consequent implications in
             immigration terms for their  mother,  and  [MK]'s  ability  to
             enter  the  DRC  as  the  father  of  citizens  of   the   DRC
             irrespective of  the  status  of  his  relationship  with  the
             Appellant.


          4) In the event that the  evidence  suggests  that  there  is  an
             obstacle to entry to either or both the DRC or Guinea  on  the
             basis of being an unmarried partner, the Appellant  should  be
             prepared to address the Tribunal as to why she and [MK]  might
             not reasonably be expected to contract  a  civil  marriage  to
             preserve the integrity of the family unit.


          5) The parties are to file and serve any  further  evidence  upon
             which they wish to rely -  whether  in  response  to  evidence
             filed by the other party pursuant to the Directions  above  or
             otherwise - at least seven days prior to the relisted hearing.


Notice of Decision


21.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained errors of law and  is
    set aside.


22.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Page  with
    all issues at large.


23.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



Signed:  Date: 14 January 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
