
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
hu/16592/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre|  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25th July 2019                       |  On 8th August 2019                |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                       Padukkage Don Buddhika De Alwis
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs L Barton of Counsel, instructed by OTS
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Macintosh (the judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 26th March 2019.

 2. The Appellant is a Sri Lankan national born 2nd July 1985.  He appealed
    to the FtT against the Respondent's decision dated 1st August  2018  to
    refuse his application for indefinite leave to remain in the UK on  the
    basis of long residence and on the basis  of  his  private  life.   His
    application had been made on 21st February 2018.

 3. The judge set out the Appellant's immigration history at paragraphs 2 -
    9 noting that he had arrived in the UK on 18th October 2007 with  leave
    to enter as a student.

 4. The judge noted that in January 2012 he applied for leave to remain  as
    a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant and this application  was  granted  until
    30th August 2014.  On 29th August 2014 prior to expiry of his leave the
    Appellant submitted an application for further leave  to  remain  as  a
    Tier 4 Student, which application was granted  until  26th  June  2016.
    The Appellant's leave was then curtailed to  expire  on  22nd  December
    2015.  On 30th October 2015 he applied for leave to remain outside  the
    Immigration Rules  on  compassionate  grounds.   This  application  was
    refused on 4th February  2016.   The  judge  incorrectly  records  this
    refusal date as 4th February 2014.

 5. The Appellant then requested  a  judicial  review  but  permission  was
    refused.  On 16th June 2016 the Appellant applied for leave  to  remain
    relying  upon  Article  8  of  the  1950  European  Convention.    This
    application was refused and certified on 7th December  2016.   On  19th
    December 2016 the Appellant submitted further  submissions  which  were
    rejected on 24th January 2017.

 6. On 8th February 2017 the Appellant submitted an application for an  EEA
    residence  card  as  the  family  member  of  an  EEA  national.   This
    application was rejected on 15th September  2017.   On  26th  September
    2017 the Appellant made a further application for an EEA residence card
    which was rejected on 24th October 2017.  A further application for  an
    EEA residence card was made on 6th November 2017, again  as  a  non-EEA
    extended family member, which was refused on 8th February 2018.

 7. On 21st February 2018 the Appellant made an application for  indefinite
    leave to remain based on long residence.

 8. The Appellant's case before the  judge  was  that  he  lived  with  his
    brother and sister-in-law in the UK and  assisted  in  caring  for  his
    niece.  He claimed he had no family in  Sri  Lanka.   The  judge  heard
    evidence from the Appellant's brother and sister-in-law.  The sister-in-
    law is an Irish national living in the UK.

 9. The judge found at paragraph 32 that the Appellant had not proved  that
    he had ten years' continuous lawful residence in the UK.

10.  The  judge  then  considered  paragraph  276ADE  concluding  that  the
    Appellant could not satisfy any of the requirements contained  therein,
    and had not shown that there would  be  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration in Sri Lanka.

11. Having considered the  Immigration  Rules  the  judge  then  considered
    Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.  The judge found that the Appellant's
    removal from the UK would interfere with his private life  but  decided
    that there were no exceptional circumstances or compelling reasons, and
    therefore the Appellant's removal from the UK  would  be  proportionate
    and dismissed the appeal.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

12. Reliance was placed upon three grounds of appeal.

13. Firstly, it was contended the  judge  had  erred  at  paragraph  32  in
    providing inadequate reasons for concluding that the Appellant did  not
    satisfy the ten year long residence requirement.

14. Secondly, the judge had erred by failing to make any reference  to  the
    Appellant's niece when considering Article 8 of  the  1950  Convention.
    The judge had failed to consider the best interests of the child.

15. Thirdly, the judge had erred by failing to consider "paragraph  117  at
    all  in  the  determination  and  this  only  adds  to  the  fact   his
    consideration outside the rules is not  complete."   The  grounds  were
    drafted by the Appellant's solicitors who presumably meant to refer  to
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

16. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge P J M Hollingworth of the FtT
    in the following terms;

         "It is arguable that the judge has set out an insufficient analysis
         at paragraph 32 of the  decision  in  finding  that  the  Appellant
         failed to meet the ten year  requirement.   In  the  light  of  the
         evidence adduced it is arguable that  the  judge  has  set  out  an
         insufficient analysis in relation to the application of section 55.
          It is further arguable that the proportionality exercise has  been
         affected and that an insufficient analysis  has  been  set  out  in
         relation to applying the criteria pursuant to section 117."

17. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

My Analysis and Conclusions

18. The Appellant was represented at the hearing by Mrs Barton  who  relied
    and expanded upon the grounds  contained  within  the  application  for
    permission to  appeal.   Mr  McVeety,  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,
    accepted that the judge had erred in law by failing to  make  reference
    to section 117B, but  submitted  that  this  error  was  immaterial  as
    section 117B could not assist the Appellant's case.   It  was  also  an
    error to fail to  refer  to  the  Appellant's  niece  when  considering
    Article 8 but again  this  was  not  a  material  error,  as  the  only
    conclusion that could have been reached in relation to  the  niece  was
    that her best interests would be served by remaining with her parents.

19. Mr McVeety, in relation to the ten years' residence point  referred  to
    the recent Court of Appeal decision, the Queen (on the  application  of
    Masum Ahmed) [2019] EWCA Civ 1070 in  submitting  that  the  judge  was
    correct to find  that  the  Appellant  could  not  satisfy  ten  years'
    continuous lawful residence.

20. In relation to the first Ground of Appeal, I find that  the  judge  did
    not provide adequate reasoning in  paragraph  32  but  this  is  not  a
    material error.  The judge made a finding that  given  the  Appellant's
    immigration history he failed to meet the ten  year  requirement  under
    the Immigration Rules.  In my  view  that  is  a  correct  finding  but
    reasons should have been given.  The reasons are in fact to be found in
    the Respondent's refusal decision (unfortunately the paragraphs are not
    numbered) at page 5 in that the Appellant had  lawful  leave  from  his
    arrival in the United Kingdom on 18th October 2007 until  4th  February
    2016 when his application for leave to remain  outside  the  rules  was
    refused with no right of appeal.  That meant he had lawful residence of
    approximately eight years and three months.

21. Submissions had been made to the FtT that he had made repeated  further
    applications for leave within the time limit set out in the Home Office
    guidance, those applications having been made  within  28  days  or  14
    days.

22. The decision in Ahmed confirms the legal position  that  those  periods
    cannot be lawful leave to remain.  I refer in particular  to  paragraph
    15(4) of Ahmed which  specifically  confirms  disregarding  current  or
    previous short periods of overstaying does  not  convert  such  periods
    into periods of lawful leave to remain and it  is  also  stated  "still
    less are such periods to be disregarded when it  comes  to  considering
    whether  an  applicant  has  fulfilled  the  separate  requirement   of
    establishing ten years' continuous lawful residence under sub-paragraph
    (1)(a)."  For the  reasons  given,  the  judge's  error  in  not  fully
    explaining the finding, does not amount to a material error of law.

23. With reference to the second ground, as conceded by Mr McVeety, it  was
    an error not to make reference to  the  Appellant's  niece.   The  best
    interests of a child are a primary consideration.  This does  not  mean
    that the best interests of the child are a paramount  consideration  or
    the only consideration.  The best interests can be outweighed by  other
    considerations.

24. In this case,  based  upon  the  evidence  before  the  FtT,  the  only
    conclusion that the judge could have reached in relation  to  the  best
    interests of the Appellant's niece would be that she should remain with
    her parents.  The evidence did not indicate that the Appellant played a
    parental role.  The child is very young, having been born  in  November
    2017.  The Appellant is  her  uncle  not  her  parent.   There  was  no
    satisfactory evidence before the judge to indicate that a child of that
    age would be adversely affected if her  uncle  had  to  return  to  Sri
    Lanka.  Therefore the error in not making reference to  the  niece  was
    not material.

25. It was an error of law for the judge to fail to refer to  section  117B
    of the 2002 Act.  Section 117A(2) confirms that  when  considering  the
    public interest a Tribunal must have regard in  all  cases  to  section
    117B.

26. The error is not material because had the judge considered section 117B
    this could not  have  assisted  the  Appellant's  case.   Section  117B
    confirms that the maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
    the public interest.  On this point it is relevant that  the  Appellant
    cannot satisfy the Immigration Rules in order to be  granted  leave  to
    remain.

27. It is also provided that it is in the public  interest  that  a  person
    seeking  leave  to  remain  can  speak  English  and   is   financially
    independent.  The Appellant can  speak  English,  and  was  financially
    dependent upon his brother and sister-in-law,  not  the  state.   These
    factors are neutral in the balancing exercise.

28. It is provided that little weight should be attached to a private  life
    established when a  person  has  been  in  the  UK  with  a  precarious
    immigration status or without leave.  This  applies  to  the  Appellant
    because initially he had a precarious immigration status in that he had
    limited leave to remain.  Thereafter he remained without leave.

29. Section 117B(6) could not have assisted the Appellant because  he  does
    not have a parental relationship with a qualifying child.

30. Therefore had the judge considered section 117B, he would, in my  view,
    have been bound to find against the Appellant.

31.  In conclusion, although the decision of the FtT  discloses  errors  of
    law, the errors are not material and did not make a difference  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The FtT decision does not disclose material errors of law  and  is  not  set
aside.  The appeal is dismissed.

There has been no request for anonymity  and  I  see  no  need  to  make  an
anonymity order.


Signed                              Date 25th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 25th July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
