
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16420/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25th April 2019                     |On 15th May 2019                      |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                   m H H I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rehman, Mayfair Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction is made.  I consider it appropriate to do so as part
of the evidence in this matter relates to the Appellant's minor child.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, H.H.I., is a national of  Pakistan  born  31st  December
    1985.  He entered the UK on a Tier 4  Student  visa  on  11th  February
    2011.  Further leave was granted until 15th April 2015  but  in  August
    2014 his leave was curtailed and he became an overstayer.

 2. In December 2015, he met his British partner, U.S. They entered into  a
    religious marriage at the Manchester Central Mosque on 12th  May  2016.
    On 7th April 2017 their daughter H was born.  Following the birth of H,
    the Appellant applied to the Respondent for  leave  to  remain  as  the
    partner of a British citizen.  The Respondent refused that  application
    in a decision dated 26th July  2018.   The  main  grounds  for  refusal
    centred on the suitability requirements  under  both  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE to the Rules.

 3. Firstly the Respondent did not accept that the relationship  with  U.S.
    came within the Rules in that they had contracted an  Islamic  marriage
    only. (The  relationship  issue  now  appears  to  have  fallen  away).
    However the main thrust of  the  Respondent's  refusal  centred  on  an
    assertion that the Appellant had used deception  by  engaging  a  proxy
    text taker to complete a TOEIC test taken by him  on  3rd  April  2013.
    This formed the basis for the curtailment of leave dated August 2014.

 4. The Appellant appealed the refusal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Young-Harry) on the only ground available  to  him,  stating  that  the
    decision interfered with his Article 8 private/family life rights.  The
    FtTJ heard evidence from both the Appellant and U.S. He noted that  the
    evidence showed that the Appellant had established a family  life  with
    U.S.  and  their  child  and  that  article  8  was  engaged.  He  made
    sustainable findings that the Appellant had indeed  used  deception  by
    employing a proxy test taker for the TOEIC test on 3rd April 2013.  The
    FtTJ correctly noted that the Respondent's decision was silent  on  the
    financial requirements of the Rules  [14].  (Apparently  no  issue  was
    raised on this point).

 5. The FtTJ then turned his attention to the position of  H.  He  accepted
    that H is a qualifying child for the purposes of S.117B(6) of the  2002
    Act. In considering S.117B(6) the FtTJ said, in what appeared to  be  a
    cursory consideration only, the following:

         "... I find the appellant's child  is  a  qualifying  child  and  I
         accept  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
         relationship with her. I find, given the child  is  still  under  2
         years old, it would not be unreasonable for her to  leave  the  UK,
         under the care of both parents.  In all  the  circumstances,  given
         the appellant's willingness to  use  deception  in  an  attempt  to
         deceive  the  UK's  immigration  authorities,  I  find  the  public
         interest does require the appellant's removal."

 6. The FtTJ dismissed the appeal and the Appellant appealed to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. Permission was granted in the following terms:

         "It is arguable that the Judge did not give  adequate  reasons  for
         concluding that the Appellant's British spouse and child could live
         in Pakistan and, particularly,  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to
         expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.   The  decision  also
         appears to give no consideration to the Article  8  rights  of  the
         Appellant's spouse and  only  cursory  consideration  of  the  best
         interests of the child without reference to ZH (Tanzania).

         The  Judge  does,  however,   appear   to   have   given   adequate
         consideration  to  the  finding  of  fraud  in  relation   to   the
         Appellant's TOEIC test bearing in mind the shift in burden of proof
         specified in Shehzad and Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615."

Onward Appeal

 7. By a decision promulgated on 29th March 2019 I  set  aside  the  FtTJ's
    decision.  My reasons for doing so were  set  out  in  my  decision  as
    follows:

         "10. Before me Mr Rehman appeared on behalf of  the  Appellant  and
         Miss Cunha for the Respondent.  At the outset of the hearing,  Miss
         Cunha accepted that the FtTJ had failed to give proper reasons  for
         his finding that it would not be unreasonable for  the  Appellant's
         child to leave the UK  with  her  parents.   In  this  respect  she
         accepted that the proper course would be for the decision to be set
         aside and for it to be remade at a further hearing.

         11. Following that concession  by  Miss  Cunha,  I  heard  from  Mr
         Rehman. I indicated to him that I was satisfied that the concession
         made by Miss Cunha was a proper one requiring the  decision  to  be
         set aside.  I also indicated my preliminary view that,  so  far  as
         the TOEIC fraud was concerned and looking at the  grounds  and  the
         FtTJ's decision, I could see no good reason to disturb the  judge's
         findings regarding his assessment of the issue of the TOEIC  fraud.
         Those findings are fully reasoned and sustainable.  The  judge  has
         properly applied the  shifting  burden  of  proof  as  set  out  in
         Shehzad.  Mr Rehman had  nothing  further  to  add  other  than  to
         address me on disposal.

         12. I discussed with  the  representatives  the  disposal  of  this
         matter. In view of the lack of findings made by  the  FtTJ,  I  was
         satisfied that it will be necessary to hear short evidence from the
         Appellant and his partner.  The Appellant requires an  interpreter.
         Ms Cunha was of the view that this matter should be retained in the
         Upper Tribunal because the issues had been narrowed down from those
         originally heard.  Mr Rehman tended towards a hearing in the First-
         tier Tribunal.

         13. My initial view was that this was  a  matter  which  should  be
         returned to the First-tier  Tribunal.   However  on  reflection,  I
         agree that Miss Cunha was correct to say  that  this  is  a  matter
         which should more appropriately be retained in the Upper  Tribunal.
         I come to this decision in consideration of my view that  there  is
         no good reason to disturb the judge's findings regarding the  TOEIC
         issue.  I find that the matters  upon  which  the  FtTJ  has  erred
         materially in law are in failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  with
         regard to the S.117B(6) "reasonableness test"  in  respect  of  the
         Appellant's child and failing to make proper findings in respect of
         the Article 8 rights of the Appellant's spouse.  Thus  the  resumed
         hearing will deal with the issues.

         14. The remaking of the decision  will  take  place  in  the  Upper
         Tribunal before me on a date to be fixed.  Both the  Appellant  and
         his partner should attend the re-hearing in  order  to  give  short
         evidence and to  give  the  Respondent  the  opportunity  to  cross
         examine them.  The findings made by the FtT on  the  assessment  of
         the TOEIC fraud are  preserved.  In  preparation  for  the  resumed
         hearing, the parties should focus on the Article 8  rights  of  the
         Appellant's spouse and child, in particular S.117B(6) of  the  2002
         Act."

Resumed Hearing on 25th April 2019

 8. Before me Mr Rehman appeared for the Appellant and Mr  Walker  for  the
    Respondent. The Appellant and U.S. both attended.  Both representatives
    drew attention to two decisions which had been  handed  down  following
    the hearing before me on 13th March 2019.  It  was  agreed,  that  both
    decisions are material to the matter before me; the first in the  Upper
    Tribunal JG (s117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT  72
    (IAC) and the second AB (Jamaica) and Another [2019] EWCA Civ 661.

 9. Additionally the following documents  were  served  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant:

      1)  a witness statement signed by the Appellant (but undated); and

      2) a witness statement from U.S. signed  but  also  undated.   In  the
         event Mr Walker accepted that  there  was  no  challenge  to  these
         statements and they therefore stand as evidence.

Discussion

10. Mr Rehman in his submissions drew attention particularly to  paras.  58
    and 59 of AB (Jamaica).  It  is  accepted  that  the  Appellant  has  a
    subsisting and genuine relationship with H, who as a  British  citizen,
    is a qualifying child for the purposes of  S117B(6).   He  pointed  out
    that the Appellant's wife U.S. is presently pregnant with their  second
    child.  U.S. confirms that H is in a deep-rooted relationship with  her
    father.  It was also confirmed by both the Appellant and  his  partner,
    that any removal of the family as a whole to Pakistan  would  place  an
    unreasonable strain on their relationship, not least because of  U.S.'s
    fear of her grandparents who had made threats against the Appellant  as
    they did not approve of the marriage.  There would  be  problems  of  a
    financial nature, issues of where they would  live,  and  language  and
    health difficulties.  These difficulties would undoubtedly  impact  not
    only on the relationship between the Appellant and U.S. but  also  upon
    H.  It would not be in H's best interests to relocate to Pakistan  with
    her parents.

11. Mr Walker accepted that there is  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship between the Appellant and H.  There was  no  challenge  to
    the evidence in the form of  the  witness  statements  which  has  been
    submitted on behalf of the Appellant.  He accepted that AB (Jamaica) is
    authority  for  saying  that  absent  deportation  considerations   the
    "reasonableness test" is solely a child focused one.

12. At the end of submissions, I announced my decision that I was satisfied
    that the Respondent's decision refusing him leave to remain in the  UK,
    was contrary to the Appellant's Article 8 family/private life.   I  now
    give my reasons for this decision.

Consideration

13. It is  accepted  that  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with his daughter H, who is a British citizen.  It is also
    accepted that the Appellant, albeit that he has been found to engage in
    deception by using a proxy test-taker in the TOEIC test, is not  liable
    to deportation. Thus the question before me is simply, is it reasonable
    to expect H to leave the UK?  In assessing that question  I  must  take
    into account as a starting point H's  best  interests.  (ZH  (Tanzania)
    [2011] UKSC 4 and MA (Pakistan) & Ors [2016] EWCA Civ 705).  I have  no
    hesitation in finding that H's best interests require her to remain  in
    the UK, by a wide margin.  Although she is of  a  young  age  (3  years
    now), she is a British citizen.  She was born in  the  UK  as  was  her
    mother.  She has resided in the UK, nowhere  else,  together  with  her
    parents and members of her wider family including her grandmother.  The
    evidence from her parents, which has been accepted, is that her  father
    has a close loving relationship with her.

14. The Appellant's evidence is that he has no job to return to in Pakistan
    and thus there
    would be financial constraints which would necessarily have  an  impact
    upon H.  Her mother reports that  she  fears  that  H  would  lose  the
    cultural  advantages  to  which  she  is  entitled,  namely  a  British
    education, language and the presence of appropriate medical facilities.

15. In KO (Nigeria) the Supreme Court made it clear that it is relevant  to
    consider where the parents are expected to be since it will normally be
    reasonable for the child  to  be  with  them.   This  brings  into  the
    equation the question of whether it  can  be  properly  said  that  H's
    mother, a British citizen, should be expected to follow  the  Appellant
    to Pakistan.  In answering that question, it is  relevant  to  consider
    the "real world" in which H and her parents find themselves.  In JG the
    Upper Tribunal carefully considered KO  (Nigeria)  and  concluded  that
    Section 117B(6) requires a Tribunal to hypothesise that  the  child  in
    question would leave the United Kingdom, even if this is not likely  to
    be the case, and ask whether it would be reasonable to expect her to do
    so.

16. In the present case, H's mother is a British citizen having  been  born
    here and lived all her life here. She is clearly unwilling to  relocate
    to  Pakistan  with  the  Appellant  and  her  reasons  for   this   are
    understandable.  She is presently pregnant with her second child.   She
    suffers from asthma and fears that the dust and  heat  will  exacerbate
    her condition.  Importantly she has a fear that  if  she  relocates  to
    Pakistan, she and her husband will  be  harassed  by  her  grandparents
    because her relationship formed with the Appellant is  unacceptable  to
    them.

17. I find that the question of whether it would be reasonable to expect  H
    to leave the United Kingdom must be viewed not only in the  context  of
    her mother's unwillingness to follow the Appellant to Pakistan but also
    by following the approach set out in AB (Jamaica). The position is that
    in  an  appeal  where  Section  117B(6)  is  argued,  the  concept   of
    reasonableness does not include a  consideration  of  the  conduct  and
    immigration history of the parents as part of an  overall  analysis  of
    the public interest, as set out in [58 -59] and reproduced below:
    1. Subsequently, the  series  of  cases  known  in  this  Court  as MA
       (Pakistan) became KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
       Department [2018] UKSC 53; [2018] 1 WLR 5273 in the Supreme Court.
       That Court held that the approach taken by  this  Court  in  the MM
       (Uganda) case was wrong. The Supreme Court  endorsed  the  approach
       which Elias LJ would have taken at para. 36 of his judgment  if  the
       matter had been free from authority: see para. 17 in the judgment of
       Lord Carnwath JSC; and generally the discussion by Lord Carnwath  at
       paras. 12-19. It is clear that the approach taken by Laws LJ  in MM
       (Uganda), referred to by Lord Carnwath at paras. 26 and  31  of  his
       judgment, was considered by him to be wrong: see  para.  32  in  the
       judgment of Lord Carnwath.
    1. Accordingly, the position has now been reached in which  this  Court
       is not only free to depart from the approach taken by Laws LJ in MM
       (Uganda) but indeed is required to do so in  order  to  follow  the
       binding decision of the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria). That can  be
       done  by  following  the  preferred  approach  of  Elias  LJ  in MA
       (Pakistan), at para. 36, where he said:
       "Looking at section 117B(6) free from authority, I would favour  the
       argument of the appellants. The focus on paragraph (b) is solely  on
       the child and I see no justification  for  reading  the  concept  of
       reasonableness so as to include a consideration of the  conduct  and
       immigration history of the parents as part of an overall analysis of
       the public interest. I do not deny that  this  may  result  in  some
       cases in undeserving applicants being allowed to remain, but that is
       not in my view a reason for distorting the language of the  section.
       Moreover, in an appropriate case the Secretary of State could render
       someone liable to deportation, and thereby render him ineligible  to
       rely on this provision, by certifying that his or her presence would
       not be conducive to the public good."

18. Thus the public interest in maintaining immigration control falls away.
     Therefore, drawing all these strands together, I find  that  it  would
    not be reasonable to expect H to relocate with her parents to Pakistan.



19. It follows that  the  Appellants  meets  the  requirements  of  Section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act.   I  therefore  allow  the  Appellant's  human
    rights appeal.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision promulgated on 13th December  2018  is  set
aside.  I remake the decision  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  human
rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     11 May 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although I have allowed this appeal, I make no fee  award.   No  application
was made for a fee award. I formed the view in any event that  a  fee  award
would not be appropriate in this case.





Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     11 May 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts




