
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16284/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 September 2019                 |On 9 October 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                               emal Shahsawar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                       (by an Entry Clearance Officer)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Nawaz, Legal Representative from Crown Gate
                    Law, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appeal of the appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State refusing him entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom
    as a husband. The First-tier Tribunal Judge recognised  that  the  main
    issue on the facts of this case was whether the Appellant  did  satisfy
    the immigration rules as that would illuminate the  balancing  exercise
    under article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights. I  am  able
    to give an extempore judgment now because I have had the opportunity of
    considering the papers rather carefully before I came into the  hearing
    room,  and,  although  it  is  not  a  decision  which  gives  me   any
    satisfaction, it is at least a decision I  can  make  quickly  so  that
    appropriate advice could be given.

 2. The appellant's case is entirely straightforward.  He is married  to  a
    British citizen; he wants to travel to the United Kingdom to  join  her
    and he says that he satisfies the requirements of the Rules.  The Entry
    Clearance Officer did not agree.  The Entry Clearance Officer  did  not
    agree because he was not satisfied with the evidence about  the  income
    earned by the appellant's wife.  In order to satisfy  the  requirements
    of the Rules she depended on two jobs.   Her  main  employment  is  not
    being doubted at all.  She worked as a care home assistant of some kind
    and said she supplemented that income with a part-time job.

 3. The evidence that she had a part-time job was not believed by the Entry
    Clearance Officer.  I  say  immediately  that  I  have  concerns  about
    aspects of that decision.  The decision was based on an interview  with
    the appellant and her sponsor and the alleged employer but the  sponsor
    says that she was working as a care  home  assistant  and  it  was  not
    convenient to discuss things with the Entry Clearance Officer when  she
    was telephoned and that her employer was driving when he was  contacted
    and was not in a position to attend to detailed questions.   I  do  not
    know if these claims are well founded but they certainly might be, and,
    if they are, then it seems  to  me  very  undesirable  that  the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer  continued  with  the  interview.   What  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer should have done is to have arranged a time that  was
    convenient to be interviewed. If the Entry Clearance Officer telephoned
    at a time that was said to have been convenient but was told it was not
    convenient when contact was made at the arranged  time  then  it  might
    have been appropriate to draw  adverse  inferences.  However,  just  to
    telephone someone at a time convenient to the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    and to assume it was convenient to the person being interviewed,  seems
    to me less than satisfactory.

 4. Mr Nawaz for the appellant was very critical of this  approach  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer and I see much merit in the  criticism  but  it
    does not help him today because it is not something  that  particularly
    bothered the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Judge was dealing with  an
    appeal and the judge noted, entirely correctly, that a main reason  for
    refusal was that the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that the
    employment was genuine.  It was therefore incumbent upon the  appellant
    to get the case in order and prove that the employment was genuine  and
    that is what he failed to do. The interview records were not given much
    weight.

 5. This is a slightly unusual case in that the  minimal  requirements  set
    out in the guidance about what has to be proved is all present.   There
    is documentary evidence that there is a regular income paid into a bank
    account, precisely as the Rules require.  However I  strongly  disagree
    with Mr Nawaz's submission that that was sufficient, it is not.  It  is
    an irreducible minimum and if it is not done rule  are  not  satisfied.
    In order to succeed it is still necessary to prove that the  employment
    is genuine and the Judge was not satisfied that it  was  genuine.   The
    judge gives reasons.  They are particularly set out  in  paragraphs  16
    and 17 of the Decision and Reasons.  A main problem is that the written
    terms of employment were vague.   Of  course  it  could  be  that  that
    reflects the fact that the employer is not very sophisticated  but  the
    employer is a director of a limited company and it would  be  wrong  to
    regard these things as being of no consequence whatsoever.

 6. There are aspects of the employment which  do  not  sound  right.   The
    sponsor was said to work occasionally from her own home, sometimes from
    her  employer's  home,  which  was  the  administrative  centre  for  a
    transport company that made use  of  yard  in  West  Bromwich.   It  is
    possible that the business office is well away  from  the  lorry  yard.
    That claim is capable of being right but might not be entirely usual in
    the transport industry.  There was nothing  in  the  written  terms  of
    employment that indicated when the Sponsor was required to  work,  what
    her holidays were or how much she was paid.   These  are  all  striking
    omissions.  Neither is there anything that I can see that explains  how
    her duties were discharged when  the  Sponsor  was  not  present.   Her
    employment was  part-time,  her  hours,  on  her  own  account,  varied
    considerably and it is hard to see precisely what  she  did.   She  has
    given an explanation but it was not accepted by the judge.

 7. The judge also looked at the evidence from the  employer.   Of  course,
    nobody has to give evidence before the Tribunal and cases  have  to  be
    decided on the evidence that is there, not the evidence  that  is  not,
    but the judge did comment adversely on the absence of the employer who,
    instead of attending, had written something  described  as  an  undated
    letter that I have read carefully with the assistance of the advocates.
     It is in the nature of a testimonial.  It does not deal in any  detail
    at all about precisely what the sponsor did, how she fitted in with the
    company and the nature of her work.

 8. The judge said at paragraph 18 of his decision:-

         "Given  the  observations  above  I  find  that  the  evidence   is
         inadequate to discharge the burden of proof and I find that it  has
         not been shown that the claimed employment with Maks Services  (UK)
         Ltd is genuine".

 9. That is a decision that was open to the judge.  I have reflected  again
    on this because I do realise the importance of  this  decision  to  the
    appellant and his wife, who I assume is the woman sitting in  front  of
    me, and I do realise how horrible this decision is if  in  fact  it  is
    wrong.  It may be that the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal could have
    been decided differently on the evidence that was given but  the  judge
    heard the evidence, considered the evidence  and  has  reached  a  view
    which I find to be wholly without legal error.   It  follows  therefore
    that I dismiss this appeal.

10. The appellant no doubt will be given appropriate advice  about  further
    appeals.  It does also seem to me that a  fresh  application  might  be
    possible.  The Entry Clearance Officer in  that  event  would  have  to
    reflect carefully on the criticisms I have  made  of  the  reasons  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's decision about the employment evidence  being
    unsatisfactory, but that is not a matter before me now.



    Notice of Decision

11. I dismiss the appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's decision.






|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 7 October 2019                 |



