
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/16027/2018
                                                               hu/16036/2018
                                                               hu/16040/2018
                                                               hu/16042/2018
                                                               hu/16045/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On February 5, 2019                         |On February 26, 2019          |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                Batbayar [B]
                               Erdenetuya [B]
                                    [D B]
                                   [T1 B]
                                   [T2 B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms Thomas, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. On September 9, 2004  the  first-named  appellant  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on a student visa which gave him leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom until July 31, 2005.  That leave was subsequently  extended  in
    the same category until March 31, 2007.  Two subsequent applications to
    extend his leave were rejected on April 17, and May 21, 2007.  He  then
    made an application as an extended family member of an EEA national  on
    August 14, 2009 and he was issued with a residence card allowing him to
    remain in the United Kingdom until  August  21,  2014  as  long  as  he
    remained an extended family member of an EEA  national.   The  evidence
    suggests that that relationship broke down.

 2. On July 5, 2007 the second-named appellant entered the  United  Kingdom
    as a student with  leave  until  November  25,  2007.   Her  leave  was
    subsequently extended until August 4, 2010 and since that date she  has
    resided here without leave.

 3. The remaining appellants are the children of the first and second-named
    appellants and were each born in the United Kingdom.  Their  respective
    dates of birth are November 15, 2009, March 24, 2014 and May 18,  2016.



 4. Applications for leave to remain  on  family/private  life  grounds  in
    respect of the first four appellants were rejected  on  both  June  25,
    2015 and February 17, 2016.  All the appellants have an application for
    leave to remain rejected on July 5, 2017.  The appellants  then  lodged
    applications to remain on March 22, 2018 but these were all refused  by
    the respondent  on  July  17,  2018.   The  appellants  appealed  those
    decisions on July 23, 2018 and their appeals came before Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Maxwell on November  9,  2018  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on November 19, 2018 he dismissed all their appeals.

 5. Grounds of appeal were lodged on November 22, 2018  and  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Keane granted permission to  appeal  finding  there
    were arguable errors of law and referred specifically to  the  question
    of whether the Judge had applied too high a test  and  for  failing  to
    have regard to Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

 6. No anonymity direction is made.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Turning to the submissions.  Ms  Thomas  did  not  draft  the  original
    grounds of  appeals  but  summarised  the  grounds  of  appeal  on  the
    following basis.  She submitted that the Judge had, in paragraph 41  of
    the decision, applied too high a  test  and  that  the  judge  had  not
    separated the assessment of the best interest of the children from  the
    proportionality assessment which was required in line with the case  of
    KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.   In  expanding  upon  those  grounds  she
    argued that there was no  evidence  of  criminality  or  evidence  that
    either parent was subject to deportation and consequently by  referring
    to "unjustly harsh" the Judge had applied the test set out  in  Section
    117C of the 2002 Act and such a test was reserved for persons who had a
    criminal history.  The second issue raised related to his  approach  to
    the best interest of the children and  in  particular  the  third-named
    appellant.  She invited the Tribunal to find that the Judge had imposed
    his own opinion on whether the children would  be  able  to  undergo  a
    transition if required to go back to Mongolia and had failed to  attach
    sufficient weight to the report that had been provided by  Ms  Redfern.
    In  assessing  what  education  was  available  for  the  children  she
    submitted that the report, contained at page  309  of  the  appellant's
    bundle.  The Judge did not attach  sufficient  weight  to  the  medical
    condition of  the  third-named  appellant  who  had  been  admitted  to
    hospital on an emergency basis as evidenced by the discharge form  that
    was found in the appellant's bundle.  Whilst  accepting  there  was  no
    evidence by way of medical records of a follow up she  submitted  there
    was evidence that an inhaler was used and there was objective  evidence
    describing pollution issues in Mongolia.  Her general criticism of  the
    best  interest  assessment  was  that  it  had  not   been   undertaken
    independently of the overall assessment that the Judge had carried out.



 8. Mr McVeety opposed the application and argued that the  permission  had
    been wrongly given, in his  view,  as  the  Judge  granting  permission
    referred to the test  of  unduly  harsh  whereas  the  Judge  had  been
    describing the situation as unjustly harsh  and  this  should  be  read
    alongside the earlier conclusion and finding in paragraph 19  when  the
    Judge made a finding that the appellants had produced  little  evidence
    to support the claim it would be unreasonable to expect them to  return
    to Mongolia.  He argued that the Judge  from  the  outset  acknowledged
    that the best interests of the children  was  a  primary  consideration
    rather than a paramount consideration and from paragraph 18 onwards the
    Judge had considered whether it would be unreasonable  to  require  the
    children to return.  He maintained that the report of  Ms  Redfern  was
    generalised and that the Judge was entitled to reach the findings  that
    he did in paragraph 18 of his decision.  With regard to  the  issue  of
    education he made the point that  the  article  referred  to  concerned
    children under the age of 5 whereas the eldest child was over  the  age
    of 5.  He submitted that the Judge had  followed  the  guidance  in  KO
    correctly and had ultimately applied a real world scenario.  He pointed
    to the fact that the Judge had considered the  first-named  appellant's
    immigration  history  and  had  made   findings   regarding   his   EEA
    relationship.  Finally, with regard to the issue of asthma he submitted
    this was a common medical condition and there was no evidence that  the
    child could not receive treatment in Mongolia.

    FINDINGS

 9. This is an  appeal  on  behalf  of  all  the  appellants  who  made  an
    application for leave to remain.  There is no dispute that neither  the
    first-named appellant nor the second-named  appellant  had  any  lawful
    leave at the date of application.  It is also accepted that  all  three
    children were born in the United Kingdom.  None of  the  children  have
    any leave to remain.

10. This is a human rights appeal and the Judge  had  before  him  a  large
    bundle of  documents  which  he  clearly  had  engaged  with.   At  the
    commencement of his findings  the  Judge  addressed  the  circumstances
    regarding the first-named appellant's relationship which existed before
    his relationship  with  the  second-named  appellant.   The  Judge  was
    entitled to take those factors into account  but  for  reasons  I  will
    hereafter give the Judge rejected their human rights appeals because he
    found it would not be unreasonable to require the children to accompany
    their parents back to Mongolia.

11. At paragraph 17 the Judge acknowledged that the parents  would  have  a
    private life as they had a circle  of  friends  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom, who were supporting them, but the Judge also noted  that  they
    had maintained contact with their family in Mongolia.

12. From paragraph 18 onwards the Judge  considered  the  position  of  the
    children.  I received submissions from both representatives in relation
    to the report that had been prepared by Ms  Redfern.   That  report  is
    found on  pages  43  to  57  of  the  appellant's  bundle.   The  Judge
    considered this report. Ms Thomas takes issue with those findings.

13. The Judge  noted  that  the  assessment  was  based  on  one  two  hour
    assessment and within the report  the  author  summarised  the  current
    circumstances of the parties and then at  paragraph  5  of  the  report
    discussed the effect and impact on the family were they to be  removed.
    Ms Redfern considered what was  available  in  Mongolia  and  gave  her
    opinion.

14. The Judge engaged with this report and ultimately  concluded  that  the
    report merely highlighted the obvious point that moving children  to  a
    country which had a different culture and language could be disruptive.
     His finding that the  "other  obvious  fact  that  most  children  who
    undergo such a transition do  so  successfully"  is  challenged  by  Ms
    Redfern on the basis that it was not within the Judge's remit  to  make
    such a finding.  I disagree with that submission.

15. The Judge was entitled to  consider  all  the  evidence  and  concluded
    requiring the children to go to a  foreign  country  was  a  reasonable
    requirement.

16.  Mr  McVeety  submitted  that  children  in  foreign  countries   often
    accompanied their parents to the United Kingdom or  any  other  foreign
    country and adjusted to their new surroundings.  The same could be said
    to a scenario where children are required to go back to their  parents'
    place of birth.  I therefore find nothing wrong  with  the  phraseology
    used by the Judge in that report.

17. Moving on to the substantial part of the decision I find that the Judge
    did consider the issues  relating  to  the  children  separately  to  a
    general assessment.  Any reading of paragraphs 18  to  23  demonstrates
    this.

18. The Judge considered  the  issue  of  education,  the  child's  medical
    condition and ultimately concluded that the best interests of the child
    (third-named  appellant)  would  be  for  the  family  unit  to  remain
    together.  The issue that he had to decide would be whether that should
    be in the United Kingdom or in Mongolia.

19. Ms Thomas  challenges  the  approach  in  respect  of  the  third-named
    appellant and in particular  how  the  Judge  dealt  with  the  medical
    condition of asthma.  There was limited evidence in the  bundle  before
    the Judge.

20. The hospital document referred to the fact  that  the  child  had  been
    taken to hospital due to problems with asthma.   At  page  280  of  the
    report there is a reference to the child having been discharged with  a
    request for a follow up but there was no evidence in the bundle of  any
    such follow up.  The assessment on admission was that the child had had
    a one day history of nocturnal cough and an increased  difficulty  with
    breathing.  There was an earlier episode in 2017 which had been treated
    without the necessity of being admitted to hospital.

21. I was referred to issues of pollution but there was no evidence  before
    me that supported Ms Thomas' submission that sufferers of  asthma  were
    unable to access medical treatment such as inhalers even  in  Mongolia.
    There was also no evidence  before  the  Judge  that  asthma  prevented
    people from living in Mongolia.  The Judge therefore took into  account
    the poor air quality but made the obvious  point  that  the  appellants
    could live in an area which was "less polluted".

22. With regard to the issue of schooling this was addressed from paragraph
    21 and  whilst  I  accept  children  under  the  ages  of  5  may  have
    difficulties getting into their chosen school the  fact  remained  that
    there was schooling available for such infants regardless of  what  the
    cost was.  There were public and private schools available.

23. Having considered the children's situation the Judge  reminded  himself
    that Section 55 had to be at the forefront of  his  mind  and  that  is
    exactly what he stated at paragraph 23.

24. Thereafter the Judge  turned  to  the  proportionality  assessment  and
    correctly set out the recent Supreme  Court  decision  in  KO.   Having
    identified the relevant law the Judge went on to apply the law  to  the
    appellants' circumstances from paragraph 31 of his decision.

25. This was a decision in which the Judge took account of all the  factors
    put forward on behalf of the family and he noted at  paragraph  32  the
    physical health of the third-named appellant and potential exposure  to
    significant air pollution.  However, referring to his earlier  findings
    he concluded that it would not be unreasonable  to  expect  the  third-
    named appellant to leave the  United  Kingdom  with  the  other  family
    members.

26. Contrary to how the grounds of appeal are drafted, the Judge  did  have
    regard to Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act and he carried out  a  Razgar
    assessment of the evidence including reference to Section 117B factors.



27. Having identified that neither parent had any legal right to be in this
    country he concluded that for the  purposes  of  maintaining  effective
    immigration control it would be proportionate to remove the appellants.



28. Having considered the Judge's decision  and  the  submissions  advanced
    today I find the Judge made findings open to him and do not find  there
    has been an error in law.

29. For these reasons I dismiss these appeals.

Notice of Decision

I dismiss the appeals and uphold the original decision.


Signed                              Date 21 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 21 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



