
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/16722/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th October 2019                 |On 24th October 2019                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                Abubakar [F]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jafferji of Counsel, instructed by Mayfair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                     Determination DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 23rd February 1993.   He
    entered the United Kingdom in April 2011 as a student and had leave  to
    remain on that basis until such leave was curtailed  with  effect  from
    31st August 2014 on the basis that he had submitted a TOEIC certificate
    which was found to be false.

2.   Notwithstanding the curtailment of  leave  the  appellant  married  his
    wife on 23rd August 2014.  Further applications for  leave  to  remain
    were submitted but were refused.  Indeed the appellant absconded on one
    occasion and was only encountered in October 2017 during an enforcement
    visit.

3.   On 14th November 2017 the appellant made an application  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of family life with  his  wife  Sofhia  [D]and  his
    child [EA] born on 22nd May 2017.

4.   The application was refused by the respondent  on  27th  November  2017
    and an appeal against the  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    dismissed on  1st  May  2018.   The  appellant's  appeal  against  that
    decision was successful and in a decision by  the  Upper  Tribunal  the
    matter was sent back to the First-tier Tribunal to  rehear  the  matter
    with a particular focus in these terms:-

         "It was still incumbent  upon  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to
         consider the appeal in light of the  respondent's  policy  and  the
         related jurisprudence.  The position as set out in  those  policies
         is that very strong reasons are required to  expect  the  child  to
         leave., thus the task for the Judge was to balance  the  fact  that
         the appellant had used  deception  in  his  English  language  test
         against the best interests of the child and the  reasonableness  of
         expecting him to leave.  This was not done and it is required to be
         done".

5.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge acknowledged that matter in  paragraph  2
    of the determination and proceeded to consider a number of  aspects  in
    the matter, concluding that the  appellant,  his  wife  and  son  could
    return to Pakistan and establish a life there.

6.   The appellant sought to appeal against that  decision  on  the  grounds
    that the jurisprudence had not been followed and that the focus of  the
    matter, which had been highlighted by the Upper Tribunal, had  in  fact
    not been followed.  Leave to challenge the  decision  was  granted  and
    thus the matter comes before me to determine the issues.

7.   A matter of considerable importance, as acknowledged by Mr  McVeety  on
    behalf of the respondents, was the decision letter  itself  dated  27th
    November 2017.  It is  perhaps  a  decision  letter  that  is  somewhat
    difficult to understand as to its logic.

8.   In terms of eligibility and EX.1.(a) the following was stated

         "EX.1.(a) applies in your case because you have  provided  evidence
         that you are the father to  [EA].   You  have  provided  sufficient
         evidence  that  you  have  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
         relationship with this child and it would be unreasonable to expect
         this child to leave the United Kingdom and to give  up  all  rights
         afforded to him as a British citizen."

    On the face of it, it is argued that that  particular  statement  fully
    engages with Section 117B(6) such as  to  call  into  question  whether
    removal is proportionate in the interests of immigration control.

9.   That passage is described as a  concession  and  Mr  McVeety  does  not
    resile from that position.

10.  The matter  is  made  worse  by  the  consideration  under  exceptional
    circumstances  in  which  the  following   paragraph   is   contained:-



         "We have considered, under paragraph  GEN.3.2  of  Appendix  FM  as
         applicable, whether there are  exceptional  circumstances  in  your
         case which would render refusal a breach of Article 8 of  the  ECHR
         because it would result in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for
         you, your partner, relevant child  or  other  family  members.   In
         doing so we have taken into  account,  under  paragraph  GN.3.3  of
         Appendix FM the best interests of any relevant child as  a  primary
         consideration."  In terms of that matter, although  the  letter  of
         decision seemingly saw  nothing  unreasonable  in  the  appellant's
         partner and child returning to Pakistan, it was stated as follows:-



             'In view of above facts, though it is accepted that  it  would
             be deemed unjustifiably harsh  to  expect  you  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom, the SSHD is satisfied that as  you  sought  to
             obtain leave to remain by  deception,  your  presence  in  the
             United Kingdom is not conducive to  the  public  good  because
             your conduct makes it  undesirable  to  allow  you  to  remain
             here'".

11.  That contention stands in strange contrast as I have indicated  to  the
    letter read as a whole but Mr McVeety indicates that he is at a loss to
    understand why that phrase is expressed as it is.   Clearly  if  it  is
    unjustifiably harsh to expect  the  appellant  to  leave,  then  it  is
    surprising that there is a suggestion that he does so.

12.  What is clear from the authorities is that having  British  citizenship
    is a very important consideration in the overall  determination  as  to
    whether it is reasonable for the child to relocate.  Although the Judge
    acknowledged that the child  is  British  as  his  mother  is  British,
    nevertheless the Judge went on in paragraph 8(vi) to consider that  the
    appellant could also adopt Pakistani nationality and thereby live  with
    ease in Pakistan.  It is said that that is to obscure the importance of
    the element of citizenship.

13.  In summary Mr Jafferji relies  upon  the  skeleton  argument  that  was
    submitted, contending that the Judge has misapplied  the  jurisprudence
    in respect of Section 117(B)(6) and generally, such that  the  decision
    should not be upheld.  Mr McVeety most fairly agrees that the  decision
    as expressed in its current form does  not  engage  properly  with  the
    issue to which the Tribunal was directed to apply its mind by the Upper
    Tribunal.   I agree.

14.  In those circumstances it is perhaps unnecessary  to  go  further  into
    the errors of law or approach.  They are in any event helpfully set out
    in the grounds of appeal.

15.  Thus it is appropriate for  me  to  uphold  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   It
    will therefore be necessary for that decision to be remade.

16.  All parties agreed that the appropriate forum was the  Upper  Tribunal,
    in that the issue was a narrow one and that all relevant  evidence  and
    submissions have been made.

17.  Mr Jafferji invited me to  consider  the  matter  on  the  evidence  as
    presented and to remake the decision.  Mr McVeety agreed.

18.  It is said that few if any statutory provisions of  recent  years  have
    been subject to more judicial analysis than those contained in part  5A
    (Article  8  of  the  ECHR:  public  interest  considerations)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The primary focus in the
    present appeal is Section 117B(6) which provides:-

         '(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where  -



             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child; and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.'

19.  It was how that reasonableness falls to be assessed which has been  the
    subject of a number of significant judgments.  Such was  considered  in
    the case of  MM  (Uganda)  v  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 450.

20.  It was held in the case of PD and Others v the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC) that it would  be  absurd  to
    consider  the  child's  position  entirely  independently  of,  and  in
    isolation from, the position of the parents given that the child's best
    interests will usually require that he or she  lives  as  part  of  the
    family unit.  I recognise however that the focus on the family did  not
    sit happily with the language of Section 117B(6).

21.  In EV (Philippines) v the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874  at  paragraph  58  the  following  was  set  out:-



         "In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of
         the children must be made on the basis the facts are as they are in
         the real world.  If one parent has no  right  to  remain,  but  the
         other parent  does,  that  is  the  background  against  which  the
         assessment is conducted.   If  neither  parent  has  the  right  to
         remain, then that is the background against which the assessment is
         conducted.  Whilst the ultimate question will be, is it  reasonable
         to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to remain in
         the country of origin".

22.  The matter was further considered by the Supreme Court in KO  (Nigeria)
    and Others v the Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC
    53.  The matter was further considered by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  JG
    (s117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 0072 (IAC).

23.  It was noted in respect of KO Nigeria as follows:-

         "The first thing to note is that there is nothing in  the  judgment
         that overturns  the  conclusion  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MA
         (Pakistan) regarding the freestanding nature of Section 117B(6), in
         the sense that where the application of that provision  results  in
         the public  interest  not  requiring  the  removal  of  the  person
         concerned, he or she must succeed under Article 8 on the basis that
         the proportionality balance contains nothing on  the  Secretary  of
         State's side of the scales.  The words 'the  public  interest  does
         not require the person's removal' mean what they say".

24.  JG was much concerned with the scope of the  "reasonableness"  that  is
    demanded by Section 117B(6).

25.  The Upper Tribunal also cited the judgment of Lord Carnwath set out  in
    KO, in particular paragraph 22 thereof as follows

         "In my opinion before one embarks on an assessment of whether it is
         reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK one has  to  address
         the question 'why would the child be expected to leave  the  United
         Kingdom'.  In the case such as this there can only  be  one  answer
         'because the  parents  have  no  right  to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom'.  To approach the question in any other  way  strips  away
         the context in which the  assessment  of  reasonableness  is  being
         made.  It's also in that context that it was relevant  to  consider
         whether one parent had a right to remain and another  not  or  both
         had no right to remain.  It is  part  of  the  overall  matrix  and
         content".

26.  In terms of the real world context  it  was  recognised  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in the facts of the case before it that, were the appellant to
    be removed, she having a very bad immigration history, it was  unlikely
    that the children or her partner would follow her.  Thus there would be
    a rupture in the family unit.  That was considered to be a  significant
    factor particularly when one considers the child in that context.

27.  Although nationality was not a "trump card" it was  recognised  by  the
    Tribunal that it was of particular importance  in  assessing  the  best
    interests of any child.  I stress  that  the  intrinsic  importance  of
    citizenship should not be played down.

28.  Thus in making the proportionality  assessment  under  Article  8,  the
    best interests of the child must  be  a  primary  consideration.   This
    means that they must be  considered  first.   They  can  of  course  be
    outweighed by the cumulative effect of other  considerations.   In  the
    case of JG the countervailing considerations were the need to  maintain
    a  firm  and  fair  immigration  control,  coupled  with  the  mother's
    appalling immigration history and the precariousness  of  her  position
    when family  life  was  created.   The  Tribunal  recognised  that  the
    inevitable result of removing their primary carer  would  be  that  the
    children would have to leave with her.

29.  It was highlighted that the decision maker must assess whether  refusal
    of the application will mean that the child will have to leave  the  UK
    or is likely to have to do so.  Where the decision maker  decided  that
    the answer to this first stage is yes, then they must go on to consider
    secondly, taking  into  account  their  best  interests  as  a  primary
    consideration, if it is reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

30.  If the departure of the parent or carer would not result in  the  child
    being required to leave the United Kingdom then the question of whether
    it is reasonable to expect the child to leave the United  Kingdom  will
    not arise.  However where there is a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship between the appellant and the child, the  removal  of  the
    appellant may still disrupt his/her relationship with that child.   For
    that reason, the decision maker will still need to consider whether  in
    the round, removal of the appellant is appropriate in the light of  all
    the real life circumstances of the case, taking into account  the  best
    interests of the child as a primary consideration and the impact on the
    child of the appellant's departure from the United Kingdom or the child
    having to leave the United Kingdom with them.  If it is considered that
    refusal  would  lead  to  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for   the
    appellant, the child or the family, leave will fall to  be  granted  on
    the basis of exceptional circumstances.

31.  Those comments lead into the strong statement of the respondent in  the
    decision under challenge that there would indeed be unjustifiably harsh
    consequences for the appellant if removed.  The evidence  indeed  which
    seemed to have been accepted by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  in  the
    matter currently before me was that the primary carer, namely the wife,
    would remain in the United Kingdom and not join  the  appellant.   Thus
    there  would  be  a  rupture  or  potential  rupture  in   the   family
    relationship which was clearly a material consideration to be borne  in
    mind.

32.  It is important to stress that clearly such  considerations  that  have
    been highlighted are fact specific.  The Tribunal  in  JG  found  that,
    notwithstanding the  appellant's  appalling  immigration  history,  she
    should remain.

33.   In  this  case  the  child  is  a  British  citizen  and  clearly  the
    considerations and benefits of citizenship are an important  factor  to
    be weighed in his favour as a reason to remain.  Similarly  his  mother
    is also a British subject.  She indicated that she did not wish  to  go
    to Pakistan having had little recent contact with that country. As  was
    cited in the case of Rodrigues Da Silva, Hoogkamer v Netherlands [2007]
    44 EHRR 729 factors to be taken into account  in  the  context  of  the
    extent to which family life is effectively ruptured, the extent of  the
    ties  in  the  contracting  state,  whether  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles in the way of the family living in the country of  origin  or
    one or more of them, whether there are factors in immigration  control.



34.  The First-tier Judge concluded that the appellant's wife and  son  were
    entitled to Pakistan nationality and would be able to live with him  in
    Pakistan but if the appellant's wife and son decide  not  to  accompany
    him they will be able to remain in the United Kingdom.  In terms of the
    statement by the appellant's wife at the hearing  that  she  would  not
    accompany the appellant to Pakistan, the Judge noted that she would  be
    able to live with him and found  that  any  separation  involved  as  a
    result of this decision is one of choice and not necessity.

35.  This is by no means an easy case and perhaps one that  illustrates  the
    competing interests.  Given the  adverse  immigration  history  of  the
    appellant it is clearly and strongly in the  interests  of  immigration
    control that leave to remain be refused.  Although  he  seeks  to  rely
    upon the relationship with his British wife, it is  to  be  noted  that
    they  married  deliberately  and  in  the  full  knowledge   that   his
    immigration status in the United Kingdom had been curtailed.   Although
    she has expressed the view that she would not want to go  to  Pakistan,
    nevertheless it was the finding of the Judge that she would be able  to
    do so for the reasons as set out in the determination.

36.  The child is under 2 years old and therefore  entirely  dependent  upon
    his family  unit  and  has  not  established  any  education  or  other
    commitments, other than his potential rights in citizenship.

37.  I remind myself, however, that this is an appeal against  the  decision
    of the respondent and to that extent the nature of the decision  is  of
    importance.  As Mr McVeety acknowledged there is clearly  a  concession
    contained in that  decision  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with the child and that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect the child to leave the  United  Kingdom  and  to
    give up the rights afforded to him as  a  British  citizen.   It  is  a
    concession that has not been withdrawn, although  in  fairness  to  the
    respondent it perhaps reflects the policy that was followed.

38.  It had been clearly established in a number of cases  that  to  deprive
    the child of the benefits of citizenship  strong  reasons  need  to  be
    found to show that it would be reasonable for the child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  Although the behaviour of the appellant clearly is  an
    important  factor,  such  brings  into  effect  the  other   concession
    seemingly made by the respondent that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
    expect the appellant to leave the United Kingdom.

39.  The appellant is not someone that is subject to deportation orders  and
    is someone who would therefore have  cause  to  expect  the  protection
    offered to him under Section 117B(6) would be applied.

40.  It seems to me that those concessions that were made by the  respondent
    in the decision letter are such as to tip the scales in favour  of  the
    appellant.

41.  Imposing the hypothetical question  of  reasonableness  it  is  perhaps
    difficult to ignore the concessions that seem to have been made, albeit
    that they do not reflect in logic within the decision of the respondent
    taken as a whole.

42.  It is sometimes difficult to reconcile what is  the  hypothetical  over
    the real world, particularly when there is the potential  for  division
    and disruption.  Little has been heard for  example  as  to  the  links
    which the appellant's wife has with her British family or any family in
    the United Kingdom.

43.  Overall and taking into account the various  factors  it  seems  to  me
    that it is not proportionate  to require the appellant to  relocate  to
    Pakistan given the potential difficulties which  that  would  cause  in
    family unity .Further it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
    return to Pakistan for the same reasons and  indeed  in  terms  of  his
    overall security as a British citizen.

44.  In those circumstances the appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]    Date 22 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

