
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/17933/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 July 2019                       |On 25th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                HARBANS SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Raza, counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  India  born  on  22  August  1954.   He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent  on  24  July  2018  to
    refuse his human rights claim.  His appeal was dismissed  by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Dunne and  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Kelly ("the panel") in a decision promulgated on 15 April 2019.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Keane. Hence the matter came before me.

 3. At the outset of the hearing Mr Raza applied to amend  the  grounds  of
    appeal to include an additional ground relating to the panel's approach
    to the Article 8 analysis. He said the relevant date for  consideration
    of the human rights appeal was the date of  hearing,  rather  than  the
    date of application: [16].  The issue for the panel to decide had  been
    whether  the  appellant's   removal   would   be   a   disproportionate
    interference  with  his  protected  rights  at  the  date  of  hearing,
    particularly as the panel had found he had lived in  the  UK  for  over
    twenty years at that state, a highly material factor.

 4. Ms Jones, for the respondent, opposed the  application  on  the  ground
    that the point was not Robinson obvious and the respondent had not been
    put on notice of this proposed amendment.

 5. I allowed the appellant to amend the  ground  of  appeal  because  this
    additional  issue  should  have  been  readily  identifiable   to   the
    respondent notwithstanding the failure of the appellant to refer to  it
    specifically in the grounds of appeal. The issue to be decided  by  the
    panel was whether, on the evidence before it at  the  date  of  hearing
    (not the date of application), the respondent's decision gave rise to a
    breach of his protected rights pursuant to Article 8. The reference  to
    consideration of the "facts" at the date of application was an arguably
    material error of law. Ms Jones had not  cited  any  prejudice  to  the
    respondent as a result of the proposed amendment  and  it  was  in  the
    interests of justice for it to be addressed at the hearing  before  me.
    Of relevance is the guidance in AZ (error  of  law:  jurisdiction;  PTA
    practice) Iran [2018] UKUT 00245 (IAC), confirmed recently  in  Durueke
    (PTA: AZ applied, proper approach) [2019]  UKUT  00197  (IAC).  In  the
    latter case the Upper Tribunal advocated reference  by  the  permission
    judge to the relevant sub-paragraph in paragraph (3) of the headnote in
    AZ.  In the present case, permission should be granted  on  the  ground
    that there is a strong prospect of success for the appellant.

 6. Mr Raza adopted the amended grounds  of  appeal.  He  focussed  on  the
    panel's finding was at [27] to the effect that the appellant had  lived
    in the UK since 1 October 1997, a period of  more  than  twenty  years.
    Despite this finding, there was no  further  reference  to  it  in  the
    analysis outside the Rules, pursuant to the  Article  8  jurisprudence.
    The appellant did not dispute the finding at [34]  that  the  appellant
    did not meet the requirements in the Immigration Rules for the grant of
    leave to remain on the basis  of  his  private  life  at  the  date  of
    application. Mr Raza relied on [34] of TZ (Pakistan) v SSHD [2018] EWCA
    Civ 1109. He submitted that the Court of Appeal had found  that,  where
    the only missing event was a further application for leave  to  remain,
    the outcome would be in the appellant's favour.

 7. The respondent had lodged a Rule 24 in response to the original grounds
    of appeal to the effect that those grounds were merely  a  disagreement
    with the decision. Ms Jones submitted that [17] of the decision  should
    be read in its entirety; the appellant had made  an  application  under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). It had been submitted, before the panel,  that
    he could have made an application under paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii).  The
    panel had found at [34] that he did not meet the Rules.  She  submitted
    that this appeal was being pursued on the basis of  a  near  miss.  The
    panel had carried out an  appropriate  analysis  at  [29],  looking  at
    whether there were very serious  obstacles  to  integration  on  return
    (paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)). That was the starting point.  It was not the
    tribunal's role to speculate as to  the  possible  outcome  of  a  long
    residence application. The appellant was inviting this tribunal to find
    the panel had made an error with regard to the application of the  long
    residence provisions; these were not before the  panel  and  the  panel
    correctly did not speculate or make assumptions about what  may  happen
    in the future.   She  submitted  the  panel  had  adopted  the  correct
    approach; there was no error of law. It might have been the  case  that
    the appellant could have met the long residence provisions but  it  was
    not  for  the  panel  to  speculate  as  to  the  outcome  of  such  an
    application.

Discussion

 8. Mr Raza accepted as justified the finding at [34]  that  the  appellant
    did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules for the grant of
    leave to remain  on  the  basis  of  his  private  life.   That  is  an
    appropriate concession in light of the evidence before the panel.

 9. The panel's statement at [16] of its task, under the heading "The legal
    framework" is misleading:

         "... We must make that decision [whether the respondent's  decision
         places the UK in breach of Article 8] by considering the  facts  at
         the date of the appellant's application (that is  26  April  2017),
         although we must consider any evidence before us that may bear upon
         the facts as of that date, whether or not available at the time  of
         the decision".

10. The panel's understanding on this issue appears to be repeated at  [17]
    where it states that its task was "to consider the  lawfulness  of  the
    respondent's decision to refuse the application that was made,  on  the
    basis of the facts that existed at the date of application".

11. That statement would be correct if the  panel  were  referring  to  its
    analysis of  whether  the  appellant  met  the  criteria  in  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) which required it to consider the position at the date of
    application.  I agree with Mr Raza that [16] and [17] suggest the panel
    applied this principle to the Article 8 analysis  in  addition  to  the
    analysis under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  The panel does not  appear  to
    have taken into account the requirements of s85(4) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act ("the 2002 Act"), namely that, this being an
    in-country appeal, the tribunal may consider evidence about any  matter
    which it considers to be relevant to the  substance  of  the  decision,
    including evidence which concerns a matter arising after the  decision.
    Those requirements applied here because this was  an  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.  The inference from [16] and [17]  is  that  the  panel
    limited the evidence it took into account  in  his  assessment  of  the
    human rights claim outside the Rules. This inference is corroborated by
    the panel's subsequent findings as discussed below.

12. The panel was right to find that the issue of whether the appellant met
    the criteria in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) at the date of hearing  was  a
    new matter pursuant to paragraph section 85(6)  of  the  2002  Act  and
    could not be considered  by  the  panel  without  the  consent  of  the
    respondent (AK and IK (S.85 NIAA 2002 - new matters) Turkey [2019] UKUT
    67).  That said, the length of the  appellant's  residence  was  highly
    relevant to the analysis of his Article 8 claim outside the Rules.

13. The panel found at [36] that the appellant had  established  a  private
    life in the UK and "it is now of  long  standing".   It  accepted  "the
    decision to refuse him leave to remain will disrupt that private  life,
    and to that extent amounts to an interference with it".  Thus it  found
    Article 8 was engaged by the respondent's decision. The panel then went
    on to conduct a proportionality analysis, albeit  rather  briefly.   It
    identified  at  [36]  that  "the  many  connections  between  the  Sikh
    community in the UK and  the  Punjab  region  of  India  to  which  the
    appellant would have to return, and the  many  possibilities  for  both
    future communication and travel between India and the UK" would not  be
    "cut ... completely".  This is the only finding on the  impact  of  the
    interference on  the  appellant's  established  private  life  in  this
    country.  As regards the public  interest,  the  panel  had  regard  to
    s117B(1)-(4), namely that little weight was to be given  to  a  private
    life established while the applicant was in  the  UK  unlawfully,  that
    there was a clear public interests  in  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls, that the appellant could not  speak  English  and
    that he was not financially independent.  The panel  did  not  consider
    the impact of it earlier finding at [27] that the appellant  had  lived
    in the UK for over 20 years  continuously  and  its  relevance  to  the
    maintenance of immigration control.

14. Article 8 being engaged, the failure to have regard to the  appellant's
    length of residence in the proportionality analysis  was  an  error  of
    law: the appellant had referred to it specifically in  his  grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal submitting the length of residence as
    an exceptional circumstance.  It was a highly relevant factor.

15. I was referred by Mr Reza to TG (Pakistan) at [34].  I also have regard
    to OA & Ors (human rights; "new matter"; s120) Nigeria [2019]  UKUT  65
    where it was held that in a human rights appeal under s82(1)(b) of  the
    2002 Act, a finding that a  person  satisfies  the  requirements  of  a
    particular immigration rule, so as to be entitled to leave  to  remain,
    means that (provided Article 8 of the ECHR is engaged),  the  Secretary
    of State will not be able to point to  the  importance  of  maintaining
    immigration controls as a factor weighing in favour of the Secretary of
    State in the proportionality balance, so far as that factor relates  to
    the particular  immigration  rule  that  the  judge  has  found  to  be
    satisfied.

16. The panel's error was material to the outcome: had the panel taken into
    account its earlier finding as to the appellant's length of  continuous
    residence, it  would  have  found  that  the  appellant  fulfilled  the
    residence requirement  in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii).   The  respondent
    identified no particular public interest issues over and above those in
    the 2002 Act. The evidence  before  the  panel  did  not  point  to  an
    application under paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) being refused (paragraph  33
    of OA). The respondent could not therefore rely on the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls in the proportionality balance.  Thus it
    was unarguable that  the  public  interest  outweighed  the  degree  of
    disruption to the  appellant's  protected  rights  resulting  from  the
    respondent's decision. Pursuant to OA, it would be disproportionate  to
    remove the appellant or to require him to leave the UK  before  he  was
    reasonably able to make an application for indefinite leave to remain.

Decision

17. The decision of  the  panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  a
    material error of law and I set it aside and remake  it,  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

18. No application was made for anonymity and none is required.


A M Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 22 July 2019


Fee Award

This appeal having been successful, I make a whole fee award of any fee
which has been paid by the appellant.


A M Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 22 July 2019
