

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17890/2018
                                                               HU/17898/2018
                                                               HU/17894/2018


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 3 January 2020                            |on 19 February 2020           |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              SOOMADUTH NANKOO
                               INDRANI NAUKOO
                                NUVIN NANKOO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr J Metzer instructed by Raj Law Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Ms Bassi Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellants' appeal with permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Zahed ('the Judge') promulgated on the 20 April 2019
        in which the Judge dismissed the appeals of this family  unit,  all
        citizens of Mauritius, on human rights grounds.



Background


     2. The first appellant was born on 24 September 1961  and  the  second
        appellant on  17  November  1966.  They  are  partners.  The  third
        appellant, their elder son, was born on 31 January 1991.  A  second
        child born on 17 September 1994 is not a party to the appeal having
        been granted leave to remain on 13 August 2018.
     3. Relevant immigration history shows:


            . 30 September 2001 first appellant entered the UK lawfully  as
              a student. His leave was extended to 30 November 2005.
            . 2 December 2005 first appellant made  a  further  application
              for leave to remain as a student.
            . 3 December 2005 second and third appellant's  and  their  son
              subsequently granted leave entered the UK  on  a  visit  Visa
              valid to 8 May 2016. At that time the third appellant was  14
              years of age and his younger brother 11 years of age.
            . 6 February 2006 first appellant's application  for  leave  to
              remain as a student was refused without a right of appeal.
            . 15 March 2006 the  second  appellant  applied  for  leave  to
              remain as a student with the third appellant and his  younger
              brother as dependents. On 3 April 2006  the  application  was
              refused without a right of appeal, a decision  maintained  on
              30 May 2006 and again on 30 June 2006.
            . 9 May 2006 the second appellant applied for leave  to  remain
              as a student with the third appellant and his younger brother
              as dependents. On  11  September  2007  the  application  was
              refused without a right of appeal.
            . 12 September 2007 the second appellant  was  served  with  an
              IS151A notice as an overstayer.
            . A pending consideration for leave to remain notice, as  being
              considered by the respondent, was in force between  2007  and
              26 March 2011.
            . On 30 September 2012 all three appellants  made  applications
              for  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  article  8.   The
              applications were refused without a right  of  appeal  on  10
              October 2013. An application for permission to bring judicial
              review was refused by the Upper Tribunal on 8 May 2015.
            . On 11 July 2016 all three appellants were served with RED0001
              notice as overstayer's.
            . On 25 July 2016 appellants applied for leave to  remain.   On
              19 October 2016 the  three  applications  were  refused.  The
              decisions of the first and second appellants  were  certified
              pursuant to section 94(1) of the 2002 Act whereas  the  third
              appellant's application was refused with a  right  of  appeal
              although the same was not exercised as none of the appellants
              received the notice.
            . On 5 September 2016 the appellants made  further  application
              for leave to remain pursuant to article  8  ECHR  which  were
              refused without a right of appeal on 1 June 2018.
            . On 11 June 2018  section  120  notice  was  served  upon  the
              respondent. The application  contained  therein  was  refused
              although the youngest son of the first and second  appellants
              was granted leave to remain.


     4. The Judge's decision in relation to the first and second appellants
        is set out at [12-14] in the following terms:


             12.  The starting point is that there is no family  life  that
                  would engage Article 8 between a parent  and  their  adult
                  child unless it can be  shown  that  there  is  a  greater
                  emotional dependency between  that  adult  child  and  his
                  parent than the normal emotional bond that exists  between
                  an adult child and his parent. The Courts have  repeatedly
                  stated that there is no "bright line" as to the fact  that
                  at 18 a child turns into an adult, each case turns on  its
                  own individual fact.


             13.  [A] is 24 years old, so he has been an adult for  over  6
                  years.  He  does  not  have  any  health  issues,  neither
                  physical or emotional. He gave evidence before  me  and  I
                  found him to be an intelligent young man. He  stated  that
                  he tutored students between 6 PM to 9:30 PM. He is in  his
                  first year at university and lives at home.  I  note  that
                  [A] applied for and was given a bursary to study geography
                  in Australia but did not go due to him  [sic]  immigration
                  status in the UK. I find that [A] would not  have  applied
                  for such a bursary to study in Australia  if  he  was  not
                  willing to go there without his parents. I accept that  he
                  lives at home but that is not uncommon for a vast majority
                  of students whose university is in commuting distance from
                  home as it allows the financial burden  on  the  students,
                  especially when accommodation is so expensive in London.


             14.  I find that although [A]  is  living  at  home  with  his
                  parents and brother that in itself does not show  that  he
                  and his parents have a greater emotional bond than that of
                  other parents with their adult child. I find that [A]  has
                  a greater level of independence by working as a  tutor  in
                  the evenings. I find that the fact that he applied  for  a
                  bursary  for  a  university   in   Australia   shows   his
                  willingness to live away from his  parents.  I  find  that
                  taking his age, lack of health issues, his job as a  tutor
                  and the fact he is at university are all factors  pointing
                  to the fact that he is a young man who has the  capability
                  of giving an independent life without his parents  I  find
                  that without that greater emotional bond that Article 8 is
                  not engaged between the first two appellants and [A].


     5. The appellant's assert the Judge erred in law  in  stating  at  [6]
        that they did not attempt to regularise their status  between  2007
        and 2012 when during this time there was  a  pending  consideration
        for all three appellants as to whether they would be granted leave.
         It is also stated that on 30 September  2012  an  application  for
        leave to remain on a discretionary basis was lodged but refused  on
        10 October 2013.
     6. The grounds also assert the third appellant is  in  a  relationship
        with Ms Wade and that although they do not cohabit their lives  are
        closely connected in relation to  which  appropriate  evidence  was
        given from various sources.
     7. The first and second appellants youngest child lives in the  family
        home in London with them. He is studying for a  BSc  in  Economics.
        The grounds assert this son not only lives under the same  roof  as
        his parents but relies  upon  them  significantly  for  advice  and
        emotional support and that he will be unable to relocate  owing  to
        the fact he is presently undertaking a degree in  the  UK  and  his
        parents removal will amount to a significant  interference  in  his
        family life.
     8. The grounds assert the first appellant has  lived  continuously  in
        the United Kingdom for 17 years and the second appellant  for  over
        13 years and that they have developed  close  relationships  and  a
        strong private life.
     9.  The  grounds  acknowledge  the  relationship  between  the   third
        appellant and Ms Wade was established at a time  he  did  not  have
        leave to remain but argues the "little weight" guidance pursuant to
        section 117B(4) may be overridden in this case in light of the fact
        the third appellant entered the United Kingdom as a child  and  his
        last period of leave expired whilst he was  underage,  meaning  his
        unlawful presence was a matter for which he is not responsible.
    10. The grounds assert contradiction in the Judge's findings about  the
        third appellant's appeal who should have had a proper consideration
        of his article 8 outside the Rules on the basis removal will amount
        to an 'unjustifiably harsh' interference with his protected  rights
        on the basis of his relationship with Ms Wade and with his  brother
        who has leave to remain in the UK.
    11. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-Tier
        Tribunal for the following reason:


             'It is arguable that the Judge attached insufficient weight to
             the  factors  appertaining  to  the  matrix  facets   of   the
             relationships described in the permission application.  It  is
             further arguable that  the  Judge  has  attached  insufficient
             weight to the level of integration of  the  Appellant.  It  is
             arguable that the strength of the factors advanced  on  behalf
             of the Appellant's has not  been  the  subject  of  sufficient
             analysis  weighing  them  against  the  strength  the   public
             interest. It is arguable that insufficient analysis  has  been
             set  out  of  the  totality  of  the  available  evidence   as
             identified in the permission application  in  respect  of  the
             applicants. It is arguable that the factors  advanced  in  the
             permission application constitute unjustifiable harshness  and
             taking account of those factors  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
             those factors which relate to Mauritius. It is  arguable  that
             insufficient  weight  has  been  attached  to  the  issue   of
             financial sustainability and the evidence appertaining to that
             set out in the overall context of  the  level  of  integration
             described.



Error of law


    12. It is settled law that whether family life recognised by article  8
        ECHR exists is a question of fact. It is also settled that  such  a
        status comes into force between parents and their natural  children
        from birth. When family life recognised by article 8  ends  depends
        upon the situation of the family unit.
    13. The fact a child attains the age of 18 does  not  mean  he  or  she
        crosses a 'bright line'  after  which  family  life  recognised  by
        article 8 is extinguished even if replaced by de facto family life.
    14. In this appeal the Judge's finding that family life  recognised  by
        article 8 had not been established is clearly wrong in law. It  was
        not  disputed  that  the  first  and  second  appellants  have  two
        children, the third  appellant  and  his  brother  A.  It  was  not
        disputed that A has leave in his own right to remain in the  United
        Kingdom and that he continues to live with his parents. It was  not
        disputed that A is  undertaking  a  course  of  study  at  a  local
        university.
    15. The relevant factual matrix is therefore of a young man who, whilst
        he may have attained the age of 18 some time ago, remains dependent
        upon his parents in the United Kingdom. Whilst A may undertake some
        tutoring is was not made out this generates a sufficient  level  of
        income to enable him to be financially independent. It is also  the
        case that A remains dependent upon his parents  for  accommodation,
        emotional support, and financial support to enable him to meet  his
        basic needs.
    16. I find it not made out that family life  recognised  by  article  8
        does not exist between the first and second  appellants  and  their
        son A.
    17. That aspect of the Judge's decision in relation to  the  first  and
        second appellant's shall be set aside. Ms Bassi was invited to make
        submissions in relation to whether, in light of the finding  family
        life recognised by article 8 exists, the respondent's  decision  to
        remove the first and second appellants from the United  Kingdom  is
        proportionate.
    18. Full consideration has been given to those submissions.  I  do  not
        find,  however,  that  the  respondent  has  established  that  the
        decision to remove the  first  and  second  appellants  during  the
        period their son A, who has lawful leave to remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom, is a student and dependent upon them is  proportionate  to
        the legitimate aim of immigration control. Any period of  leave  is
        likely to only be for the  duration  of  A's  course  which  as  an
        undergraduate may be only for a further two years.  The  impact  of
        removing the first and second appellants at this stage,  leaving  A
        to effectively  fend  for  himself  without  employment  income  or
        accommodation, will result in a disproportionate impact upon A.
    19. I therefore substitute a decision allowing the appeals of the first
        and second appellants.
    20. In relation to the third appellant the situation is different.  The
        Judge finds at [27] that he was bound to give only little weight to
        the relationship between the third appellant and Ms Wade  where  it
        was established the third appellant lacked  lawful  status  in  the
        United Kingdom. Whilst the statutory  provisions  refer  to  little
        weight being given to a private life relied upon  when  a  person's
        status is precarious, the Judge was not bound  to  find  that  what
        was, arguably, the central plank  of  the  third  appellant's  case
        should only  warrant  little  weight  being  given  to  it  in  the
        balancing exercise. The requirement in section 117B  cannot  stymie
        judicial independence or the ability of a Judge to attach  whatever
        weight he or she  rationally  feels  appropriate  to  give  to  the
        evidence.
    21. Whilst it is asserted on the  third  appellant's  behalf  that  his
        relationship with Ms Wade satisfied the definition of  family  life
        pursuant to article 8 and that the Judge's finding to the  contrary
        was flawed, no arguable legal error is made out on this  basis.  At
        that time the third appellant and Ms Wade did not live together and
        were in a relationship of boyfriend and girlfriend. It was not made
        out  that  their  relationship  had  the  degree  of  strength   or
        sustainability required to satisfy article 8 ECHR family life.
    22. The relationship  was,  however,  part  of  the  third  appellant's
        private life and his removal from the United  Kingdom  would  cause
        interference with his private life which also included his ties  to
        his brother A. The failure of the Judge to  consider  whether  more
        than  "little  weight"  should  have  been  given  to   the   third
        appellant's private life, and what such weight should have been  in
        all  the  circumstances,  means  there  is  merit  in   the   third
        appellant's submission that the Judge has erred in law.
    23. I set aside the decision of the Judge  in  relation  to  the  third
        appellant  for  this  reason.  In  light  of  the  fact  the  third
        appellant's circumstances have changed, in that it is  said  he  is
        now cohabiting with Ms Wade, the following directions (given orally
        at the hearing) shall  apply  to  the  future  management  of  this
        appeal:


            i. The third appellant shall, no later  than  4  PM  31  January
               2020,  file  with  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  send   to   the
               respondent's  representative  a  consolidated,  indexed   and
               paginated bundle containing all the evidence he seeks to rely
               upon in support of his appeal.  Witness  statements  must  be
               signed, dated, and contain a declaration of truth, and  shall
               stand as the evidence in chief of the maker who shall be made
               available for  the  purposes  of  cross-examination  and  re-
               examination only.
           ii. No interpreter is required.
          iii. List for a Resumed Hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
               on the first  available  date  after  1  February  2020  time
               estimate 3 hours subject to the availability of Mr Metzer.
Decision

    24. The First-Tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  in
        relation to the first  and  second  appellants  as  follows.  These
        appeals are allowed pursuant to article 8 ECHR. The appeal  of  the
        third appellant shall be managed in accordance with the  directions
        set out above.


   Anonymity.


    25. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 24 January 2020












