
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/17757/2018
                                                               HU/17760/2018
                                                               HU/17763/2018
                                                               HU/17770/2018
                                                               HU/17780/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 May 2019                       |On 18 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                    M.R.
                                    A.A.
                                     W.
                                     R.
                                     N.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms L Turnbull of Counsel instructed by Maliks and
                    Khan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These linked appeals have come back before me to remake  the  decisions
    in the appeals pursuant to the 'error of law' hearing held on 28  March
    2019. Appended to this document is a copy of the text of the  error  of
    law decision and Directions promulgated on 6 April 2019.

2.   The Appellants are nationals of Bangladesh. Their personal details  are
    a matter of record on file, and are not reproduced here in keeping with
    the anonymity directions  that  have  previously  been  made  in  these
    proceedings and are hereby continued. Suffice to  say,  the  Appellants
    are a family unit comprising two parents and  three  children.  At  the
    date of the hearing the children's ages  were:  R  -  approximately  17
    years, 5 months; W - one week short of 8 years; N - 2 years, 8 months.

3.   The father of the family, MR, had entered the UK  as  a  visitor  on  2
    June 2005, and had overstayed his leave to enter as a visitor upon  its
    expiry in December 2005 - securing no further leave to  remain  despite
    various applications under the EEA Regulations and pursuant to  Article
    8 of the ECHR. R was born in Bangladesh; he entered  the  UK  with  his
    mother, AA, on 19 November 2009 with entry clearance as a visitor.  The
    other two children were born in the UK.

4.   For completeness, it is  to  be  noted  that  since  these  proceedings
    commenced there has been the addition to the family of  twin  daughters
    in May 2018.

5.   As was the case  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appeals  were
    pursued on the principal basis that the Third and Fourth Appellants,  W
    and R were 'qualifying children'.

6.   Pursuant to the Directions issued after the finding of  error  of  law,
    the Appellants have filed two supplementary bundles.  The  contents  of
    the bundles, and the contents of the Appellants' bundle that was before
    the First-tier Tribunal, are a matter of record on file: I do  not  set
    out the documents here, but refer to them  as  is  incidental  for  the
    purposes of this Decision. For the avoidance of any doubt  I  have  had
    regard to all of the documents on file in remaking the decisions in the
    appeals.

7.   As was anticipated at the error of law hearing it was not necessary  to
    hear oral evidence. In this context it is to be noted  that  there  had
    been no express challenge to the primary findings of fact made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal, and Ms Cunha indicated that she did  not  seek  to
    cross-examine any of the Appellants. The hearing proceeded  by  way  of
    submissions.

'Best Interests'

8.   In determining these appeals it is necessary  to  have  regard  to  the
    best interests of the children of the family as a primary consideration
    - although not a paramount consideration.

9.   In this context  -  as  in  the  appeal  generally  -  the  Appellants'
    emphasis is on the best interests of the two older children, R  and  W.
    In the circumstances I trust I will be forgiven for  dealing  with  the
    best interests of N and the twins in relatively brief terms.

10.  In considering 'best interests', in the premises I  note  that  it  has
    been asserted by the parents that the family has no life to  return  to
    in Bangladesh having been in the UK for a significant period  of  time.
    The First Appellant asserts in his witness statement (dated 7  November
    2018) that his parents are deceased and that neither he  nor  his  wife
    have any family in Bangladesh that they can rely upon for  support;  it
    is asserted that they have no  property  or  assets,  and  it  is  also
    claimed that they would struggle to find a job (paragraphs 25 and  26).
    This is said to inform the parents' concerns about the welfare of their
    children in the event that the family returns to Bangladesh.

11.  In my  judgement  these  are  essentially  empty  assertions,  and  not
    supported by any corroborative evidence. It is not said that there  are
    no relatives in Bangladesh, only that there are no relatives  that  can
    support them. No explanation is offered as to why  the  relatives  that
    remain in Bangladesh cannot offer similar support to that that has been
    extended by family members in the UK, such  as  accommodating  them  as
    guests - at least during an initial period whilst the  First  Appellant
    seeks to establish himself.

12.  In any event, and perhaps more pertinently, it is be noted that in  the
    application form signed on 17 July  2017  it  was  indicated  that  the
    Appellants were living with the First Appellant's sister in the UK in a
    5 bedroom house, not paying rent and not working, being dependent  upon
    the First Appellant's sister and friends. The First Appellant's witness
    statement refers to being financially supported  by  friends  who  "are
    paying for our accommodation and expenses" (paragraph  28).  Supporting
    letters have been provided by a number of friends who confirm that they
    have provided financial support to the family.  Nothing  approaching  a
    reason, far less any evidence, is offered as to why such  support  that
    has sustained the family in the UK cannot be replicated in Bangladesh.

13.  The First Appellant asserts that he wishes to undertake  employment  in
    the future "and work hard to support myself without recourse to  public
    funds" (witness statement at paragraph 27). He  has  not  provided  any
    supporting evidence as to why such ambitions could not be fulfilled  in
    his country of nationality: the mere assertion that he  "will  struggle
    to find a job in Bangladesh" because of his absence and because of  his
    age (paragraph 26) is not an assertion that I am prepared to accept  in
    the absence of relevant supporting evidence. At  paragraph  33  of  his
    witness statement the First Appellant acknowledges that the  Respondent
    had stated that there was no  evidence  to  suggest  that  he  and  his
    partner could not obtain employment; whilst the following paragraph  of
    the witness statement begins "In relation to the above I would like  to
    state...", nothing in paragraph 34 or any of the  following  paragraphs
    addresses this particular point.

14.  Accordingly, I approach the issue of 'best interests'  on  the  premise
    that the Appellants have not shown that the family would not be able to
    sustain itself in Bangladesh in a similar  way  to  other  families  in
    Bangladesh through the head  of  household  taking  employment,  and/or
    otherwise - in so far as it might be necessary - with the assistance of
    additional financial support from family and friends based in the UK.

'N' and the twins

15.  N and the twins are still very young, and as  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge observed "the  focus  of  their  lives  will  be  their  parents"
    (paragraph 26). They have not commenced formal education. There  is  no
    suggestion that they have any health issues.  There  is  no  suggestion
    that they are accessing any sort of services or facilities  in  the  UK
    that would not be available to them in Bangladesh.  Necessarily,  their
    best interests are served by remaining in the  care  of  both  parents.
    There is no evidential basis to support the notion that such care would
    be better provided in either the UK or Bangladesh.  Accordingly,  there
    is no evidential basis to conclude that there would be any detriment to
    the best interests of any of N and the twins if they were  to  relocate
    to Bangladesh in the company of their parents.

16.  Further, I note that in the report dated 2 December  2018  prepared  by
    Sally-Anne Deacon (see further below) it is noted that given  the  ages
    of N and the twins it is not possible to  ascertain  their  wishes  and
    feelings in respect of relocation. Quotations from the First  Appellant
    cited in  the  report  to  the  effect  that  his  children  "think  of
    themselves as British and of the UK as being  their  home",  must  with
    regard to N and the twins, necessarily, be viewed through the prism  of
    Ms Deacon's observation that it is  not  possible  to  ascertain  their
    wishes and feelings.

17.  Notwithstanding Ms Deacon's observation in this regard, she goes on  to
    state in her 'Summary and Conclusion':

         "However,  given  the  enormity  of  the   changes   ahead,   their
         presentation on the levels of integration and investment  into  the
         UK, I feel wholly confident that should they  be  able  to  control
         their future they would elect to remain."

18.  In my own consideration of  'best  interests'  I  do  not  consider  it
    relevant to take into account what the wishes of a child  might  be  if
    the  child  was  capable   of   understanding   her   predicament,   in
    circumstances where the evidence suggests that the age of the child  is
    such that she has no relevant cognition.

19.  What then follows in the 'Summary  and  Conclusion'  are  a  number  of
    paragraphs focusing on the particular circumstances of R and W,  before
    the following conclusion is stated:

         "I have no hesitation in concluding this report with the view  that
         [R, W, N, and the twins'] best interests would not be protected  or
         promoted should they return  to  Bangladesh  and  for  this  to  be
         enforced would be unduly harsh and disproportionate."

20.  I cannot identify or follow any reasoning in the report that  justifies
    such a conclusion in respect of N and the twins.

21.  I acknowledge the importance of  stability  and  security  in  a  young
    person's life - as referenced by Ms Deacon in her report. However, I do
    not accept that international migration  inevitably  adversely  affects
    the stability and security of a  child's  home  life.  Migration,  both
    within and across international borders, is  a  commonplace  phenomenon
    and in most cases the impact on children  is  readily  and  effectively
    managed by competent and loving parents. It seems to me that this  will
    be the more so where a child is very young  and  essentially  has  only
    limited cognition of the relocation, and is not being  removed  from  a
    close peer group outside the family.

22.  I note that the Skeleton Argument dated 22  May  2019  prepared  by  Ms
    Turnbull for the 'remaking' hearing does not seek to place any emphasis
    or reliance on the particular circumstances of N and the twins.  Indeed
    the quotations set out in the Skeleton Argument from Ms Deacon's report
    are limited to those that expressly relate to  R  and  W.  Ms  Turnbull
    confirmed in her oral submissions that the focus for  the  purposes  of
    the appeal was on the 'qualifying children'.

23.  In all such circumstances I note that it is not expressly  argued  that
    it would be adverse to the best interests of N and the  twins  if  they
    were to relocate to Bangladesh with their parents. In any event I  find
    that there would be no  detriment  to  their  best  interests  in  such
    relocation. Their best interests are served by remaining in the care of
    their parents, and there is no evidence that this is better promoted in
    any one particular geographical location.

'R'

24.  R is in his 18th year and has been living  in  the  UK  since  November
    2009: he entered about one month before his eighth birthday, and by the
    date of the hearing had been in the UK for 9 years and 6 months.

25.   R completed his primary education in the UK, and undertook all of  his
    secondary education here. (Various supporting documents are on file  in
    respect of R's education.) At the date of the hearing R  was  attending
    college in Luton pursuing a course in Light Vehicle Maintenance  (Level
    1), which ran from 3 September 2018 to 29 June 2019. So  far  as  I  am
    able to ascertain from the various assessment summaries on file he  has
    made good progress on this course. He remained  living  in  the  family
    unit during this course.

26.  R produced  a  handwritten  witness  statement  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (undated, but filed under cover of  letter  dated  5  December
    2018).

27.  The First Appellant's witness statement refers  to  R  wishing  "to  go
    onto university and become a car engineer  in  the  future"  (paragraph
    35). R refers to wanting to be an "engineer and  light  mechanic  so  I
    could fix cars"; he also states that he wants  to  learn  about  hybrid
    engineering "and fix cars that's hybrid in the future".

28.  In Ms Deacon's report it is said that R "is  aware  of  the  precarious
    nature of his continued residence in the UK", and that accordingly  her
    discussion with him was "full and frank". She opines that  he  presents
    "as a mature and insightful young man", and quotes him as  saying  that
    "Bangladesh means nothing to me. I have  very  few  memories  of  being
    there. My home is in the UK. I have lived half my life here, which  has
    been the part of my life that has  been  important,  educationally  and
    emotionally."

29.  I do not consider there to be anything surprising or  controversial  in
    these comments attributed to R:  he  has  indeed  spent  a  significant
    period of his time in the UK, had most of his education here, has in  a
    real sense 'grown up' in the UK, and plausibly  has  little  meaningful
    recollection of his early life in Bangladesh.

30.  Ms Deacon also  records  R  as  asserting  that  "We  have  nothing  in
    Bangladesh", and that return would mean losing "everything that we have
    worked so hard to achieve"; he "cannot  comprehend  being  back  there,
    everything will be lost".

31.  For my own part it seems to me that I should approach these words  with
    caution. In my judgement, absent anything more particular, it  is  more
    likely than not that R's understanding of  the  family's  prospects  in
    Bangladesh will  inevitably  have  been  shaped  by  the  comments  and
    observations of his parents and are not likely to have been based  upon
    any independent assessment or evaluation of his  own.  I  have  already
    observed above that I do not find  aspects  of  the  First  Appellant's
    evidence as to the family's prospects upon relocation to Bangladesh  to
    be sustainable. Indeed, it seems to me that some element  of  criticism
    is to be attached to the report of Ms Deacon in so far as she seems  to
    accept these matters uncritically and without any considered contextual
    analysis.

32.  Be that as it may, I do  not  doubt  that  R  genuinely  considers  his
    prospects to be better served by remaining in the UK. Nor  do  I  doubt
    that R understandably  perceives  relocation  as  being  a  significant
    disruption to the private life that  he  has  established  in  the  UK.
    Notwithstanding his understanding  of  the  precarious  nature  of  his
    status in the UK - (an understanding which it seems to me  is  unlikely
    to have been a consistent feature of his childhood, but to be a  matter
    that he has learnt about relatively recently in the  context  of  these
    proceedings) - it is reasonable to infer that for much of his childhood
    - and even now - he has pictured his future as moving through education
    and into employment in the UK in the same way  as  his  peer  group.  I
    accept that he sees a return to Bangladesh as an event that  frustrates
    his aspirations, obliterates the picture of the future he has  held  in
    his mind, and presents him with the most profound uncertainties  as  to
    the direction his life might take following relocation.

33.  I accept as credible R's observations in his witness statement that  he
    feels "very scared and distressed about the future", and I accept  that
    this has impacted on his "performance on everything I do". I accept  it
    is likely that "it makes [him] cry, but [he does] not show it often".

34.  Relocation to Bangladesh will also disrupt R's  relationship  with  his
    friendship group - to which Ms Deacon makes reference  in  her  report.
    Whilst it is not unusual for children and young adults to relocate with
    their parents, or for young adults to relocate independently, resulting
    in fracture of peer relationships, for R the nature of  the  disruption
    would be both an exacerbation of, and exacerbated by, the uncertainties
    referred to in the preceding paragraphs. Ms Deacon refers to studies as
    to the significance of friendship groups for teenagers and  their  role
    in insulating against  the  potentially  negative  effect  of  loss  or
    enforced change, with needs for understanding being  met,  and  support
    and guidance coming from, friends as much as, if not  more  than,  from
    family. I accept that there is weight to Ms Deacon's  observation  that
    R's friendships from school and college  communities  "are  pivotal  to
    [his] identity and [his] sense of  belonging  in  the  world".  I  also
    accept that enforced removal may have a psychological impact such as to
    affect R's motivation and commitment -  although  in  my  judgement  Ms
    Deacon overstates the case in referring  to  a  psychological  reaction
    being 'inevitable', and being potentially "catastrophic".

35.  R is still a child, and on balance I find it is in his  best  interests
    to continue to live with  his  parents  to  benefit  from  their  love,
    support, and guidance, as well  as  the  practical  benefits  of  being
    'looked after' in a family home.  Whilst  I  have  noted  his  father's
    reference to  an  aspiration  to  pursue  studies  in  connection  with
    automobile engineering at university, it is less clear to me the extent
    to which this is realistic, or even intended, as opposed to pursuit  of
    further vocational training in vehicle maintenance, whether by  way  of
    further courses  or  obtaining  an  apprenticeship  or  employment.  Ms
    Deacon's report refers to an intention to follow Level 2 of the current
    course  "at  the  same  time  as  gaining  experience  by  way  of   an
    apprenticeship". Either way, it seems to me that R is likely to benefit
    greatly from remaining within the family unit as he passes through  the
    transitional period between education, vocational  study/training,  and
    the world of work.

36.  I find that R's best interests are protected and promoted by  remaining
    in the UK. Whilst in my  judgement  there  are  more  likely  than  not
    opportunities  to  pursue  training  and/or   employment   in   vehicle
    maintenance  in  Bangladesh,  it  would  be  too  simplistic  and   too
    reductionist to conclude that such opportunities would be determinative
    of the issue  of  'best  interests'.  In  my  judgement  the  potential
    psychological impact  -  or  in  layman's  terms  the  sheer  scale  of
    disappointment that would  likely  be  experienced  -  in  finding  his
    imagined future radically altered for reasons beyond his control,  (and
    for reasons which may in time cause him to come to resent his parents),
    coupled with the significant fracture of peer  relationships,  is  such
    that it would be significantly detrimental to R's best interests if  he
    were now required to relocate to Bangladesh, even with the  support  of
    his parents.

37.  For the avoidance of any doubt I have given consideration to the  issue
    of language. The First Appellant asserts in his witness statement  that
    none of his children "speak any of the local languages  in  Bangladesh,
    namely Bengali" (paragraph 38). In respect of his own  language  skills
    he states that he and his wife "understand English and can speak  basic
    English" (paragraph 44). R was nearly 8 years old when he came  to  the
    UK which would suggest that his first language is Bengali. Moreover, in
    circumstances where his parents admit to only having basic English (and
    that after over 17 and 9 years in the UK respectively), I infer that it
    is more likely than not that the language in the home, even  whilst  in
    the UK, has primarily been Bengali. In such circumstances I also  infer
    that the other  children  of  the  family  will  understand  and  speak
    Bengali. In all such circumstances, on the  facts  of  this  particular
    case I do not perceive language differences to  be  of  any  particular
    significance in determining 'best interests' of any of the children.

'W'

38.  W was born in the UK, has entered the  education  system,  and  at  the
    date of hearing was in Year 3 of her primary school. Various supporting
    documents in respect of her education  are  on  file,  including,  most
    recently, her annual school report for 2018/2019. The report shows that
    W is 'Working at Expectation' in  all  her  subjects,  and  has  scored
    either 'Very Good' or 'Good' for effort (on  a  scale  of  'Very  Good,
    'Good', and 'Requires Improvement'). She is described as "a pleasure to
    teach", and as having "a good attitude to learning", and being  "always
    keen to join in with lessons and take part in class discussions".  This
    school  report,  together  with  the  various  other  certificates   of
    achievement and  participation,  depict  W  as  having  an  essentially
    'normal' engagement with the UK education system.

39.  In preparation for her report Ms Deacon spoke with  W,  and  also  with
    W's school. Ms Deacon records that she was informed that W was  unaware
    of the "complexities surrounding the family's immigration status due to
    her parents wish to protect her from the uncertainty", and  accordingly
    her discussions with W were "generic in nature". Ms Deacon describes  W
    as "a quiet, polite child who happily engaged in our  discussions".  In
    the circumstances it is perhaps not surprising that the discussion,  so
    far as it is referenced in the report, was  limited  in  its  scope,  W
    referred to not having visited Bangladesh and stated "that  the  UK  is
    her home"; she listed her favourite foods as fish fingers, burgers  and
    chips, and said that she found Bangladeshi food "too spicy"; she  spoke
    enthusiastically about watching television; she  said  that  she  loved
    school and that it was better than last year; she like to  learn  about
    science, was interested in rocks, and wanted to be an archaeologist.

40.  Ms  Deacon  spoke  with  the  'Family  Worker  and  Safeguarding  Lead'
    ('FWSL') at W's primary school. The FWSL made comments  in  respect  of
    educational achievements  that  are  essentially  consistent  with  the
    school report referred to above. It was additionally stated that W "has
    a good group of friends, is an active  member  of  the  school  singing
    group and is a bright and happy child".

41.  Ms Deacon's report then states:

         "On asking for the school's view on  the  likely  impact  on  [W]'s
         education if she were to leave the school, [the FWSL] states  -  'W
         is a secure and happy child who is achieving. She  needs  a  little
         help in her maths but she has every potential to catch up and  make
         good progress. For her to be removed from the UK's education system
         would be very undermining for her study, confidence and  her  self-
         esteem and could have disastrous consequences.'"

42.  This is then immediately followed by this passage:

         "Should [the children] be removed  to  Bangladesh,  there  are  two
         options for them educationally; for them  to  attend  a  public  or
         government run education provision."

    Thereafter reference is made to  an  Article  of  the  Constitution  of
    Bangladesh, followed by references and quotations  in  respect  of  the
    educational system in Bangladesh. These passages are followed  by  this
    expression of opinion:

         "It is unlikely the private education could be accessed by R and W,
         [the First Appellant], having been in the UK for  13  years,  would
         have limited capacity to earn the required salary commensurate with
         private education fees due to his  lack  of  context,  is  perished
         understanding of the Bangladesh infrastructure and his age. Due  to
         securing government employment in  Bangladesh  been  restricted  to
         those under 30 years of age, [the First Appellant] being older,  is
         likely  to  enter  any  employment  at  the  lowest   level.   Such
         restrictions have been verified  as  part  of  this  assessment  by
         accessing job vacancies within Bangladesh  Airline  Limited,  Power
         Grid and the Bangladeshi Civil Service."

43.  Ms Deacon's report was the focus of the 'error  of  law'  hearing  (see
    Annex hereto). The Appellants have now filed  a  copy  of  Ms  Deacon's
    curriculum vitae. I do not propose to repeat its full contents here. In
    summary, Ms Deacon began work as a social worker for Leeds Social  Care
    in 1994, and appears to  have  been  consistently  employed  in  social
    and/or care work until June 2018. Her  positions  and  responsibilities
    have included working with children in the context of care proceedings,
    juvenile  justice,  child  protection  enquiries,  family  intervention
    projects, and fostering.  Since  about  May  2015  her  work  has  been
    sessional and or freelance, and she includes in her CV that  since  May
    2014 she has been a Best Interest Assessor for  Immigration  Matters  -
    which, together with the representatives before me,  I  took  to  be  a
    reference to preparing reports of the sort that is presently before the
    Tribunal. The CV suggests a working practical knowledge  of  issues  in
    relation to children's welfare over a period of approximately 25 years.
    I was also provided with extracts from the Health  &  Care  Professions
    Council register which confirmed Ms Deacon's current registration.

44.  In the circumstances Ms Cunha did not seek to contest  that  Ms  Deacon
    had relevant experience such that she could  hold  herself  out  as  an
    expert.

45.  Of course, the fact that Ms Deacon is duly qualified  to  hold  herself
    out as an expert in children's safeguarding and welfare, does not  mean
    that I have to accept her opinion in all - or indeed any -  aspects.  I
    have noted above that I am unable to follow any specific  reasoning  in
    respect of Ms Deacon's conclusions on the 'best interests' of N and the
    twins. I also find the following aspects of the report unsatisfactory:

         (i)  I can  identify  nothing  in  Ms  Deacon's  qualifications  or
         experience  that  suggests  any  expertise  in   respect   of   the
         educational  system  in  Bangladesh.  Nonetheless  she  essays   an
         exploration of such system. In  my  judgement  this  was  a  matter
         beyond her expertise, should not have been included, and should not
         have informed her assessment.

         (ii) Ms Deacon also made an evaluation of the employment  prospects
         of the First Appellant in Bangladesh. Again, in my judgement,  this
         was not a matter within her expertise, should  not  found  its  way
         into the report, and should not have informed her assessment.

         (iii)    These latter two matters are significantly material to her
         overall evaluation which  is  essentially  based  on  a  comparison
         between the circumstances of  the  children  in  the  UK,  and  the
         circumstances that they might face in Bangladesh. It means that her
         concluding opinions are based substantially on matters  in  respect
         of which she is not an  expert,  and  on  findings  in  respect  of
         employment prospects that were not hers to make.

         (iv) I have quoted above the passages from the report in  which  Ms
         Deacon cites the comments of W's school's FWSL. The key phrase upon
         which reliance is placed - both in Ms Deacon's report  and  in  the
         context of the Appellants' submissions to the Tribunal  -  is  "For
         [W] to be removed from the UK's  education  system  would  be  very
         undermining for her study, her confidence and her  self-esteem  and
         could have disastrous consequences". It seems to me that Ms  Deacon
         accepts that statement without any evaluative process. It is wholly
         unclear from the report what, if anything, the FWSL  thought  would
         be put in place of the UK education system. I do  not  accept  that
         the FWSL could possibly have meant in  absolute  terms  that  being
         removed from the UK education system in itself was detrimental, but
         rather that it would be detrimental if it were in the context of an
         absence of any continuing education, or in  the  context  of  being
         placed thereafter in a significantly inferior  educational  system.
         If, which is not clear, the FWSL meant that being removed from  the
         U.K.'s  education  system  and  being  placed  in  the   Bangladesh
         education system would be undermining etc., it is not explained  by
         the FWSL on what basis she was able  to  make  such  a  comparative
         analysis.

46.  In all the circumstances I am not satisfied that I  have  any  reliable
    expert evidence, or  any  pertinent  country  information,  as  to  the
    education system in Bangladesh. Further, I am not  satisfied  that  the
    First Appellant's evidence as to the family's prospects in Bangladesh -
    which in  my  judgement  tends  to  'catastrophising'  -  is  reliable.
    Accordingly, I find that the Appellants have not shown that there  will
    be any significant detriment to the educational opportunities of  W  in
    the event of the family's relocation to Bangladesh.

47.  Nonetheless, I accept that the disruption inherent in  the  process  of
    relocation will - at least in the short term - be of some detriment  to
    W, both educationally and  emotionally.  I  also  accept  that  W  will
    experience disappointment and upset by being relocated  away  from  her
    current friendship group, her extracurricular activities  such  as  the
    school singing group, and  her  extended  family  members  in  the  UK.
    However, she is at an early stage of her education, and at a relatively
    early stage of the process of establishing a private  life  beyond  the
    immediate family unit. I do not accept that the short term  disruptions
    and upsets cannot  adequately  be  managed  in  the  same  way  as  any
    international relocation for a child - including the  relocation  of  R
    from Bangladesh to the UK, he having arrived in the UK at a similar age
    to W's current age.

48.  I accept that it would be better for W  if  she  did  not  have  to  go
    through such short-term disruptions. Accordingly, on  balance,  I  find
    that W's best interests not only lie in remaining in the  care  of  her
    parents, but  -  marginally  -  are  best  protected  and  promoted  by
    remaining in the UK.

'Reasonablness'

49.  In light of the decisions in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53, JG
(s.117B(6): "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072 (IAC), and
AB (Jamaica) and AO (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 661, it was common ground
before me that if I were to find that it would not be reasonable to expect
either R or W to leave the United Kingdom then, pursuant to section 117B(6)
of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the public interest
would not require the removal of either the First Appellant or the Second
Appellant - each being acknowledged to be persons with a genuine and
subsisting parental relationship with both R and W who are qualifying
children within the meaning of section 117D(1).

50.  The question of whether it would not be reasonable to expect R and/or
W to leave the UK posed by section 117B(6) is to be evaluated absent a
consideration of the immigration history of the parents. As such, there is
no element of balancing the precarious immigration position of the
children, or the unsatisfactory immigration history of the First and Second
Appellants.

51.  The issue of 'reasonableness' is not congruent with 'best interests'.
However, the evaluation of best interests, being a primary consideration,
must necessarily inform an evaluation of reasonableness. Further, the
matters traversed in the discussion in respect of best interests set out
above are essentially the same matters that form the factual matrix for a
consideration of the issue of reasonableness.

52.  Further to the matters discussed above in respect of R, I find that it
would not be reasonable to expect him to leave the UK at the present time.
He has spent the most significant years of his young life in the UK and is
embarked on an achievable trajectory that would be significantly disrupted
in the event that he were to leave the UK. He is at a critical stage of his
vocational education, possibly about to transition into work. There would
be a significant frustration in such ambitions in the event of removal. He
would also lose the support and guidance of his peer group which, the
reports referred to by the expert witness suggest are particularly
significant for someone of his age. Further, for the reasons given above, I
am satisfied that this would likely have a significant adverse
psychological impact.

53.  I am not so persuaded in respect of W. I am not satisfied that it has
been shown that there would be any significant long-term impact on her
educational prospects, and any short-term detriment inherent in relocation
can likely be managed by her parents.

Consequently...

54.  In consequence of my finding in respect of R, the public interest  does
    not require the removal of either the First  Appellant  or  the  Second
    Appellant. Accordingly I conclude  that  the  appeals  of  the  parents
    succeed on human rights grounds.

55.  Further, because I have found  that  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    expect R to leave  the  UK,  I  also  conclude  that  R  satisfies  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv). There being  nothing  else  to
    his detriment, the fact that  he  satisfies  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules is, in my judgement, determinatively indicative  that
    his removal from the UK in consequence  of  the  Respondent's  decision
    would constitute a disproportionate interference with his private  life
    such that it would amount to a breach of Article 8  of  the  ECHR.  His
    appeal succeeds accordingly.

56.  I pause to note that in any event on the date of his  forthcoming  18th
    birthday if R  were  still  in  the  UK  -  which  given  the  family's
    reluctance to  leave  voluntarily,  and  the  Respondent's  failure  to
    enforce removal notwithstanding refusals of earlier applications, seems
    more  likely  than  not  -  he  would  satisfy  the  age  and  duration
    requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(v)  which  does  not  involve  an
    evaluation of reasonableness.

57.  In circumstances where the parents of the family and the  oldest  child
    succeed in their appeals, it would be a  disproportionate  interference
    in the mutual Article 8 family/private lives of the family  members  if
    the remaining minor Appellants were not also granted leave to remain in
    the UK. Accordingly the appeals of W and N are also allowed.

58.  The Respondent may also wish to consider granting leave  to  the  twins
    in line with their parents and siblings - although this is not a matter
    within my jurisdiction.

Notice of Decision

59.  The appeals are allowed on human rights grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 10 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis



To the Respondent
Fee Award (This is not part of the determination)


I do not consider it appropriate to make a fee award,  notwithstanding  that
the  Appellants  have  succeeded  in  their  appeals.  The  Appellants  have
benefitted from recent developments in case law that could not have  availed
them at the time of their application or the Respondent's decision.




Signed:                                 Date: 10 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis



                                    ANNEX

   TEXT OF 'ERROR OF LAW' DECISION AND DIRECTIONS PUSUANT TO HEARING ON 28
                                 MARCH 2019


1.   This is an appeal against the decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    James promulgated on 23 January 2019  dismissing  each  of  the  linked
    appeals on human rights grounds.


2.   I am grateful to both representatives for  the  helpful  discussion  it
    was possible to have in respect of the issues  in  the  appeal.   After
    careful consideration of the submissions and materials I  have  decided
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decisions do  contain  a  material
    error of law, and that it is appropriate  that  the  decisions  be  set
    aside.  I have also concluded that the decisions in the linked  appeals
    be remade before the Upper Tribunal - it is necessary or appropriate to
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


3.   It is not necessary for present purposes to set  out  herein  the  full
    personal details of the respective Appellants all of which are a matter
    of record on file. Similarly the respective immigration histories are a
    matter of record and do not require to be rehearsed  here:  suffice  to
    say - as per paragraph 8 of Judge James' Decision -  the  appeals  were
    pursued before the First-tier Tribunal on "the principal basis ... that
    the Third and Fourth Appellants were qualifying children".


4.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge rejected that 'principal'  argument,  and
    otherwise dismissed  the  appeals  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  his
    Decision.


5.   Before the Upper Tribunal the primary basis  of  challenge  relates  to
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's approach to a social work report.


6.   A report dated 2 December 2018 prepared by Sally Anne Deacon was  filed
    before the First-tier Tribunal (Appellant's supplementary appeal bundle
    under cover of letter dated 5 December 2018). In  the  introduction  to
    the report Ms Deacon sets out a single paragraph in which she refers to
    her qualification  and  experience;  this  is  followed  by  a  further
    paragraph where she makes reference to the bases upon which the  report
    has been compiled.


7.   There are two aspects to  the  Appellants'  challenge  to  the  Judge's
    approach to this report.


8.   First, criticism is made of the Judge's characterisation of  Ms  Deacon
    as not being an expert. Paragraphs  20  and  21  of  the  Decision  are
    pertinent

         "20. Ms Deacon sets out her qualifications in the  Introduction  to
             her report.  She states that she qualified with a BA  Hons  in
             Applied Social Studies and the Certificate  and  Qualification
             in Social Work in 1994.  She claims that since  then  she  has
             worked exclusively in the  area  of  children's  safeguarding,
             fostering  and  adoption  within  local  authorities  and  the
             voluntary sectors.  She claims to have extensive experience of
             undertaking and advising  care  planning  for  children.   She
             claims she is 'deemed' to be  an  expert  witness  within  the
             family courts.


         21.  Ms  Deacon  has  provided  remarkably  little  detail  of  her
             experience.   There  is  no  information  as  to  which  local
             authorities or voluntary organisations  she  has  worked  for.
             There is no information to indicate  that  her  knowledge  and
             experience rises above that  of  her  initial  qualifications.
             She claims to be 'deemed' to be an expert witness  within  the
             family courts without providing  any  basis  for  that  claim.
             Importantly she provides no information as to membership of or
             registration with any professional body,  an  issue  I  raised
             with  the  Appellants'  representative.   Overall  I  am   not
             satisfied that she has provided sufficient information  to  be
             considered as an expert witness.  I have noted  that  she  was
             instructed to prepare the report on 28  August  2018  and  the
             report was dated 2 December 2018.  It cannot be said that  the
             lack of information has arisen due to the  urgent  preparation
             of the report.  As a result I do not consider Ms Deacon to  be
             an expert and will give  her  report  limited  weight  as  one
             prepared by a non-expert social worker."


9.   The second aspect  of  the  challenge  relates  to  a  passage  in  the
    Decision to be found at paragraph 23:

         "Ms Deacon states that [W] enjoys and succeeds  in  education.   Ms
         Deacon tells me that the school takes the view  that  removal  from
         the UK education system would undermine W's study,  confidence  and
         self-esteem but she has not attributed this comment to anyone so it
         is difficult to know the value of that assertion."


10.  In this latter regard it is clear from Ms Deacon's report that she  did
    attribute the school's view to a specific officer at the school.   This
    may be seen at paragraph 11 of the report.  Ms Deacon details that  she
    had spoken with the "family  worker  and  safeguarding  lead"  for  the
    primary school that W attended.  Specific quotations pursuant  to  that
    discussion are set out in the body of the  report  which  includes  the
    following:

         "[W] is a secure and happy child who is  achieving.   She  needs  a
         little help in her maths but has every potential to  catch  up  and
         make good progress.  For her to be removed from the UK's  education
         system would be very undermining for her study, her confidence  and
         her self-esteem and could have disastrous consequences."


11.  This quotation  is  expressly  attributed  to  the  family  worker  and
    safeguarding lead.  Indeed Ms Cunha on behalf of the Secretary of State
    fully acknowledges that the Judge's  observation  at  paragraph  23  is
    factually incorrect.


12.  As regards the first basis of challenge - that the Judge was  in  error
    in characterising Ms Deacon not to be an expert - I  accept  the  Judge
    had no adequate factual basis to so  conclude.   In  my  judgement  the
    details provided in the Introduction  to  the  report  (paraphrased  at
    paragraph 20 of the Decision) are sufficient to  establish  a  relevant
    qualification and a degree of experience in social work.  I  accept  as
    valid the Judge's observations at paragraph 21 critical of  the  detail
    provided by Ms Deacon. Nonetheless, the Judge did not indicate that  he
    found he was not  satisfied  as  to  what  was  stated  in  respect  of
    experience.  As  such  on  its  face  Ms  Deacon  presented   as   duly
    professionally qualified, and with 20 years' experience working  in  an
    approved capacity with children for agencies familiar with the  concept
    of 'best interests'. In such circumstances, whilst  I  entirely  accept
    that it would have been open to  the  Judge  to  approach  Ms  Deacon's
    report on the basis that  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the  opinions
    expressed required to be evaluated in  a  context  where  only  limited
    detail had been given of the author's experience, there was no  factual
    foundation - and it was not appropriate - to conclude  that  Ms  Deacon
    was not an expert witness.  I find that the  Judge's  finding  in  this
    regard was unsustainable and erroneous.


13.  I observe that Ms Cunha acknowledged that  rather  than  describing  Ms
    Deacon as a "non-expert social worker" - the meaning of which is in any
    event obscure - the Judge might better have characterised the Appellant
    [sic.: this should read as 'witness'] as an expert whose opinion was to
    be accorded less weight than a witness who  had  better  particularised
    her experience.


14.  However, Ms Cunha argued that the errors of approach by the Judge  were
    ultimately not material.


15.  I acknowledge that it is entirely possible that the  Judge  would  have
    reached the same overall conclusion in the appeals even if he had taken
    a different approach to the report.  Indeed, it is clear that the Judge
    had careful regard to certain elements of the contents of  the  report.
    Necessarily in part Ms Deacon simply sets out facts (such as  what  was
    stated to her by an officer of W's school), although in other parts she
    expresses her opinion.  However, whilst it might be said that the Judge
    has had regard to the factual content of the report - although as noted
    above in this regard has erred in one aspect - his characterisation  of
    Ms Deacon as a 'non-expert' denotes he has not accorded any  weight  to
    her opinion.


16.  I remind myself that the best interests of a child,  or  children,  are
    to  be  considered  as  a  primary  consideration  in  the  context  of
    immigration.


17.  The Judge refers to best interests in this way:

         "I have considered s.55 of the 2004 Act and I am satisfied that the
         best interests of the Third, Fourth and  Fifth  Appellants  are  to
         remain  with  their  parents  in  the  culture  of  their   family"
         (paragraph 26).


18.  The Judge is silent  on  the  geographical  location  that  would  best
    support and/or promote the best interests of the children.  It seems to
    me that this is particularly pertinent in circumstances where the Judge
    mischaracterised the reference in Ms Deacon's report  to  removal  from
    the UK education system as undermining W's study, confidence, and self-
    esteem as being without attribution.


19.  Further, the Judge marginalised or  disregarded  entirely  Ms  Deacon's
    opinion  on  best  interests  -  an  opinion  informed  both   by   the
    observations of the school officer and all other evidence available  to
    her. In so doing he  disregarded  relevant  evidence  on  an  erroneous
    foundation.


20.   In  light  of  the  foregoing  -  and  given  the  significance  of  a
    consideration of best interests in the disposal of the appeal  -  I  do
    not accept Ms Cunha's submission that the errors are not material.  The
    possibility that the same decisions might  yet  have  sustainably  been
    made in the appeals not in - on the facts here - determinative  of  the
    issue of materiality.


21.  For the reasons given I conclude that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge requires to be set aside for error of law.


22.  For completeness I note that there was a further matter  of  discussion
    at the hearing in respect of the grant of  permission  to  appeal.   In
    part the grant of permission to appeal states:

         "It is arguable that the failure in such  circumstances  to  permit
         the  Appellant  time  to  secure  a  more  detailed  CV  from   the
         independent social worker was procedurally unfair".


23.  I have been unable to identify - and Ms Turnbull  accepted  it  is  not
    possible to identify - anything either in the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal or the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal that gives
    a factual foundation for a submission based on procedural unfairness of
    the sort  referred  to  in  the  above  quotation  from  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal.




24.  The issue of Ms Deacon's expertise was  raised  by  the  Judge  at  the
    hearing, and Counsel  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  addressed  the
    issue: see paragraph 17. There  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  Counsel
    invited the Judge to permit time for a CV to be sent  to  the  Tribunal
    after  the  hearing.   Counsel  that  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal also settled the grounds of appeal.  Nowhere in those  grounds
    does Counsel suggest that she had made such  an  application,  or  that
    there was any  procedural  unfairness  in  such  an  application  being
    rejected. Nor was it pleaded that the Judge should have permitted  such
    time of his own motion.


25.  In such circumstances it seems to  me  that  the  issue  of  procedural
    unfairness referenced in the grant of permission to appeal was no  part
    of the Appellant's case in seeking to challenge  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In the circumstances it is unnecessary for me  to
    say anything beyond this: the  point  was  not  pleaded;  had  it  been
    pleaded, it was without merit.


Remaking the decisions

26.  The appeals are retained by the Upper Tribunal.  The decisions  in  the
    appeal will be remade pursuant to a resumed hearing and further to  the
    following Directions.


                                 Directions

           i) Within 14 days of the date shown as the promulgation date  of
              this decision, the Appellants are to file and  serve  details
              of Ms Deacon's  curriculum  vitae  and  any  other  materials
              relevant  to  her  expertise,  together  with  any   updating
              information in particular in respect of the children  in  the
              appeal.


          ii) The appeal will be relisted, reserved to  me,  on  the  first
              available date thereafter.


27.  It is not anticipated it will be necessary to  hear  oral  evidence  to
    remake the decisions in the appeals: the hearing will likely proceed by
    way of submissions only.  I am not making  any  express  direction  for
    written submissions - but  of  course  it  may  be  helpful,  and  even
    prudent,  for  the  Appellants'  representatives  to  provide   written
    submissions together with the supporting evidence.


                               >>>>> END <<<<<
