
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17270/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|by Skype for Business                |On 04 May 2021                       |
|On 16 April 2021                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 alecita yu
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Lindoven Magsino, legal representative with
                    Queen's Park Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Stephen Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on 15 October 2019 to refuse  her  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds pursuant to Article 8 ECHR,  as the carer of a British citizen,
    pursuant to paragraph 276CE with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii),
    (iv), (v) and (vi) of the Immigration Rules HC  395  (as  amended)  and
    paragraph GEN.3.2 of Appendix FM, or outside the Rules.  The  appellant
    is a citizen of the Philippines.

 2. Mode of hearing.  The hearing today took place remotely  by  Skype  for
    Business.  There were no technical difficulties.  I am  satisfied  that
    all parties were in a quiet and private place and that the hearing  was
    completed fairly, with the cooperation of both representatives.

 3. The appellant and Mrs Hannie Silas,  her  82-year  old  employer,  were
    present on the call, as was Mrs Silas' son, who arranged the employment
    of the appellant as her live-in carer.  Mrs Silas has  spino-cerebellar
    ataxia (SCA6), caused by the SCA6 gene, which runs in the Silas  family
    and is increasingly disabling over a long period.

Background

 4. The appellant was born in 1963 in the Philippines and is now  58  years
    old.  She is a highly qualified and experienced nurse, having qualified
    in the Philippines.  The appellant's husband  and  two  adult  children
    have remained in the Philippines throughout.  In 2008, she came to  the
    United Kingdom for further studies.  She departed on 31  December  2010
    at the end of her studies, having achieved a BSc in nursing and  a  BSc
    in Health and Social Care.  The appellant has worked as a nurse in both
    countries.

 5. On 23 July 2011, aged 48, the appellant returned to the United  Kingdom
    as a Tier 1 (Post Study) Migrant, and  had  leave  to  remain  in  that
    capacity until 22 July 2013.  On 19  July  2013,  she  made  a  Tier  2
    (Skilled Worker) application, which  was  unsuccessful:  the  appellant
    exercised an in-country right of appeal on which she was appeal  rights
    exhausted on 20 December 2013.  She did not embark for the Philippines,
    remaining unlawfully in the United Kingdom.

 6. The appellant has not had any kind of extant leave since December 2013.
     She has, however, worked unlawfully as a live in  carer  for  most  of
    that time.  From February-April 2015, the appellant worked as a live-in
    carer for the parents of Mrs Laura  Weaver,  who  gave  her  a  glowing
    reference.  From April-August 2015, the appellant worked looking  after
    Mrs Juliet Althaus, who had advanced Alzheimer's disease  and  vascular
    dementia.  Mrs Althaus' daughter gave a very warm  reference  regarding
    the appellant's care up to the death of her mother.

 7. On 14 February 2017,  the  appellant  made  a  10-year  long  residence
    application, which was refused and  certified  clearly  unfounded:  the
    appellant had an out of country right  of  appeal  which  she  did  not
    exercise.  Instead,  the  appellant  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom
    without leave.

 8. The appellant  continued  working  for  other  members  of  the  Jewish
    community in Essex.  Mrs Silas had been  widowed  in  March  2007,  her
    consultant rheumatologist husband having died of motor neurone disease.
     He made very good financial provision for his widow, who had been  ill
    with SCA6 since the 1970s, and to whom while alive  he  gave  wonderful
    loving care and support.

 9. The couple had two sons: one brother,  Mr  Douglas  Silas,  is  already
    disabled and a wheelchair user.  The other brother, Mr Adrian Silas (Mr
    Silas), has a family of his own but  took  on  responsibility  for  his
    mother, the sponsor, having promised his father to look after her.   Mr
    Silas was able to manage the sponsor's  care  with  the  help  of  non-
    resident carers until 2017.  He also has the SCA6 gene, such  that  his
    health  has  deteriorated  gradually  from  diagnosis  soon  after  his
    father's death, with the part time  day  carer  increasing  her  hours,
    until at the end of 2017 his mother was too dependent, and Mr Silas too
    unwell, for that to continue and the family looked for a live-in carer,
    seeking recommendations among the Jewish community, a factor which  was
    important to them.

10. On 22 August 2017, the appellant made further submissions for leave  to
    remain on the basis of her  private  life,  which  were  refused.   The
    respondent did not consider the further  submissions  to  amount  to  a
    paragraph 353 fresh claim and they attracted no right of  appeal.   The
    appellant issued a  Pre-Action  Protocol  letter,  and  the  respondent
    agreed to reconsider.

11. The appellant was known to Mr Silas' partner, having looked  after  the
    father of a close friend of hers until his death at the  end  of  2017.
    The timing was perfect: an interview  between  the  appellant  and  Mrs
    Silas went well and in January 2018, the appellant began to work as Mrs
    Silas' live in carer.  Mrs Silas was then in her early 80s and Mr Silas
    his late 50s.

12. Mrs Silas has made progress  with  the  appellant's  help  and  is  now
    physically and mentally better than when the appellant  was  appointed:
    she has recovered some mobility and is able  to  walk  short  distances
    again.  The appellant calls Mrs Silas 'Mummy'. The arrangement is  very
    successful and the appellant, known to the Silas family as  'Alice'  is
    highly valued by both Mrs Silas and her son.

Refusal letter

13. On 15 October 2019, having reconsidered, the respondent  again  refused
    the appellant's application, with an in-country right of  appeal  which
    she has exercised.  That  is  the  decision  under  challenge.  In  her
    refusal letter, the respondent set out the  history  and  rejected  her
    Article 8 ECHR claim within the  Rules,  with  reference  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi)  on  the  basis  that  there  were  no  very  significant
    obstacles to her reintegration in the Philippines.

14. The respondent considered whether there were exceptional  circumstances
    under  paragraph  GEN.3.2  of  Appendix  FM,  given   the   appellant's
    employment by Mrs Silas from January 2018 as  a  live  in  carer.   The
    respondent did not accept that the appellant had family life  with  Mrs
    Silas.  Nor did she consider that the appellant  was  irreplaceable  in
    Mrs Silas' life, or that the appellant's wish to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom and continue working to fund  her  daughter's  studies  in  the
    Philippines amounted to exceptional circumstances for her to be granted
    leave to remain. The appellant could seek and secure employment in  the
    Philippines: her son and husband were both already  in  employment  and
    could assist in supporting her daughter too.

15. The respondent refused leave to remain and the  appellant  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

16. The First-tier Judge accepted the vulnerability of Mrs  Silas  and  her
    wish and desire to retain a trusted and loving employee with  whom  she
    had formed a bond, but not that such bond amounted to  family  life  on
    Kugathas principles.   The  appellant  is  not  Mrs  Silas'  biological
    daughter, and has family life with her  husband  and  children  in  the
    Philippines, while Mrs Silas had had non-resident carers in  the  past.
    The appellant's wages were sent back to the Philippines to benefit  the
    economy there, not that of the United Kingdom.

17. Mr Silas and his family were clear in their evidence: they  were  never
    going to rely on the public health  system  and  would  always  seek  a
    private solution to the care of Mrs Silas, because they could afford to
    do so.  Mr Silas senior had  made  good  financial  provision  for  his
    widow, who was a proud woman and would  not  wish  to  rely  on  public
    services.   There was no question  but  that  the  Silas  family  could
    afford to hire another carer, if the appellant had  to  return  to  the
    Philippines and resume her family life there.   The appellant's  status
    in the United Kingdom had always been either precarious or unlawful and
    she could have had no realistic expectation that she would be  able  to
    settle here.

18. The First-tier Judge dismissed the appeal and the appellant appealed to
    the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

19. Upper Tribunal Judge Owens granted permission to appeal  on  the  basis
    that the First-tier Judge had arguably failed correctly  to  apply  the
    Kugathas dependency tests and the  principles  set  out  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in Lama (video recorded evidence - weight  -Article
    8 ECHR) Nepal [2017] UKUT 16 (IAC) that:
         "(iii)         There  are  no  hard  and  fast  rules  as  to  what
              constitutes family life within the compass of Article 8 ECHR.
           (iv)            A person's value to  the  community  is  a factor
              which  may  legitimately  be  considered  in  the  Article  8
              proportionality balancing exercise. "

20. Judge Owens noted that the appellant's representative must be  prepared
    to deal with the materiality of the error if found.

Rule 24 Reply

21. The respondent filed a Rule 24 Reply to the grant of permission,  which
    so far as relevant is in the following terms:

         "4.  The judge's self-direction in respect of family life expressly
         referred to the relevant authorities, including Kugathas  and  Lama
         at [48]-[51].
         5.   Given the employer/employee nature of the relationship between
         the appellant and sponsor, the First-tier Judge was fully  entitled
         to reach the conclusion that there was not family life between them
         at [53].
         6.   The judge in any event conducted  a  free-standing  Article  8
         balancing exercise in the alternative at [55] onwards.  Indeed,  at
         [59], the judge noted the threshold for engaging Article  8  family
         life was a low one.
         7.   Importantly, it would appear there was little factual  dispute
         and  the  judge  largely  accepted   the   evidence   before   him.
         Ultimately, it was open to the judge to conclude that in the  event
         the appellant  was  required  to  leave,  the  sponsor  would  seek
         alternative private care, as had happened before - see [60].
         8.   If family life has been established, given this  has  been  in
         clearly highly precarious circumstances, this further heightens the
         need for the appellant to  show  exceptional  circumstances,  which
         with respect are simply not apparent here.
         9.   Ultimately, where the appellant could not meet the Rules,  she
         would have to show  refusal  of  leave  to  remain  would  lead  to
         unjustifiably  harsh  consequences,  which  connotes  an  obviously
         elevated threshold.
         10.  On the facts, given the appellant has been here without  valid
         leave for a number of years and has a family and home to return to,
         it could not possibly be said to be  unjustifiably  harsh  on  her.
         Similarly from the sponsor's perspective, she clearly has financial
         provision to source private care and could find someone else in the
         alternative, and she could, if she so wanted, rely on  the  NHS  or
         local authority, but declines to do so out of personal choice  (see
         [52]).  Understandably, she and the appellant have  built  a  close
         bond but in the circumstances, it could not  possibly  be  said  to
         result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for her if the appellant
         was required to leave."

22. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

23. For the respondent, Mr Walker relied on the Rule 24 Reply  and  it  was
    not necessary to ask him to expand in detail on the respondent's case.

24. Mr Magsino prepared a skeleton argument for  the  hearing.   He  argued
    that the appellant's case was on all fours with that of  the  appellant
    in Lama and that like cases should be decided alike.  The appellant  in
    Lama was also a paid carer,  albeit  not  a  live-in  carer  like  this
    appellant. The late Dr Silas would not have  wanted  his  widow  to  be
    treated as 'someone insignificant' and his only wish had been that  she
    be properly cared for after his death.

25. Mr Magsino acknowledged that the Article  8  ECHR  case  'may  face  an
    uphill struggle given [the appellant's]  immigration  status  when  she
    became Mrs Silas' carer' but argued that Mrs Silas had become 'uniquely
    emotionally and physically dependent on the particular company and care
    provided by the  appellant'.   He  argued  that  the  appellant's  case
    outside the Rules had not been considered by the First-tier  Judge  and
    that exceptional circumstances might avail her, on the facts.

26. As to the  consideration  of  proportionality,  the  question  for  the
    Tribunal was whether, considering all relevant  factors,  it  would  be
    unreasonable to remove the appellant.  The appellant accepted that  the
    respondent had purported to carry out the exercise of  discretion,  but
    her focus was too narrow, being limited  to  exceptional  circumstances
    rather than 'compelling circumstances'.

27. Mr Magsino admitted that alternative arrangements were 'plausible'  but
    that the sponsor's family members were 'promoting...the quality of care
    that Mrs Silas  will  receive  having  regard  to  their  previous  bad
    experiences from carers despatched by previous care agencies'. He  also
    acknowledged that  the  local  authority  and  social  services  had  a
    statutory duty to provide suitable care, and had  not  been  remiss  in
    this case, 'but one should consider the human aspect in this case',  in
    this case the private life of both the appellant and sponsor.

28. The consequence of the decision to  disrupt  the  ongoing  stable  care
    which the appellant  provided  for  the  sponsor,  who  was  a  British
    citizen, elderly and frail of health, would  be  disproportionate.  The
    appellant was seeking leave to  remain  only  while  she  remained  Mrs
    Silas' carer, not beyond that date, and could return to the Philippines
    if the appeal failed.  There was a public interest  in  Mrs  Silas  not
    expending scarce public funds on her care.

29. In oral submissions,  Mr  Magsino  covered  the  same  points,  relying
    significantly on the Lama decision.

Analysis

30. The appellant's private life is not sufficient for her  to  succeed  in
    this appeal: the First-tier Judge was obliged by  section  117B(4)  and
    (5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) to
    give it little weight.  The appeal can succeed only  if  she  can  show
    family  life  with  the  sponsor,  and/or  exceptional  or   compelling
    circumstances for which leave to remain should be granted  outside  the
    Rules.

31. President McCloskey's decision in Lama emphasised  that  there  are  no
    hard and fast rules as to what constitutes family life: it is always  a
    finding of  fact  specific  to  the  circumstances  of  the  individual
    appellant. The appellant in Lama  had always been in the United Kingdom
    lawfully, and had got to know the sponsor, a well known actor,  over  a
    period of nearly a decade, initially  as  a  tenant,  then  working  to
    support his professional and backstage life as an  actor,  despite  the
    sponsor's disability.  He also supported the sponsor's.

32. There was evidence in Lama from Mr Tim Pigott-Smith, also a well  known
    actor, and a letter of support signed by about 100 people,  emphasising
    that in addition to intimate, personal and home care, the  sponsor  was
    totally dependent on the appellant to enable him to  continue  to  act,
    the appellant having developed 'an understanding of the unusually high,
    specific demands of acting work' and that without  him,  the  sponsor's
    acting career would undoubtedly be over.

33. The contrast with the circumstances of  this  appeal  is  stark.   This
    appellant is  a  highly  qualified,  experienced  nurse,  but  she  has
    disregarded the immigration laws of  the  United  Kingdom  for  over  7
    years, since the failure of her Tier 2 skilled  worker  application  on
    which she was appeal rights exhausted in December 2013.

34. The appellant carried on working as though she  had  the  visa,  taking
    employment as the paid live in carer for a  number  of  older  disabled
    people in the Jewish community,  for  which  she  was  appreciated  and
    financially rewarded, and sending money back to her own family  in  the
    Philippines, to enable her daughter to complete  her  education  there.
    It is not clear whether that education is now complete: the appellant's
    husband and son are in employment and are presumably also contributing.
      The First-tier Judge did not err in finding that the  appellant,  who
    lived in the Philippines until she was in her late 40s, would  be  able
    to reintegrate without difficulty on return.

35. I remind myself of the narrow circumstances in which it is  appropriate
    for an appellate or reviewing Tribunal to interfere with a  finding  of
    fact by a  First-tier  Judge  who  has  heard  the  parties  give  oral
    evidence: see AA (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2020] EWCA Civ 1296 and R (Iran) & Others v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at [90] in  the  judgment  of  Lord
    Justice Brooke, with  whom  Lord  Justice  Chadwick  and  Lord  Justice
    Maurice Kay agreed.

36. In the present appeal, no such  circumstances  exist.   The  First-tier
    Judge  accepted  the  appellant's  core  account   and   gave   proper,
    intelligible and adequate reasons for finding that there is  no  family
    life between this appellant as Mrs Silas' paid carer, albeit one who is
    affectionately  regarded  by  the  family,  and   the   sponsor.    The
    exceptional circumstances advanced are that Mrs Silas loves and depends
    on the appellant,  and  that  the  appellant  supports  her  daughter's
    education in the Philippines.  The First-tier  Judge  did  not  err  in
    regarding those circumstances as neither exceptional nor compelling.

37. Accordingly, it is not open to the Upper Tribunal to substitute its own
    findings of fact for those which were properly made in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and this appeal must fail.

38. The appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

39. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law
    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     28 April
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



