
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/17005/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Wednesday 29 January 2020         |On Friday 28 February 2020           |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                              MR RANJEET SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Singh, Counsel instructed on a direct access
basis
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   BACKGROUND

     1. By a decision promulgated on 28 November 2019, I found an error  of
        law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Colvin  allowing
        the Appellant's appeal.  I therefore set aside  that  decision  and
        gave directions for a resumed hearing of the appeal.  My  error  of
        law decision is annexed to this decision for ease of reference.

     2. The facts of the Appellant's case are set out at [2] to [5]  of  my
        error of law decision and I do not need to repeat those matters.  I
        emphasise five factors at the outset.  First,  this  is  an  appeal
        against the revocation of a deportation order which was made on  31
        June 2007  and  therefore  over  twelve  years  ago.   Second,  the
        revocation decision in this appeal was made on  23  November  2017.
        Third, although the appeal against deportation was dismissed at the
        time when the deportation order was made,  the  Appellant's  appeal
        against an earlier decision refusing entry clearance  was  allowed,
        although I accept only to the extent of requiring the Respondent to
        consider whether to revoke  the  deportation  order.   Fourth,  the
        Appellant returned to  India  voluntarily  in  May  2013.   He  has
        therefore been outside the UK and separated  from  his  family  for
        over six years.  Fifth, although [H] was originally thought  to  be
        the Appellant's stepson,  a  DNA  test  following  the  Appellant's
        return to  India  has  established  that  the  Appellant  is  [H]'s
        biological father.

     3. The directions given in my error  of  law  decision  permitted  the
        Appellant to adduce further evidence.  The Appellant's  appeal  is,
        to  all  intents  and  purposes,  managed  by  his  wife.   She  is
        unrepresented although the Appellant has instructed Counsel for the
        hearing.  She submitted additional  evidence  on  27  January  2020
        which  was  itself  outside  the  period   provided   for   filing.
        Furthermore, she submitted a social worker's report only on the day
        immediately prior to the hearing.  That report  was  signed  on  13
        January 2020 and there was no explanation  why  it  was  not  filed
        earlier.  However,  Ms  Everett  accepted  that  the  evidence  was
        relevant to my  consideration  (particularly  the  social  worker's
        report) and did not object to it being adduced late.  She  has  had
        the opportunity to read and consider the evidence.

   THE ISSUES AND LEGAL FRAMEWORK

     4. As this is an appeal against a decision  to  revoke  a  deportation
        order, paragraphs 390  and  391  of  the  Immigration  Rules  ("the
        Rules")  apply.   Those  paragraphs  read  as  follows  so  far  as
        relevant:


           Revocation of deportation order
           390. An application for revocation of a deportation  order  will
           be considered in the light of all  the  circumstances  including
           the following:
           (i) the grounds on which the order was made;
           (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
           (iii) the interests of the community, including the  maintenance
           of an effective immigration control;
           (iv) the interests of the applicant, including any compassionate
           circumstances.
           390A. Where paragraph 398 applies the Secretary  of  State  will
           consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if  it  does
           not, it will only  be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
           public interest in maintaining the  deportation  order  will  be
           outweighed by other factors.
           391. In the case of a person who  has  been  deported  following
           conviction  for  a  criminal  offence,  the  continuation  of  a
           deportation order against that person will be the proper course:
           (a) in the case of a conviction for an  offence  for  which  the
           person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than  4
           years, unless 10 years have elapsed  since  the  making  of  the
           deportation order when, if  an  application  for  revocation  is
           received, consideration will be given on a case by case basis to
           whether the deportation order should be maintained, or
           ...
           Unless, in either case, the continuation would  be  contrary  to
           the Human Rights  Convention  or  the  Convention  and  Protocol
           Relating  to  the  Status  of  Refugees,  or  there  are   other
           exceptional  circumstances  that  mean   the   continuation   is
           outweighed by compelling factors.
           ...
           392. Revocation of a deportation  order  does  not  entitle  the
           person concerned to re-enter the United Kingdom; it renders  him
           eligible to apply for admission  under  the  Immigration  Rules.
           Application for revocation of the order may be made to the Entry
           Clearance Officer or direct to the Home Office."

     5. As paragraph 390A makes clear, in circumstances where paragraph 398
        applies, the usual considerations in relation to the  making  of  a
        deportation order are applicable.  At  [23]  of  my  error  of  law
        decision, I accepted the  Respondent's  submission  that  paragraph
        398(b) of the Rules applies in a deportation  case.  In  fact,  the
        paragraph is A398(b).   The relevant paragraphs of the Rules  which
        therefore apply read as follows:


           "A398. These rules apply where:
           ...;
           (b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made
           against him to be revoked.
           398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be
           contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human
           Rights Convention, and
           ...; or
           (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to
           the public good and in the public interest because, in the view
           of the Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious
           harm ...the Secretary of State in assessing that claim will
           consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does
           not, the public interest in deportation will only be outweighed
           by other factors where there are very compelling circumstances
           over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.
           399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)
           applies if -
           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
           relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is in
           the UK, and
                 (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
                 ...; and in either case
                 (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                 country to which the person is to be deported; and
                 (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in the
                 UK without the person who is to be deported; or
           (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
           partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in
           the UK, and
                 (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                 (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration
                 status was not precarious; and
                 (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live in
                 the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                 of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                 in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and
                 (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain
                 in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

     6. I am also required to have regard to the factors in Section  117A-D
        Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("Section  117").
        Section 117C is of particular relevance and reads as follows (again
        so far as relevant):


           "117CArticle 8: additional considerations in cases involving
        foreign criminals
           (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
        interest.

           (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
           criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
           the criminal.

           (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
           sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
           public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
           Exception 2 applies.

           ...

           (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
           relationship with a qualifying partner or a genuine and
           subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child and the
           effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
           unduly harsh.

           (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to
           a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
           interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
           circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1
           and 2.

           ..."


        Although the main focus in deportation cases is Section  117C,  the
        factors set out in Section 117B are also relevant (so far as  those
        are not expressly excluded in deportation cases).  I refer to those
        as necessary when reaching my assessment.

     7. It  is  appropriate  to  note  that,  although  the  Appellant  was
        sentenced to a term of imprisonment of  under  twelve  months,  and
        that the deportation decision pre-dated the coming  into  force  of
        the provisions in the  Rules  at  paragraphs  398  onwards,  he  is
        nonetheless a person to whom paragraph 398 applies as the  Tribunal
        in his appeal in 2016 found that the offence was one  which  caused
        "serious harm".    There  was  a  challenge  to  that  finding  but
        permission to appeal was refused.  That finding  therefore  stands.
        That is also relevant to the applicability of Section 117C.

     8. The Rules and Section  117C  are  in  materially  the  same  terms.
        Where, as here, a person is sentenced to a term of imprisonment  of
        under four years to which paragraph 398 applies,  the  Tribunal  is
        required to consider whether either of the two exceptions  at  rule
        399/exception  2  ("Exception  2")   or   rule   399A/exception   1
        ("Exception 1") are met.  If they are not, the Tribunal is required
        to consider whether there are very  compelling  circumstances  over
        and above those exceptions.  Although, as appears at  Section  117C
        (6) (and the corresponding provision in the Rules) on the  face  of
        the legislation this provision applies only to those  sentenced  to
        at least four years, the Court of Appeal held at [24]  to  [27]  of
        its judgment in NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2016] EWCA Civ  662  that  this  was  an  unintentional
        drafting error.   Accordingly,  that  same  "fall-back"  protection
        applies equally to those in the position of the Appellant.

     9. I note that there is no issue as to  Exception  1.   The  Appellant
        resided in the UK between August 2003 and May 2013.   None  of  his
        residence was lawful.   It  is  not  submitted  that  he  was  ever
        socially and culturally integrated  in  the  UK.   Nor  can  it  be
        suggested  that  there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
        integration in India.  He has been back  there  now  for  over  six
        years.  The focus is rather on the  impact  of  separation  on  his
        wife, his stepson and, most importantly, his  biological  son  [H].
        Rule 399 and Exception 2 are therefore the relevant provisions.

    10. As to the meaning of unduly  harsh  within  those  provisions,  the
        Supreme Court gave guidance at [23] of its judgment in KO (Nigeria)
        and others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC
        53 ("KO (Nigeria)") as follows:

           "On the other hand the expression 'unduly harsh'  seems  clearly
           intended  to  introduce   a   higher   hurdle   than   that   of
           'reasonableness' under section 117B (6), taking account  of  the
           public  interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign   criminals.
           Further the word 'unduly' implies an element of comparison.   It
           assumes that there is a 'due' level of 'harshness',  that  is  a
           level which may be acceptable or  justifiable  in  the  relevant
           context.  'Unduly' implies something going  beyond  that  level.
           The relevant context is that set by section 117C  (1),  that  is
           the public interest in the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.
           One is looking for a degree of harshness going beyond what would
           necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation
           of a parent..."

    11. At [27] of the judgment in KO (Nigeria), the  Court  expanded  upon
        what is meant by "unduly harsh" by reference to what  was  said  by
        this Tribunal in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
        Home Department [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC) as follows:

           "...'unduly  harsh'  does   not   equate   with   uncomfortable,
           inconvenient, undesirable or merely difficult.  Rather, it poses
           a  considerably  more  elevated  threshold.   'Harsh'  in   this
           context,  denotes  something  severe,  or  bleak.   It  is   the
           antithesis  of  pleasant  or  comfortable.    Furthermore,   the
           addition of the  adverb  'unduly'  raises  an  already  elevated
           standard still higher."

    12. If I am not satisfied that Exception 2 is met in this case, I  need
        to go on to consider whether there are nonetheless very  compelling
        circumstances over and above  the  exceptions,  in  practice  here,
        Exception 2.  That requires me to consider all  factors,  including
        the weight to be given to the public interest.  That  is  important
        in this case, not only because I can there consider the nature  and
        seriousness of the offence which led to the Appellant's deportation
        but also the passage of time since that offence was  committed  and
        the deportation order made and the length of the separation of  the
        family members.

    13. In relation to  the  passage  of  time  since  the  making  of  the
        deportation order, I refer to what I said at [15]  to  [24]  of  my
        error of law decision and the cases to which I there  have  regard.
        I do not need to repeat any of that.  I  simply  observe  that  the
        relevant period for these purposes is the twelve  years  since  the
        deportation order was made.  Nonetheless, and although  it  is  the
        case that this exceeds the ten years mentioned in paragraph  391(a)
        (cited above), there is no  presumption  that  this  leads  to  the
        revocation of the  deportation  order.   The  materiality  of  this
        factor is one to be taken into account, but it does not necessarily
        lead to revocation.

    14. In Hesham Ali v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]
        UKSC 60, the Supreme Court advocated  a  "balance  sheet  approach"
        when considering the Article 8 issue more widely; in  other  words,
        setting  out  on  the  one  side  the  nature  and  level  of   the
        interference with private and family life  and  on  the  other  the
        nature and extent of the public interest.

    15. In short summary, therefore the issues to be determined are:

        a) Is it unduly harsh for [H]  to  go  to  India  to  be  with  the
           Appellant or to continue to live in the UK without him?

        b) Is it unduly harsh for the Appellant's wife to go to India to be
           with him or to continue to live in the UK without him?

        c) If the answer to either or both of those questions is "yes", the
           Appellant is entitled to succeed.

        d) If the answer to both of those questions is "no", I have  to  go
           on to consider whether there are very  compelling  circumstances
           over and above Exception 2.  That does not preclude me factoring
           into that assessment, considerations  which  arise  also  within
           that exception.

   EVIDENCE

    16. I have before me the  Appellant's  bundle  of  evidence  which  was
        before the First-tier Tribunal to which I refer as [AB/xx].  I also
        have supplementary evidence to which I have referred at [3]  above.
         I also have the Respondent's bundle of evidence to which  I  refer
        as [RB/xx].  I have read and considered all the evidence  but  need
        only refer to that which is  relevant  to  the  issues  I  have  to
        decide.

    17. I heard  oral  evidence  from  the  Appellant's  wife,  [MK].   The
        Appellant's son,  [H],  also  attended  the  hearing.   Ms  Everett
        indicated that she had no need to cross-examine [H] but I was  told
        that he wished to address me, and I agreed that he could do so.  It
        was though clear when he started to give evidence that he  was  too
        nervous and distressed to do so  and  therefore  his  evidence  was
        brought to an end.  I make clear, particularly in relation  to  [H]
        that I have read his statement  very  carefully  before  making  my
        decision and I have also played close attention to what is said  in
        the social worker's report about the impact on  him  of  separation
        from his father.

    18. I have an undated, signed witness statement from the  Appellant  at
        [AB/22-32] which is detailed.  There was  no  application  for  the
        Appellant to give video evidence from India.  However, none of what
        he says is contentious.  The statement provides a detailed  history
        of his time in the UK and since.

    19. In relation to the offence of which the Appellant was convicted, he
        was sentenced in the Croydon Crown Court  on  15  June  2007.   The
        conviction was for the possession of a false identity  document  (a
        counterfeit ARC card).  He was sentenced to and served four  months
        in prison.  The sentencing remarks appear at [RB/C1-3].  The  Judge
        gave a  lesser  sentence  because  of  the  Appellant's  age.   The
        Appellant was said to be eighteen at the time although I note  that
        his marriage certificate at [AB/53] (issued in India) shows that he
        was born in 1982 and not 1988 as given in the  sentencing  remarks.
        It appears therefore that he lied about his age  (probably  to  the
        authorities in the UK).  The Judge recommended  the  Appellant  for
        deportation.  As the Judge noted,  the  Appellant  was  in  the  UK
        illegally and had been using the false document to work  illegally.
        The Judge said that "the only purpose of your being here was to try
        and get round the immigration laws for economic motives".

    20. The Appellant accepts that he "did wrong" but points out  that  his
        "offence was at the lower end of  the  scale".   He  believes  "the
        punishment  [his]  family  has  suffered  goes  way  beyond   [his]
        offence". At [17] of the statement he says this:

           "I did not kill or hurt anyone.  I did it to get by but since  I
           did it and was charged I accepted I was wrong and is  sorry  for
           it.  I know this.  That's why I left the United  Kingdom,  as  I
           wanted to be a good person and do everything properly."

    21. The Appellant reports that he is living in a village in India  with
        his parents which he says "is not ideal at all".

    22. Dealing with his family life, the Appellant met [MK]  in  2004  and
        they became friends.  She had been married before and  suffered  an
        abusive relationship.  As a result, she took time to  trust  anyone
        else.  They entered into a relationship in 2005 and started  living
        together in 2010.  They married in India in June 2013.  I note from
        the marriage certificate that [MK] was born in India.

    23. [MK] has two sons, both  of  whom  were  thought  to  be  from  her
        previous relationship.  However, a DNA test conducted in July  2017
        established that [H] is the Appellant's son.  I  note  incidentally
        that this also gives the Appellant's date of birth as 1982 and  not
        1988.  [H] was born in June 2006. [MK]'s other son was born in  May
        2000 and is now an adult.

    24. [MK] has provided a statement at [AB/33-42] which is  unsigned  and
        undated.  However, she adopted its contents  as  true  when  giving
        oral evidence.  She explained that some of  it  was  put  in  legal
        language which she did not entirely understand  and  therefore  had
        also handwritten a letter  which  was  submitted  as  part  of  the
        additional  evidence.   The   statement   at   [AB/33-42]   largely
        replicates the Appellant's witness statement.  That does not mean I
        give  it  any  less  weight,  but  I  pay  more  attention  to  her
        handwritten statement as that gives her evidence in her own  words.



    25.  [MK]  confirms  what  is  said  by  the  Appellant   about   their
        relationship and her previous marriage.  She says she did not  know
        of the Appellant's unlawful immigration  status  when  she  entered
        into the relationship and when [H] was born. She did not know until
        he was arrested for illegal working.  She says  that  although  the
        Home Office wanted to remove the Appellant to India  at  the  time,
        they could not do so as they could not get documents  for  him.  He
        was therefore released on reporting conditions  (although  detained
        periodically for removal).

    26. [MK] also says in her handwritten statement, that the  Home  Office
        muddled her husband's case with another person and tried to  deport
        him under a different name.  This is not particularly relevant  but
        is possibly explained by the fact  that  the  Appellant  was  using
        false documents to work illegally and  that  the  Home  Office  was
        unable to  establish  his  real  identity.   It  appears  from  her
        handwritten statement that this is probably the case  as  she  says
        that she had to go back to India at the time to get  her  husband's
        birth certificate so that he could apply for a  passport.  Whatever
        the position, the Appellant was able to continue to live in the  UK
        with her and the children for a further five years whilst the  Home
        Office tried to deport him. When  he  obtained  his  passport,  the
        Appellant left voluntarily.

    27. In terms of the impact of deportation on  [MK]  herself,  she  says
        that she is very depressed, has anxiety and trouble sleeping.   She
        has been referred for counselling.  She says her mental  health  is
        starting to be affected.

    28. The impact on [MK]'s health is borne out to some limited extent  by
        a letter from Shereen Everett, a  Trainee  Psychological  Wellbeing
        Practitioner with West London NHS Trust  dated  23  December  2019.
        That letter follows an initial triage assessment appointment on  17
        December 2019.  [MK] reported to  the  practitioner  that  she  was
        "feeling lonely and low in mood" due to  the  separation  from  her
        husband.  She said that this was impacting "several  areas  of  her
        life" but that, nonetheless, she remained able to care for [H].

    29. The practitioner reported, based on completion of a  questionnaire,
        that [MK] is "experiencing moderately-severe symptoms of low  mood"
        and "severe symptoms of anxiety". [MK] was not considered to  be  a
        suicide risk or a risk to others or  herself.   A  risk  management
        plan was agreed.  [MK] elected to receive "telephoned guided  self-
        help" and has been referred for that. There is  no  evidence  about
        any past contact with mental health professionals during the period
        of her separation from the Appellant nor that [MK] is being treated
        with any medication for her condition.

    30. [MK] is in full-time,  permanent  employment.   She  owns  her  own
        house.

    31. [H] has provided a statement at [AB/47-52] which he signed  at  the
        hearing before me and is therefore dated 29 January  2020.   Again,
        this largely replicates the statement of  his  parents  and  cannot
        have been written by him.  For that reason, I do not  need  to  set
        out much of what is in this statement.

    32. [H] describes the continuing contact between  him  (and  his  half-
        brother [M]) and the Appellant  (which  is  as  also  said  in  the
        Appellant's  and  [MK]'s  statement).   They  contact  each   other
        regularly using Videocall, Whatsapp and Skype.  [H]  and  [M]  have
        been to India twice, in January 2014 and late 2015.  They  did  not
        like India. [H] says that he could not live there. He says this:

           "India is not the  same  as  the  United  Kingdom.   The  United
           Kingdom is developed and India still has a long way to go before
           it becomes anything like the level of development in the  United
           Kingdom.  In the United Kingdom, there are lanes, law and  order
           etc but in India it is chaos."

        I express some doubt about whether  those  words  were  written  or
        spoken by a child of [H]'s age.  Nevertheless, I  accept  that  the
        point that there is a very different culture and  way  of  life  in
        India to which he would not be accustomed.

    33. The better evidence of [H]'s feelings  about  separation  from  his
        father is to be found in the  Independent  Social  Work  Report  of
        Sarah Edwards, dated as signed on 13 January 2020  ("the  Report").
        I note and  accept  Ms  Edwards'  professional  qualifications  and
        experience.  I did not find helpful what she says about the  impact
        of separation or a move to India  being  "unduly  harsh"  for  [H].
        That is a matter for my assessment and not for her  to  decide.   I
        accept however as Mr Singh submitted, that she may have carried out
        the assessment as if this were an appraisal of the situation for  a
        Family Court case rather than applying the  test  set  out  in  the
        Rules and Section 117C.

    34. Before I set out what is in the Report, I have regard to  a  letter
        from [H]'s school, undated, and written  by  Ms  Lallian,  Business
        Studies  and  Psychology  Teacher,  Head  of  Year  9.   She  there
        describes [H] as being, in the past, "a positive and  hard  working
        student".  However, in the current year the school has  noticed  "a
        big change in his emotional state as well as his  attitude  towards
        learning".  The school is understandably concerned  about  what  is
        happening in his life outside school.  The school has noticed  that
        [H] is withdrawn, does not engage with adults as he used to,  looks
        constantly tired and "not as smart" and is  becoming  emotional  in
        school.   Although he now has 91% attendance, the school  considers
        him to be a persistent absentee.  Ms Lallian also points  out  that
        this is a critical year for [H]  as  he  has  to  choose  his  GCSE
        options.

    35. Although the letter is undated, I  assume  that  the  reference  to
        "this year" is to the academic year 2019-2020 given when the letter
        was produced and that [H] is shortly to select his GCSEs  (as  [MK]
        said in oral evidence).  It appears from the letter and from [MK]'s
        oral evidence that [H] is getting help  with  his  problems.   [MK]
        said  he  is  being  given   special   classes   and   counselling,
        particularly from his head of year (I assume Ms Lallian) and  other
        teachers.  The school is referring [H] for counselling but  talking
        to him and giving him special care in  the  meanwhile.   [MK]  said
        that [H] was "doing OK" with this additional help.

    36. As Ms Everett pointed out in submissions, the  problems  which  the
        school identifies could be a matter of [H]'s age. He  is  now  aged
        thirteen.  However, the Report records that  [MK]'s  view  is  that
        these are caused by the "impact of the immigration case".   As  was
        put to me by Mr Singh, it is the ups and  downs  of  appeals  being
        allowed and then decisions reversed.

    37. Ms Edwards spoke to [H] about school.  He told her he "enjoys  it".
        He has support from three teachers in particular.  What is said  at
        [8.7.4] to [8.7.6] of the Report paints a picture of a child who is
        relatively well-adjusted.  However, when Ms Edwards discussed  with
        [H] his wishes and feelings, he said that he is "scared" that  [MK]
        will stop trying to get his father to the UK and that this Tribunal
        will reject his father's case.  That does indicate a  preoccupation
        with the appeal proceedings.  He does however  identify  a  support
        network of people who he goes to and that he has  outlets  when  he
        feels upset of going to the temple or  listening  to  music.   When
        asked what he would wish for if he had three wishes, the  first  is
        "for his Dad to come back".

    38. What is said by Ms Edwards at [9.1.2] and [9.1.3] of the Report  is
        particularly telling.  She points out that the current contact  via
        social media "limits his ability  in  having  a  proper  meaningful
        relationship with his father".  Although she  notes  the  stability
        and security which [MK] is able to offer [H] she  says  that  "[MK]
        and [H] advise that they do not feel that the current situation  is
        something they can cope with for much longer, and they both  suffer
        a high level of anxiety and pressure concerning the continued legal
        process in respect of Mr Singh."  At [9.1.3]  she  records  [H]  as
        saying that "things seem 'weird and confusing'  explaining  that  a
        couple of months ago 'it  was  good  and  I  was  happy'  with  the
        previous court decision but then the latest court decision  changed
        this".  All of that points to it being the  uncertainty  caused  by
        the ongoing separation and appeal proceedings  which  is  adversely
        affecting [H].

    39. Ms Edwards very helpfully sets out in tabular  form  the  pros  and
        cons of [H] remaining in the UK  without  his  father,  having  his
        father return to the UK to be with him, and of the family moving to
        India.   Although Ms Everett did not press the option of the family
        relocating to India (although did not  concede  that  it  would  be
        unduly harsh for them to do so), I record in summary form  what  Ms
        Edwards says about all three options.

    40. If [H] remains separated from his father, he would continue to have
        the support of [MK] and others from which he currently benefits but
        it would be contrary to his wishes.  He would also continue to have
        regular contact but limited as it is now.  His emotional  wellbeing
        may continue to be impacted as it is now  by  the  uncertainty  and
        that may also impact his educational attainment,  although  [H]  is
        now receiving support from the  school.    [H]'s  "identity"  would
        also be impacted by the separation from one of  his  parents.    He
        would however continue to benefit from the stability  and  security
        that [MK] offers him.  [H] is fully integrated within the UK. There
        are no health needs identified.  The impact in relation to [H]  for
        the Appellant is that he would not be able  to  parent  him.   [MK]
        could continue to do so although  without  the  benefit  of  shared
        parenting.

    41. If the Appellant were allowed to  return  to  the  UK,  this  would
        accord with [H]'s wishes.  The Appellant would be able to care  for
        [H] and parent him. [H] would have the support of his father  which
        would remove the "current  triggers  for  his  negative  feelings".
        [H]'s education and integration in the UK would  not  be  adversely
        affected.  [H]'s identity would be informed by his father and  they
        would be able to develop a father-son relationship.  Stability  and
        safety would be provided by both parents.

    42. If the family were to relocate to India, [H] would be able to  live
        with both parents.  However, this would sever his integrative links
        with the UK and also his sibling relationship with his elder  half-
        brother ([M] is now a police officer and has said that he would not
        leave the UK).   [H] knows nothing about India.  That is likely  to
        impact on his emotional wellbeing.  [H] would also lose his friends
        in the UK and his support network here.  The educational system  in
        India is likely to be different  and  a  move  there  is  therefore
        likely to negatively impact on [H]'s education. [H] would lose  his
        home, community and identity as a British citizen.   Stability  and
        safety would also be impacted.   [MK]  says  she  has  no  home  or
        employment in India.

    43. Little is said about the  Appellant's  stepson,  [M].   The  Report
        indicates that he would be unlikely to go to India were the  family
        to move there.  [MK] said in her oral evidence  that  [M]  and  [H]
        have a good relationship.  However, when asked  whether  [M]  helps
        [H] with his homework and the such like, she said "not much" as [M]
        is  nineteen  and  has  his  own  life.   [MK]  also  says  in  her
        handwritten statement that [H] becomes  upset  because  [M]  has  a
        relationship  with  his  own  father  (I  assume  [MK]'s   previous
        husband).

   SUBMISSIONS

    44. Ms Everett relied on the Respondent's decision under  appeal.   She
        also relied on my error of law decision in relation to the approach
        to be taken.  No issue is taken with my decision as to the  way  in
        which the law is to be applied. Ms Everett accepted that the public
        interest is lessened by the  passing  of  time,  but  it  does  not
        evaporate entirely.  It is not a "neutral square one".

    45. Although Ms Everett did not concede that it would be  unduly  harsh
        for [MK] and [H] to go to live in India, she focussed her attention
        on the option of them staying in the  UK  and  remaining  separated
        from the Appellant.  She made clear that none of the facts  as  set
        out in the evidence were disputed.  She also acknowledged that  [H]
        wishes to have his father in the UK.

    46. However, she also pointed out that the evidence in relation to  [H]
        as contained in the letter from the school and the Report  is  "not
        straightforward".  She submitted that at the age  he  is,  [H]  may
        have problems in any event.  The teenage  years  can  be  difficult
        ones.  The evidence was that [H] is "doing OK" with the  help  from
        the school.

    47. Ms Everett accepted that the family wish to be together.   However,
        she said that the effects of deportation are  "routinely  upsetting
        and challenging" and the upset caused by deportation could  not  of
        itself be unduly harsh.  She submitted that the test was not met on
        the evidence here.

    48. When looking beyond Exception 2, Ms Everett submitted that I should
        take into account that the decision to deport was upheld.  That was
        a factor of  some  weight.   The  nature  and  seriousness  of  the
        underlying offence was a further  relevant  factor.   She  accepted
        that weight had to be attached to family life  but  submitted  that
        this could be continued as it is now even if that is not the way in
        which the family wishes to conduct it.  I should  not  ignore  that
        family life is able to be maintained.

    49. Mr Singh  adopted  his  skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal.  I do not need to set out what is there contained as most
        is directed at the  legal  provisions  as  to  which  there  is  no
        dispute.   Mr Singh accepted that the approach was as set out in my
        error of law decision.  The relevant approach, Rules,  statute  and
        caselaw are as set out at [4] to [15] above.

    50. Mr Singh's oral submissions were largely directed at the option  of
        [MK] and [H] going to live in India even though Ms Everett did  not
        press that option.  I have taken note  of  what  he  said  in  that
        regard which I consider below but, in my view, the  more  pertinent
        parts of his submissions relate to the option of the "status  quo",
        in other words, the Appellant remaining in India and [MK]  and  [H]
        remaining in the UK.

    51. In relation to Exception  2  and  whether  the  impact  is  "unduly
        harsh", Mr Singh relied on the Report.  He emphasised in particular
        that, although [H] has been separated from the Appellant for  about
        six years, he has only become aware in that time and more  recently
        that the Appellant is his biological father.  That has  intensified
        the impact of separation.  That separation has prevented  [H]  from
        being able to form the bond with his biological father in  the  way
        that his elder brother is able to do with  his  father.   Mr  Singh
        submitted that the  effect  of  continued  separation  is  "bleak",
        particularly taking into account the effects on [H]'s education.

    52. Mr Singh also urged on me that [H] should not  be  blamed  for  the
        offence committed by his father.  As I pointed out,  however,  that
        is not the issue.  Section 117C sets out the test  to  which  I  am
        bound to have regard which applies equally to a child  impacted  by
        deportation.   I  accept  that  punishment  of  the  Appellant   by
        deportation has an impact on the child, but that is provided for by
        the law.  This is not a case where the child himself is  threatened
        with removal.

    53. When assessing whether  there  are  very  compelling  circumstances
        above Exception 2, Mr Singh urged  me  to  take  into  account  the
        wishes and feelings of [H] as well as his emotional needs  and  the
        impact on his education, particularly at such a crucial time.   His
        best interests are, I accept, a relevant factor in that assessment.



    54. As to the passage of time, Mr Singh pointed to the reference to ten
        years in paragraph 391.  He said that this was an indication  of  a
        proportionate period to maintain deportation in  a  "normal  case".
        There was a lessening of the public interest.

   DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

   Exception 2: Unduly Harsh

    55. I begin with the impact of deportation on [H] as he is the focus of
        the Exception 2 case. I accept that it would be difficult  for  him
        to relocate to India.  He has only ever known UK culture.   He  has
        grown up here, has undergone all his education here and has friends
        here.  He is clearly fully integrated in the  UK.  He  has  visited
        India  twice  but  did  not  like  it.    That   is   not   however
        determinative.  He has two parents who both  come  originally  from
        that country and who could no doubt help him to adapt  to  life  in
        India.  I recognise that [MK] has been in the UK for many years but
        there is no evidence to suggest that she is not still familiar with
        life in India, having been born and having grown up there.

    56. I accept that a move to India would have a negative impact on [H]'s
        education.  That is particularly so given the stage he has  reached
        in his education.  He is about  to  embark  on  his  GCSE  courses.
        However, the Appellant has produced no evidence about the education
        system in India.  There is therefore limited information as to  the
        differences which enable any detailed assessment of the  extent  of
        any impact.   There are no health concerns.  I  do  accept  however
        that the impact is negative and comes at a  particularly  important
        time in [H]'s life.

    57. I accept that the impact on [H]  of  such  a  significant  move  is
        likely to be greater given his age.  He is not a very  young  child
        who would be expected to adapt more quickly.  I  also  accept  that
        [H] would be upset by separation from his half-brother, [M], who is
        likely to stay in the UK.  However, I have little information about
        [M] or the closeness of the relationship between them.

    58. Most of the impacts  I  have  identified  are  ones  which  are  an
        anticipated consequence of  deportation.   However,  based  on  the
        combined effect of [H]'s age,  his  lack  of  knowledge  of  Indian
        culture, his assimilation to British culture, his  separation  from
        his elder brother and, most importantly, the adverse effect on  his
        education at a crucial point in that education, I  accept  that  it
        would be unduly harsh for [H] to go to India.

    59. That is, however, not the end of the matter.  I  have  to  consider
        whether it would be unduly harsh for [H] to remain in the UK whilst
        the Appellant remains in India.

    60. The high point of the Appellant's case in that regard is  contained
        within the evidence from the social worker and the letter from  the
        school.  Unusually, in this case, however, I have  the  benefit  of
        hindsight as [H] has been separated from the Appellant  for  nearly
        half his life.  The evidence from the school in particular suggests
        that it is only recently that [H] has been  adversely  affected  by
        the separation in terms of his  behaviour.   I  accept  Mr  Singh's
        submission that this may be in part due to the discovery  that  the
        Appellant is his biological father although that  is  not  strongly
        supported by the evidence (and that discovery was made as long  ago
        as July 2017).  I also accept as Ms Everett says that this  may  be
        due to [H]'s age.  It may well be a combination of those factors.

    61. However, the evidence points to the more significant cause  of  the
        recent downturn being the appeal proceedings themselves.   One  can
        readily understand that a child of [H]'s age, having  learned  that
        his father may now be in a position to apply to come back to the UK
        and  having  been  excited  by  that  prospect  would  suffer   the
        disappointment of a reversal of that decision more acutely.    That
        does not however indicate that the impact of the deportation itself
        is unduly harsh.

    62. I have carefully considered all the  evidence  about  [H]  and  the
        impact on him over the time since the Appellant  was  deported.   I
        accept that he has found the  separation  very  difficult  and  the
        consequences are  undoubtedly  harsh,  even  very  harsh,  but  the
        evidence does not  show  that  those  are  of  the  elevated  level
        required to establish that the impact is unduly harsh.

    63. I can deal with the impact on [MK] more swiftly.  I accept that she
        has a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  the  Appellant
        notwithstanding the lengthy separation.  [MK] cannot meet the  test
        in paragraph 399(b) as her  relationship  with  the  Appellant  was
        formed when the Appellant was in the UK unlawfully.  That does  not
        however prevent  her  meeting  the  test  under  Section  117C  (5)
        (Exception 2) if it would be unduly harsh for her to go to live  in
        India with the Appellant or to remain in the UK without him.

    64. In terms of living in India, [MK] was herself born there.  She  has
        been in the UK for over twenty years.  According to  her  statement
        she moved here in 1997.  Although she is now British, she therefore
        lived in India for over twenty years also (she was born  in  1972).
        She grew  up  there.   I  have  no  information  about  any  family
        remaining there apart from the Appellant, but she will at least  be
        familiar with the culture.  She has been to visit the Appellant  in
        India. There is evidence that she is content to travel there  alone
        as  she  did  when  she  needed  to  get  the   Appellant's   birth
        certificate. Whilst she would be leaving behind her  home  and  job
        that is no different to any other deportation case.  Indeed, it  is
        not any different to a removals case  where  the  test  is  one  of
        whether there are any insurmountable obstacles to family life being
        continued in another country.  Here, that test is not  met  on  the
        evidence in relation to [MK] (leaving aside the position of [H] who
        I have accepted cannot be expected to go to India). It follows that
        it is not unduly harsh for her to go to live in India.

    65. As to [MK] remaining in the UK, leaving  aside  for  a  moment  the
        position of [H], I do not accept that the evidence shows that it is
        unduly harsh for her to continue as she has done for the  past  six
        years or so.  She is said to have some problems with low  mood  and
        anxiety but there is limited evidence about this, such as how  long
        the condition has  lasted,  and  no  evidence  that  she  has  been
        receiving treatment for it until very recently.  It may well be  as
        is said in relation to [H] that it is the "ups and  downs"  of  the
        appeal process and  the  uncertainty  which  has  had  the  greater
        effect, particularly given the timing.  In any event, the  evidence
        shows that she remains able to parent [H] and to continue to  work.
        The evidence does not show that the high threshold in  Exception  2
        is met so far as the impact relates to [MK] alone.

   Very Compelling Circumstances

    66. For those reasons, the Appellant cannot show that  Exception  2  is
        satisfied.  I therefore turn to consider  whether  there  are  very
        compelling circumstances above Exception 2.  In so  doing,  I  take
        into account what I have already said about the impacts on [MK] and
        [H].  I have accepted that it would be unduly harsh to  expect  [H]
        to go to India to live with the Appellant.  I  have  also  accepted
        that the impact of continued  separation  is  very  harsh  but  not
        unduly so.  Although I have concluded that the impact of  continued
        deportation on [MK]  is  not  unduly  harsh,  nonetheless,  I  have
        accepted that she is in a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
        the Appellant and that she  is  finding  the  continued  separation
        difficult.

    67. I have regard to [H]'s best interests.  In this regard, I  have  no
        hesitation in accepting the social worker's evidence that it is  in
        his best interests to remain in the UK living  with  and  with  the
        support of both parents.  Although I do not accept the  point  made
        about the loss of his father's identity if separation continues  as
        [MK] herself originates from India and therefore can assist in that
        regard, I accept that it is [H]'s very strong wish for  his  father
        to come to the UK and I can readily accept that it is generally  in
        a child's best interest to have both parents with him.

    68. I am bound to apply Section 117 which  includes  not  only  Section
        117C but also Section 117B.  In particular,  when  considering  the
        weight to be given to the Appellant's family life (and that of  his
        family members in the UK), I am required to give little weight to a
        family life which was formed whilst here unlawfully.  I accept that
        the Appellant's family life with [MK] falls into that  category  as
        does his  life  with  [H].   However,  this  is  an  unusual  case.
        Although the Appellant's stay in the UK was  wholly  unlawful,  his
        relationship with [MK] and [H] (and to the extent relevant [M]) has
        been developed and strengthened when he has been outside the UK and
        therefore not in the UK unlawfully.  That is particularly  relevant
        in this case as the Appellant and [H]  have  discovered  since  the
        Appellant left the UK that they are father and son.   I  also  give
        more weight to family life in this  case  because  the  family  has
        maintained a strong relationship notwithstanding  the  geographical
        separation and infrequent direct contact.  There is very clearly  a
        strong family bond.

    69. Balanced against that  family  life,  I  have  to  set  the  public
        interest.  I recognise that Section 117B has application here  also
        due to the Appellant's prior unlawful residence  in  the  UK.   The
        maintenance of effective immigration control is relevant not simply
        based on the unlawful residence but also the fact of using a  false
        document in order to work illegally when the Appellant had no right
        to do so.  That is undermining of the immigration system.

    70. I also accept that Section 117C is relevant.  In this regard, I  do
        have some concerns about whether it can really  be  said  that  the
        offence committed was one which caused serious harm.  That  is  the
        only basis on which it can be said that the Appellant is a  foreign
        criminal within the definition in Section 117D.  However, that  was
        a finding made by an earlier Tribunal and the Appellant was refused
        permission to appeal that finding.  It is also  a  relevant  factor
        when looking at revocation of the deportation order as it  is  part
        of the circumstances of the initial deportation.

    71. Serious harm does not in any event denote only harm in the sense of
        violence but also societal harm.  It could not  sensibly  be  said,
        for example, that the supply of Class A drugs  is  not  an  offence
        involving serious harm (although in practice that is unlikely to be
        relevant as the sentence is likely to exceed the minimum).  It  can
        therefore be said that an offence which has an  impact  on  the  UK
        economy by illegal working  using  false  documents  is  one  which
        causes serious harm.  I also note that the sentence was reduced  as
        a result of the Appellant's age and that he lied about his age.  He
        was in fact over 18 at the time of the offence and  may  well  have
        been sentenced to 12 months in prison had his true age been  known.
         For the reasons I have given in  relation  to  Section  117B,  the
        offence of which the Appellant was convicted is one which did cause
        harm to the immigration  system,  whether  or  not  that  could  be
        described as serious. It was not in any event suggested to me  that
        Section  117C  should  not  be  applied.   Mr  Singh's  submissions
        proceeded on the basis that it applies.

    72. The nature of the offence is however a relevant consideration  when
        it comes to considering whether it is proportionate  to  refuse  to
        revoke  the  deportation  order.  The  more  serious  the   offence
        committed by the foreign criminal, the greater the public  interest
        in deportation.  Whilst, for the  reasons  I  have  explained,  the
        offence is one which is undermining of immigration control  and  to
        that extent serious, it does not fall at  the  higher  end  of  the
        spectrum of seriousness, as is reflected by the sentence which  was
        imposed.

    73. Moreover, the offence was committed  in  2007  and  therefore  over
        twelve years ago.  It is the Appellant's only offence  (other  than
        to remain in the UK without leave).  For the reasons I gave  in  my
        error of law decision, the passage of  time  does  not  create  any
        presumption that the time has come to revoke the deportation order.
         However, it is relevant that the  Respondent  indicates  that  ten
        years is an appropriate starting point for consideration whether to
        revoke the deportation order in circumstances where the sentence is
        under four years.

    74. As the Rules now provide, after the period of ten years, each  case
        has to be considered on its own  facts.   I  have  regard  in  this
        context to what is said in the Rules about  the  relevant  factors.
        Those include the grounds on which the order was made  to  which  I
        have already made  reference,  and  the  maintenance  of  effective
        immigration control to which I  have  also  had  regard.   Balanced
        against those considerations are the representations in  favour  of
        revocation  and  the  interests  of  the  Appellant  including  any
        compassionate circumstances.  When the Respondent is  carrying  out
        the exercise of  considering  revocation,  she  does  so  based  on
        paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Rules which  largely  replicate  the
        exceptions in Section 117C.  As is made clear at paragraph 390A, if
        those exceptions do not apply, it  will  only  be  "in  exceptional
        circumstances  that  the  public  interest   in   maintaining   the
        deportation order will  be  outweighed  by  other  considerations".
        That in essence mirrors  the  assessment  whether  there  are  very
        compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions  in  Section
        117C.

    75. As such, the balance which I have to carry out remains between  the
        circumstances over and above the exceptions (in this case Exception
        2) as against the public interest.

    76. In favour of the Appellant, I take into account in  particular  the
        adverse impact on [H] of continued separation, that  he  cannot  be
        expected to go to live in India and also, to a lesser  extent,  the
        continued effect  of  separation  on  [MK].   I  balance  what  are
        undoubtedly harsh or very harsh consequences for  [H]  against  the
        nature and seriousness of the offence of which  the  Appellant  was
        convicted now over twelve years ago.   Although I also give  weight
        to the maintenance of effective immigration control and the  impact
        of the Appellant's offence in that regard (as well as his  unlawful
        presence in the UK), the weight to be given to the public  interest
        is reduced by the passage of time, the fact that the Appellant  has
        committed no further offences and left the UK voluntarily.  I  also
        take into account the length of separation of the  family  to  date
        and the strong family life which has  continued  and  developed  in
        that time, as well as the intensification of family life  based  on
        the discovery that [H] is the Appellant's biological son.

    77. When the factors for and against are balanced, I am satisfied  that
        there  are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above   the
        exceptions which render the decision to  maintain  the  deportation
        order disproportionate.

    78. The consequence of my decision is that I  consider  that  continued
        separation enforced by the deportation order  is  disproportionate.
        I emphasise however, particularly for the benefit of [H]  and  [MK]
        that the effect of my decision is only that to refuse to revoke the
        deportation order is disproportionate.  It  will  be  open  to  the
        Appellant thereafter to apply to join his family in the UK  and  my
        findings as to the proportionality  of  continued  separation  will
        obviously have a bearing but the issue  of  entry  clearance  is  a
        matter which will be for  the  Respondent  to  consider  when  that
        application is made.




   CONCLUSION

    79. For the above reasons, I conclude that  the  Respondent's  decision
        refusing to revoke the deportation order  is  disproportionate  and
        therefore unlawful under the Human Rights Act 1998.

DECISION
The Appellant's appeal is allowed on the  basis  that  the  refusal  of  the
Appellant's human rights claim made in the context of the decision  refusing
to revoke the deportation order is unlawful under  Section  6  Human  Rights
Act 1998 (Article 8 ECHR).


Signed           [pic] Dated: 12 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/17005/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,    |Determination Promulgated            |
|London                               |                                     |
|On Monday 25 November 2019           |                                     |
|                                     |...28 November 2019...............   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              MR RANJEET SINGH
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr B Singh, Counsel instructed on a direct access
basis


                    ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS
      BACKGROUND

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference, I
      refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal  even
      though the Secretary of  State  is  strictly  the  Appellant  at  this
      juncture.  The Respondent appeals against  a  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Colvin promulgated on 30 August 2019  ("the  Decision")
      allowing the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision
      dated 22 November 2017 refusing his human rights  claim  made  in  the
      context of a decision maintaining a  deportation  order  against  him.
      The deportation order was made on 2 April 2008.

   2. The Appellant is an Indian national.  He first came to  the  attention
      of the UK authorities when he was arrested in August 2003 whereupon he
      claimed asylum.  He was placed in the care of Social  Services  as  he
      claimed to be aged only fourteen years. The  asylum  claim  was  later
      refused on non-compliance grounds, the Appellant having  gone  missing
      from the care of Social Services.  The Appellant was  arrested  on  15
      April 2005 for assaulting his landlord and again placed in  care,  but
      he failed to report.  He was again arrested on 25  April  2007  and  a
      counterfeit ARC card was found during a search of his  home.   He  was
      convicted of possession of a false identity document and sentenced  to
      four months' detention.  He was also recommended for deportation.  The
      Respondent gave the Appellant notice of her intention to deport him on
      31 June 2007.  His appeal was dismissed by the Tribunal by a  decision
      promulgated on 7 January 2008.

   3. In January 2011, the Appellant again claimed asylum which was  refused
      in June 2011.  He voluntarily returned to India on 13 May  2013.    In
      July 2013, the Appellant's wife, who  is  a  British  citizen,  sought
      revocation  of  the  deportation  order  and  in  December  2013,  the
      Appellant applied for  entry  clearance  as  a  spouse  of  a  British
      citizen.  That application was refused but  a  subsequent  appeal  was
      allowed on human rights grounds in December  2014.   On  challenge  of
      that decision by the Respondent, the appeal  was  allowed  in  October
      2015 to the extent of requiring the Respondent to deal with the  issue
      of revocation of the deportation  order  prior  to  dealing  with  the
      settlement application.

   4. On 27 February 2016, the Respondent refused to revoke the  deportation
      order.  The Appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed.  A
      further application to revoke the deportation order on 29 August  2017
      was refused on 23 November 2017.

   5. The Appellant met his wife in 2004.  She was at that time married  but
      separated in 2008 and later divorced.  The Appellant married his  wife
      in India on 26 May 2013.  His wife has two children, [M] born  in  May
      2000 and [H] born  in  June  2006  who  are  both  British  nationals.
      Following DNA tests, the Appellant has now established that he is  the
      biological father of [H].  The Appellant's wife was born in India  but
      came to the UK in 1997 and was  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain
      based on her previous marriage in 1998.  She became a British  citizen
      in 2010.  The Appellant's wife, stepchild and child have  visited  the
      Appellant in India.  The children did not like India.

   6. The Judge took into account the findings of the previous  Tribunal  in
      2016 which included that the Appellant is in a genuine and  subsisting
      relationship with his wife, his stepson and his  own  child  (at  that
      time believed to be his stepchild) and that it would be  unduly  harsh
      for the children to move to India.  The eldest child (the  Appellant's
      stepson) is no longer  a  minor.   The  previous  Tribunal  concluded,
      however, that it was not unduly harsh for the children  to  remain  in
      the UK without  the  Appellant.  Judge  Colvin  adopted  the  previous
      Tribunal's finding that the Appellant falls within the  definition  of
      "foreign criminal" in Section 117D Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
      Act 2002 for the purposes of Section 117C of that Act ("Section 117C")
      because the Appellant had been convicted of an  offence  which  causes
      serious harm.

   7. The Judge concluded at [31] of the Decision that it  would  be  unduly
      harsh for [H] to continue to  live  in  the  UK  without  his  father,
      particularly in light of the passage of  time  since  the  deportation
      order was made.

   8. The Respondent submits that the Judge has erred in  her  consideration
      of the passage of time, since the  deportation  order  has  only  been
      enforced for six years (the Appellant having voluntarily departed  the
      UK only in 2013).  She  places  reliance  on  the  Court  of  Appeal's
      judgment in Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  ZP  (India)
      [2015] EWCA Civ 1197 ("ZP (India)") and EYF (Turkey)  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 592 ("EYF (Turkey)").

   9. Permission to appeal was refused  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Macdonald on 1 October 2019 in the following  terms  so  far  as
      relevant:


           "... The Judge gave many reasons for concluding that the  public
           interest in continuing the deportation order  had  significantly
           lessened (paragraph  25).   Ten  years  had  elapsed  since  the
           deportation order, the offence was some twelve years ago and  it
           was the  sole  conviction  of  the  appellant.   The  four-month
           detention sentence was at  the  lowest  end  of  the  scale  for
           criminal offences and he had voluntarily returned to  India  and
           had not sought to return here unlawfully.  The Judge also  noted
           that since the previous appeal decision it  has  been  confirmed
           that the appellant was indeed the biological father of [H].
           The Judge's reasoning is clear  and  cogent.   Contrary  to  the
           grounds  the  Judge  did  not  find  that  the  signing  of  the
           deportation order was a determinative factor.
           The grounds do not disclose any arguable error of law."

  10. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Kekic  on  17  October
      2019 in the following terms:


           "The respondent challenges the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge Colvin allowing this appeal on human rights grounds.   The
           appeal is against the Secretary of State's refusal to  revoke  a
           deportation order.
           Arguably the judge failed to  appreciate  that  the  deportation
           order had been enforced six years ago even if it had been signed
           ten years ago and that, in any case, the passage  of  time  does
           not diminish the public interest in maintaining deportation  (ZP
           (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 1197 and EYF (Turkey)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ
           592).
           The grounds may all be argued."

  11. The appeal comes before me to determine whether the Decision  contains
      errors of law and if so whether the Decision should be set aside.

   DISCUSSION

  12. As Mr Lindsay pointed out, the Judge allowed the appeal on two  bases.
      First, at [22] to [25] of the Decision, the Judge concluded  that  the
      "balance had shifted in favour  of  revocation"  because  "the  public
      interest in continuing the order is now significantly lessened on  the
      facts and due to the period of time that has elapsed" ([25]).  Second,
      the Judge concluded that "continuation of  the  deportation  order  is
      disproportionate to family life under Article  8  for  all  the  above
      reasons" ([33]).

  13. As Mr Singh submitted and I accept, the Respondent's  pleaded  grounds
      are directed only at the first of those bases.  However, I also accept
      Mr Lindsay's submission that,  if  the  Respondent  is  right  in  her
      argument in relation to the first basis, it follows that this  infects
      the second basis because that imports the Judge's reasoning as to  the
      public interest in revocation.  For  reasons  which  I  also  set  out
      below, there is in any event a  free-standing  error  of  law  in  the
      Judge's consideration of the human rights claim which  is  an  obvious
      one even though not identified by the Respondent's grounds.

  14. The Judges reasoning in relation to the revocation  issue  appears  at
      [22] to [25] of the Decision as follows:


           "22.  Since that appeal Decision [that  is  to  say  the  appeal
           Decision in 2016] 10 years has elapsed from when the deportation
           order was made in May 2008 - indeed it is some 11  years  and  3
           months at the date of the hearing.  In this context I have  been
           referred to the recent case decision in EYF (Turkey) cited above
           which dealt with the proper construction of paragraph 391(a)  of
           the Immigration Rules.  It held at paragraph 28:
           "Within the ten year period, it will be very difficult for other
           factors  to  counterbalance  the  presumptive  effect   of   the
           Secretary of  State's  policy.   That  is  consistent  with  the
           decision of this court in ZP (India).  Once the ten year  period
           has elapsed it becomes easier to  argue  that  the  balance  has
           shifted in favour of the revocation on the facts of a particular
           case because the presumption has fallen away; but that does  not
           mean that revocation thereafter is automatic or  presumed.   The
           question of revocation of a deportation order will depend on the
           circumstances of the individual case."
           23.   In this case, an issue was raised in the  previous  appeal
           Decision as  regards  the  claim  that  the  appellant  gave  an
           incorrect age at the time of his conviction in order to gain the
           advantage of being sentenced as a young person.  Ms Darkwah  for
           the respondent raised it again in  her  submissions  before  me.
           However, I have no evidence before me to assess this and, in any
           event, it is  clear  from  the  decision  of  Immigration  Judge
           Cockrill at paragraph 40 that he took the view that  the  proper
           course was "to note the length of sentence that was imposed  and
           not seek to go behind it in any shape or form or to speculate at
           all as to what would have happened to the appellant if,  indeed,
           his true date of birth had been disclosed." I  agree  with  this
           statement.
           24.    Another  issue  has  been  raised  as  to   whether   the
           appellant's offence is one that causes  serious  harm.   Despite
           the respondent, as represented by Mr Lowton  HOPO  at  the  last
           appeal hearing, apparently taking the view that it did not do so
           in order to bring the  appellant  within  the  definition  of  a
           foreign criminal under  section  117D(2(ii),  Immigration  Judge
           Cockrill decided otherwise as  stated  above.   Whilst  I  fully
           accept that having a false identity document is a serious matter
           I am doubtful whether it can truly be  said  to  'cause  serious
           harm'.  However, I do not consider that it is necessary  for  me
           to say anything further on this in my view there  are  weightier
           matters that need to be taken into account now at this point.
           25.   The first matter is that over ten years have elapsed since
           the deportation order.  Second, this deportation order was  made
           in respect of an offence committed some 12 years ago and  it  is
           the sole conviction of  the  appellant.   Third,  I  accept  the
           submission that the offence and the 4 month  detention  sentence
           received by the appellant is certainly at the lowest end of  the
           scale of criminal offences.  Fourth, the  appellant  voluntarily
           returned to India in light of the deportation order  being  made
           and has not sought to return to the UK unlawfully.  In  my  view
           when taking all these matters into account I have  no  doubt  in
           finding that the balance has shifted in favour of revocation  on
           these facts particularly because the presumption  for  upholding
           the deportation order has now  fallen  away.   In  other  words,
           whilst there was clearly a strong public interest  in  deporting
           the appellant as a foreign criminal following his conviction  in
           2007, the  public  interest  in  continuing  the  order  is  now
           significantly lessened on the facts and due  to  the  period  of
           time that has elapsed."

  15. The Respondent's point is a short one.  She says that, notwithstanding
      the use of the words "making of the deportation  order"  at  paragraph
      391 of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules"), that terminology has to be
      construed consistently with the interpretation given by the  Court  of
      Appeal in ZP (India) and EYF (Turkey).  The  paragraphs  to  which  my
      attention was drawn are as follows:

           ZP (India)

           "25.  Mr Biggs argued that a fundamental difference between  the
           decision whether to make a deportation order in the first  place
           and the decision whether to revoke a subsisting order  short  of
           the prescribed period - and particularly  where,  as  here,  the
           applicant has been deported - is that in  the  latter  case  the
           public interest in maintaining the order will generally diminish
           with the passage of time and that that must be borne in mind  in
           striking the proportionality balance.  I would accept that up to
           a point.  Where  there  are  compelling  factors  in  favour  of
           revocation the applicant's case is - other things being equal  -
           bound to be stronger if they have already been  excluded  for  a
           long period.  But I would not accept that the  passage  of  time
           can by itself be relied on as constituting a  compelling  reason
           for early revocation.   It  is  inherent  in  the  making  of  a
           deportation order  that  there  must  be  a  period  before  the
           deportee becomes eligible for re-admission: otherwise  it  would
           be a mere revolving-door.  Mr Biggs did not contend that the ten-
           year prescribed period applicable to foreign criminals sentenced
           to  between  one  and  four  years'  imprisonment   was   itself
           irrational or that it inherently involved any breach of  article
           8.  That being so, the default position must be  that  deportees
           should "serve" the entirety of  the  prescribed  period  in  the
           absence of specific compelling reasons to the contrary."

           [my emphasis]

           EYF (Turkey)

           "24.  In  Smith,  the  UT  considered  that  its  reasoning  was
           supported by this court in ZP (India) v Secretary of  State  for
           the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1197.  One of the issues  in
           ZP (India) was the impact on the proportionality balance of  the
           prescribed period in  the  circumstance  that  early  revocation
           within the prescribed period  was  being  considered.   In  that
           context, it is hardly surprising that at paragraph [25]  of  the
           judgment Underhill LJ said that the "default  position  must  be
           that deportees should 'serve' the  entirety  of  the  prescribed
           period in the absence of  specific  compelling  reasons  to  the
           contrary""

      My attention was also drawn to [28] of the judgment  in  EYF  (Turkey)
      which the Judge set out at [22] of the Decision and which is therefore
      cited above.

  16. Mr Lindsay argued that the references  to  "excluded",  "re-admission"
      and "serve" in ZP (India) (and reference to "serve" in  EYF  (Turkey))
      indicated that the time lapse to be considered was that from the point
      in time when deportation was  enforced.   Otherwise,  a  deportee  had
      suffered no prejudice by the actual signing of the deportation order.

  17. Mr Singh submitted that the words in paragraph 391 of the Rules had to
      be given their plain, ordinary  meaning  and  that  "making"  in  this
      context clearly means "signing" of the  deportation  order.   He  also
      pointed out that a deportee who continues  to  live  in  the  UK  does
      suffer some prejudice from the fact of having no leave - he is  unable
      to rent, open bank accounts, travel outside the UK etc.  However, that
      is no different to a person who is unlawfully in the UK and who is not
      categorised as a "foreign criminal".   The  additional  penalty  of  a
      deportation order is that a person is not  able  to  re-enter  the  UK
      during the currency of the order.  He is, as the Court of Appeal said,
      "excluded" from the  UK.   That  can  occur  only  when  a  person  is
      physically deported.

  18. I have read very carefully the two judgments  on  which  reliance  was
      placed.   Both  are  concerned  with  persons  who  had  already  been
      deported.  That is important because, as the Court of Appeal noted  at
      [23] of its judgment in ZP (India), it is only in  that  context  that
      paragraph 391  of  the  Rules  can  apply  at  all.   In  cases  "pre-
      deportation" it is paragraph 390A of the Rules which applies ([22]  of
      the judgment).

  19. However, neither judgment deals with the issue of when the  period  of
      exclusion identified in paragraph 391 begins.  Perhaps the closest one
      comes is the comment at [15] of the judgment in ZP (India) where it is
      said that "[n]o doubt it may be right to put a limit on the period for
      which the public interest requires their continued exclusion, but that
      is another matter and is addressed in the  Immigration  Rules..."  [my
      emphasis].

  20. Since the Court of Appeal considered that it is the Rules to which one
      has to turn to interpret what the public  interest  requires,  I  also
      consider the issue raised in this case in that  context.    Paragraphs
      391 and 391A of the Rules currently (and at the date of the  Decision)
      provide as follows:


           "391. In the case of a person who has been deported following
           conviction for a criminal offence, the continuation of a
           deportation order against that person will be the proper course:
           (a) in the case of a conviction for an offence for which the
           person was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4
           years, unless 10 years have elapsed since the making of the
           deportation order when, if an application for revocation is
           received, consideration will be given on a case by case basis to
           whether the deportation order should be maintained, or
           (b)...
           Unless, in either case, the continuation would be contrary to
           the Human Rights Convention or the Convention and Protocol
           Relating to the Status of Refugees, or there are other
           exceptional circumstances that mean the continuation is
           outweighed by compelling factors.
           391A. In other cases, revocation of the order will not  normally
           be authorised unless the situation has been materially  altered,
           either by a change of circumstances since the order was made, or
           by fresh information coming to light which was  not  before  the
           appellate authorities or the Secretary of State. The passage  of
           time since the person was deported may also in itself amount  to
           such a change of circumstances as to warrant revocation  of  the
           order.
           [my emphasis]

  21. In my view, paragraph 391 read  in  context  favours  the  Appellant's
      construction.  In particular, the  words  "since  the  making  of  the
      deportation order" in that paragraph are to  be  contrasted  with  the
      words  "since  the  person  was  deported"  in  paragraph  391A.   The
      draftsperson can be assumed to have  meant  two  different  things  in
      those  two  paragraphs.    For  that  reason,  I  conclude  that   the
      Respondent's interpretation is incorrect.  The "policy" as  laid  down
      by paragraph 391 is that ten years must have elapsed since the  making
      ie the signing of the deportation order and not since  the  order  was
      enforced.

  22. However, that is not the end of the issue.  The  Respondent's  grounds
      are argued on the basis, first, that the  Judge  materially  erred  in
      relation to the period which has elapsed ([3]) and, second,  that,  by
      reference to ZP (India) and EYF (Turkey), the Judge erred because  the
      presumption in deportation has not fallen away ([4]).  Both  of  those
      elements make up the central ground  that  the  Judge  has  materially
      erred in finding that the passage of time is a determinative factor.

  23. The Judge at [25] of the Decision gives four  reasons  for  concluding
      that the public interest in upholding the deportation order has fallen
      away.  First, she refers to the fact that ten years have elapsed.   As
      I have concluded, she was entitled to take  that  into  account  as  a
      relevant factor.  Second, that the offence was committed twelve  years
      ago and is the Appellant's sole conviction.   That  too  is  relevant.
      Third, that the sentence was at the lower end of the scale of criminal
      offending.  The Judge was entitled to factor  that  into  account.   I
      accept Mr Lindsay's point in this regard that the  deportation  regime
      laid down in the Rules continues to apply as paragraph 398(b)  of  the
      Rules applies that regime to  the  case  of  a  foreign  criminal  who
      applies for revocation of a deportation  order.   I  also  accept  his
      point that the Judge at [24] of the Decision has not  made  a  finding
      either way whether the  Appellant's  offending  could  "cause  serious
      harm" but that is immaterial given the content  of  paragraph  398(b).
      Finally, the Appellant returned  to  India  voluntarily  and  has  not
      sought to re-enter unlawfully.  I  agree  with  Mr  Lindsay  that  the
      relevance of this factor is not clear.  The Appellant was the  subject
      of a deportation order and should have left in any event.  That he did
      so voluntarily may have saved the  Respondent  some  expense  but  can
      hardly be said to diminish the public interest in deportation.  It may
      explain why the Respondent did not make  reference  to  paragraph  391
      when assessing revocation (as it might be said that the Appellant  had
      not been deported as such) but  otherwise  has  no  relevance  to  the
      public interest.  Similarly, that the  Appellant  has  not  sought  to
      breach immigration laws by re-entering  unlawfully  can  hardly  be  a
      positive factor in his favour or reduce  the  weight  in  keeping  him
      excluded from India if circumstances dictate that result.

  24. However, the more significant error which  appears  from  the  Judge's
      reasoning at [25] of the Decision is her reference to "the presumption
      for upholding the deportation order" having fallen away  so  that  the
      "balance has been shifted in favour of  revocation".   As  the  Senior
      President  said  at  [25]  of  the  judgment  in  EYF  (Turkey),  "the
      proposition that the public interest in  maintaining  the  deportation
      order would generally diminish over time was only  accepted  up  to  a
      point.  That point was the duration of the  prescribed  period.   That
      says nothing about the asserted existence of a new presumption at  the
      end of the prescribed period.   Indeed,  it  rightly  in  my  judgment
      leaves the question at large.  Furthermore, it is  of  note  that  the
      wording of the Rule changed after the decision in ZP (India) to add-in
      by amendment the words that are critical to the interpretation  relied
      upon by the Secretary of State".   I  note  that  the  decision  under
      appeal  in  that  case  was  dated  5  June  2015,  long  before   the
      Respondent's decision in this case which was made on 22 November 2017.
       As such, it is the revised wording of paragraph  391  which  applies.
      That includes the word which I have emboldened in the citation at [20]
      above.  There is therefore a misdirection by  the  Judge  when  citing
      paragraph 391 at [15] of the Decision.  Even leaving aside the changed
      wording, the Judge erred when considering  that  the  presumption  for
      maintaining the deportation order had fallen away.  Although  that  is
      the wording used at [23] of the judgment in EYF (Turkey) (by reference
      to SU (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]
      EWCA Civ  1069),  that  refers  only  to  the  "previous  presumption"
      inherent in  the  prescribed  period  and  does  not  create  any  new
      presumption in favour of revocation, as the Judge appeared to consider
      existed.

  25. I then have to consider whether that  error  is  material.   Mr  Singh
      submitted that any error made by the Judge when looking at the  public
      interest in maintaining deportation was  not  material  because  there
      were in any event compelling circumstances  justifying  revocation  of
      the deportation order.   That  submission  was  made  to  address  the
      Respondent's point that the prescribed period had not elapsed  but  is
      equally relevant to the need to assess all  the  factors  set  out  in
      paragraph 390 of the Rules and Section 117C.  It is also  relevant  to
      the amended wording of paragraph 391  which  requires  a  case-by-case
      consideration.

  26. That then brings me on to the second basis on  which  the  appeal  was
      allowed,  namely  that  maintenance  of  the  deportation   order   is
      disproportionate under the scheme laid down by the Rules  and  Section
      117C.

  27. I begin by making two observations.  First, the appeal in this case is
      against the refusal of a human rights claim.   As  such,  the  Judge's
      assessment of the Article 8 issue is central to the  allowing  of  the
      appeal; the only basis on which the Judge could allow  the  appeal  is
      because the  Respondent's  decision  breaches  the  Appellant's  human
      rights.

  28. Second, and flowing from that, the Respondent did not plead any direct
      challenge to the Judge's Article 8 assessment.  Mr Singh  objected  to
      any consideration of the Judge's assessment of the  Article  8  issues
      for that reason.  However, I reject his submission in that regard  for
      two reasons.  First, as Mr Lindsay submitted, the Judge, in particular
      at [31] of the Decision, brings into the equation  her  reasoning  for
      reducing the weight to be given to the public interest relying on  the
      passage at [22] to [25] of  the  Decision.   Second,  and  in  reality
      favouring the Appellant's position, if, as I  have  concluded  is  the
      case, the Judge had to consider all the circumstances of the case  (or
      the compelling circumstances  as  Mr  Singh  submitted),  then  it  is
      relevant to the overall lawfulness of the Decision whether  the  Judge
      has approached that task in the correct manner.

  29. The Judge's assessment of the Article 8 issue appears at [30] to  [32]
      of the Decision as follows:


           "30.  In this case the child [H] has lived  without  his  father
           for some 6 years already and has only seen  him  on  two  visits
           during this period.  He only found out that the appellant is his
           biological father a couple  of  years  ago  and  has  now  asked
           questions why, if this is accepted,  his  father  is  still  not
           allowed to return.  In many ways it can be  said  that  [H]  has
           already been through and perhaps to a certain extent got used to
           the  degree  of  hardship  that  necessarily  comes   with   the
           deportation of a parent.  And it is  this  that  the  respondent
           seems to be relying upon - namely that the present  arrangements
           of separation can continue as the  family  members  are  dealing
           with this situation.  In other words the respondent  is  relying
           upon the status quo.
           31.   It is submitted on behalf of the appellant  that  this  is
           somewhat of a Catch 22 with the respondent  unfairly  using  the
           lengthening  time  of  separation  as  a  factor   against   the
           appellant.   I  consider  that  there  is  substance   to   this
           submission particularly as the respondent has not, in  my  view,
           adequately addressed the situation from the opposite perspective
           of the family.  That is, that together with the appellant,  they
           have managed the period of the deportation order which  has  now
           gone beyond the ten-year period  when  the  public  interest  in
           continuing the deportation order on the facts  of  the  case  is
           significantly lessened as stated above.  It is in looking at  it
           from this other perspective that I have reached the  conclusion,
           on a balance of probabilities, that it is unduly harsh  on  this
           child to be separated from his  father  for  any  longer  period
           particularly at this time of his early teenage  development.  It
           is noted that he has made it clear in his written statement that
           he is unable to maintain a relationship with his father  through
           phone calls alone.
           32.   In relation to the appellant's wife it  is  accepted  that
           the relationship with the appellant was formed at  a  time  when
           the appellant was not in  the  UK  lawfully  and  therefore  the
           exception under paragraph 399(b) of the Immigration Rules cannot
           apply.  However, she is a qualifying person for the purposes  of
           s.117C of the 2002 Act and I am satisfied for similar reasons as
           stated above that any  longer  period  of  separation  from  the
           appellant amounts to being unduly harsh in all the circumstances
           of the case."

      That passage follows the Judge's self-direction  that,  based  on  the
      finding in the previous appeal, she should conclude that it  would  be
      unduly harsh for [H] to join his father in India  and  that  therefore
      the issue in relation to [H] was whether it was unduly harsh  for  him
      to remain in the UK with his mother whilst the  Appellant  remains  in
      India.  It also follows  the  Judge's  reference  to  KO  (Nigeria)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53 and citation
      from that case at [28] and [29] of the Decision.

  30. As appears from those citations and  as  the  Judge  appears  to  have
      understood, the issue whether it would be  unduly  harsh  for  [H]  to
      remain with his mother in the UK and separated from his father is  one
      which must be assessed on the basis of the  threshold  which  applies.
      There is no balance to be carried out at that stage between the impact
      on the child  and  the  seriousness  of  the  offence  or  the  public
      interest.  That is inherent in the  threshold  within  the  exception.
      However, at [31] of the Decision, that is precisely the approach which
      the Judge adopted.  In so  concluding,  I  also  take  account  of  Mr
      Lindsay's criticism of the "Catch 22" point made by the Judge.  As  he
      put it, if the effect of the separation of the family is  that  family
      life no longer exists or is significantly reduced in weight, then that
      is a factor which should be weighed in the  balance.   If  the  public
      interest too is significantly reduced, it may be that the  Appellant's
      family life still outweighs the public interest.  That has nothing  to
      do with fairness or unfairness.

  31. I asked Mr Singh to direct my attention to the evidence on  which  the
      Judge might be said to be relying when reaching the  finding  that  it
      would be unduly harsh for [H] (and the Appellant's wife) to remain  in
      the UK whilst the Appellant continues to live in India.  He pointed to
      the  witness  statements  of  [H],  the  Appellant's  wife   and   the
      Appellant's stepson.  I have read those carefully.

  32. I make the initial observation that all three of those statements  are
      in essentially the same form.  I also note that the content  of  those
      statements for the most  part  reads  as  legal  submissions  and  not
      evidence.  It is readily apparent that those statements  were  drafted
      by a legal representative and therefore the effect of separation  does
      not come through clearly. The salient part of [H]'s statement  appears
      at [17] to [21]. That evidence reads (so far as relevant):


           "17.  My father  is  living  in  a  village  in  India  with  my
           grandparents, but this is not ideal at all.  We call  my  father
           using Videocall, Whatsapp and Skype.  However,  that  can  never
           replicate him being here.  It breaks me inside being  away  from
           my father every day.  We need to do this because if  we  do  not
           the court will say we do not care and if we do they will say  we
           can accept it.  This is very hard for me, my brother and mother.


           18.   ...
           19.   What was really hard and has hit me hard since finding out
           my father is my real father is the Judge made some  good  points
           but for some  reason  believed  he  should  have  been  deported
           because his offence caused serious harm [this  comment  relating
           back to the finding in the earlier appeal] ...
           20.   The separation of all of us is ruining our family life.  I
           believe it would be unfair for my father to have to continue  to
           wait in India and somehow accept the  relationship  is  carrying
           on. ...The passage of time with these cruel time processing  and
           bad decisions has meant it is favouring him being away from  the
           family forever.
           21.   I am not able to maintain a relationship  with  my  father
           over the phone, as we have been doing  simply  because  we  have
           been left with no choice.  This is horrible  and  if  the  Judge
           could feel any of the pain inside me and my mother  are  feeling
           especially knowing how the law has been in cases where  offences
           like my father's were done and the fact these  cases  now  being
           fought in the United Kingdom are being won has only hardened our
           resolve to make sure my father gets justice and  is  allowed  to
           rejoin us in the United Kingdom."

  33. Whilst I recognise that the impact as there  described  by  [H]  shows
      that he finds it difficult to be separated from his father  and  might
      well be described as harsh, I can  find  nothing  in  the  description
      which suggests that it is unduly harsh.  It describes the impact which
      one would expect on a  parent  and  child  separated  by  the  act  of
      deportation.  That is simply not enough.  It may well be  relevant  to
      an assessment of Article 8 outside the assessment when the  impact  is
      balanced against the offending, but the evidence does  not  show  that
      the very high threshold for unduly harsh is reached. For that  reason,
      I am unable to conclude that the error made by the Judge when  setting
      out her approach to the Article 8 issue (to  which  I  refer  at  [30]
      above) is immaterial.

  34. I make clear that I am not saying that the outcome of the appeal would
      necessarily be different to that reached by Judge Colvin.  However,  I
      am unable to reach the conclusion that the errors make  no  difference
      and therefore they are material.

  35. As I have concluded above, the period prescribed in paragraph  391  of
      the Rules has expired.  That may well reduce the weight to be given to
      the public interest.  However, that outcome requires an assessment  of
      all the circumstances of the case which includes the factors  set  out
      at paragraph 390 of the Rules namely:


           "(i) the grounds on which the order was made;
           (ii) any representations made in support of revocation;
           (iii) the interests of the community, including the maintenance
           of an effective immigration control;
           (iv) the interests of the applicant, including any compassionate
        circumstances."

      It also requires consideration  of  the  provisions  of  Section  117C
      including not only the exceptions but whether there can be said to  be
      "very compelling circumstances over and above" the exceptions (Section
      117C (6)).  That latter provision requires a  balanced  assessment  of
      the interference with the Appellant's family and private life  against
      the extent of the public interest.

  36. In light of my conclusions that the Decision contains  errors  of  law
      which are material for the reasons I  have  given,  I  set  aside  the
      Decision.  Mr Singh submitted that if I were to take this course,  the
      appeal should be remitted for re-determination.   I  do  not  consider
      this to be necessary as the  reconsideration  of  the  decision  is  a
      matter of assessment with little  fact  finding  to  be  carried  out.
      There are no issues of credibility.  It is accepted that  [H]  is  the
      Appellant's biological son  and  that,  notwithstanding  the  physical
      separation, the Appellant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
      with his wife, his son and his stepson.   Mr Singh also asked that, if
      I were to set aside the Decision, the Appellant should be  given  time
      to produce more evidence.  Although there is no application to  adduce
      further evidence, I am content to give more time for  evidence  to  be
      provided and for oral evidence to be called if  the  Appellant's  wife
      and children wish to give such evidence.

   CONCLUSION

  37. For the above reasons, I conclude  that  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Colvin promulgated on 30 August 2019 contains errors of
      law.  I set that aside.  I give directions below for the re-making  of
      the decision.

DECISION
The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Colvin promulgated  on  30  August
2019 contains errors of law.   I  set  that  decision  aside.   I  make  the
following directions for the re-making of the decision:

    1. Within 8 weeks from  the  date  when  this  decision  is  sent,  the
       Appellant is to file with the Tribunal and serve on  the  Respondent
       any further evidence on which he relies.
    2. The resumed hearing will be relisted on  the  first  available  date
       after 8 weeks from the date when this decision is sent with  a  time
       estimate of  day.


Signed           [pic] Dated: 27 November 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

