
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17108/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th April 2019                   |On 29th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 Deepak [R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Walsh of Counsel, instructed by Farani Taylor
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Jones, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Craft made
    following a hearing on 1st November 2018 at Hatton Cross.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal born on  10th  December  1986.   On
    13th February 2018 he made a human rights claim in an  application  for
    leave to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of  his  private  life.   The
    application was rejected by the respondent on 31st July  2018  and  his
    appeal came before Judge Craft.

 3. The appellant has a lengthy immigration history. He originally  entered
    the UK on 7th September 2009 under a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  visa
    which was valid  until  31st  May  2011.   He  then  made  an  in  time
    application for further leave which was refused on 22nd February 2013.

 4. He appealed and the application was remitted back  for  reconsideration
    which took place on 22nd June 2015 when it was again  refused  on  11th
    March 2016.  His subsequent appeal was dismissed.

 5. One of the issues before the Judge was the respondent's contention that
    the appellant fell for refusal on  the  grounds  of  suitability  under
    Section S/LTR under paragraph 276AD(1)(i) because ETS had a  record  of
    the appellant's TOEIC speaking tests taken on 22nd August 2012, on 18th
    September 2012 and on 27th November 2013.  It was the respondent's view
    that the appellant's certificate was fraudulently obtained by  the  use
    of a proxy test taker.

 6. The judge found in the appellant's favour in respect of that aspect  of
    the appeal, and the respondent does not challenge his decision.

 7. The judge dismissed the appeal in relation to private and  family  life
    grounds.  At paragraph 33 she wrote as follows

         "The exceptional circumstances relied upon by the appellant are the
         strength of his relationship with S, his cousin's teenage  son  who
         is now 16 years old.  The Tribunal has given careful  consideration
         to  the  totality  of  the  evidence  received  by   it   and   the
         representations made on behalf of the appellant on this point.  The
         Tribunal notes that the  respondent  had  taken  into  account  the
         allegation that the appellant had used deception  in  reaching  its
         decision on exceptional circumstances.  The Tribunal stresses  that
         it is  satisfied  that  the  respondent  had  every  reason  to  be
         suspicious of the appellant's conduct because of the evidence as to
         widespread fraud at the colleges at which ETS records indicated the
         appellant had sat English  tests.   Their  conclusion  was  clearly
         based on a careful assessment of detailed  generic  evidence.   The
         Tribunal has had the  advantage  of  receiving  evidence  from  the
         appellant and has reached the decision set out above but that  does
         not in any way amount to  a  criticism  of  the  obviously  careful
         consideration of the fraud issue undertaken by  the  respondent  in
         this case.  In its deliberations the  Tribunal  has  redressed  the
         balance of the matters under consideration by  accepting  that  the
         appellant did not receive or make use of  a  certificate.   However
         having done so the other reasons given by the  respondent  for  the
         finding that there are no exceptional circumstances  in  this  case
         accord with the Tribunal's own  conclusions.   S  is  living  in  a
         secure family unit  with  his  mother  and  father.   This  may  be
         enhanced by the appellant living with his family  but  that  family
         unit will not be broken or substantially damaged by  the  appellant
         returning to  Nepal  and  he  will  still  be  able  to  remain  in
         communication with S by all the means that are available  to  them.
         S himself is of an age when he will becoming  more  independent  of
         family ties in future years.  The question for the Tribunal  taking
         full account of  all  considerations  weighing  in  favour  of  the
         refusal is whether the prejudice  to  the  appellant's  family  and
         private life is of a manner sufficiently serious  to  amount  to  a
         breach of the fundamental right protected  by  Article  8  and  the
         Tribunal has concluded that  it  is  not  sufficiently  serious  to
         amount to such a breach.  The Tribunal was satisfied that Article 8
         is engaged and that the action of the respondent interfered with it
         but  is  satisfied  that  the  respondent  has   shown   that   the
         interference was lawful and was necessary in the pursuance  of  the
         interests of immigration control  and  that  the  interference  was
         proportionate to that interest.  Therefore the  appellant's  appeal
         must be dismissed."

The Grounds of Application

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in failing to record that the appellant's Counsel had made an
    application for an adjournment to  allow  for  the  appellant's  family
    members to give oral evidence in support of his family life in the  UK.
    The judge refused the application but no mention of it  appears  within
    the determination and no reasons for the refusal  of  that  application
    has been provided.

 9. Second, it was argued that the judge had failed to have regard  to  the
    appellant's family life and third that the judge  had  failed  to  have
    regard to the previous 2017 determination which ought to have  provided
    her starting point.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Kelly on 22nd January 2019.

11. On 8th April 2019 the respondent served  a  reply  accepting  that  the
    representative had made an application for an adjournment  request  but
    submitting that the error in not referring to it in  the  determination
    was immaterial.

Submissions

12. Mr Walsh relied on his grounds.   In  essence  he  submitted  that  the
    judge's overall conclusions were reached without having the benefit  of
    oral evidence.  She  had  made  findings  in  the  appellant's  favour,
    accepting that Article 8 was engaged and it would  have  been  assisted
    her considerations, had live oral evidence been given.

13. Miss Jones submitted that the judge's failure to record the adjournment
    application was immaterial and the decision should stand.

Findings and Conclusions

14. Clearly the judge ought to have recorded in her determination  that  an
    application for an adjournment had been made and should  have  set  out
    her reasons for refusing it.  However the error is not  material  since
    she did in  fact  accept  the  evidence  as  set  out  in  the  witness
    statements which were before her from the appellant's cousin  and  from
    his cousin's husband and from S himself.

15. Those statements attest to the closeness of the appellant to  S.   They
    state that S confides in him  and  the  appellant  takes  him  to  play
    cricket and to watch football.  He brings stability  to  his  life  and
    looks on him as a  role  model.   The  appellant  helps  him  with  his
    homework and  they  do  a  lot  of  physical  activities  together,  in
    particular helping him to play football and cricket and keeping himself
    in good physical condition.

16. None of this evidence was contested by the judge.   She  accepted  that
    there was a close relationship between the appellant  and  S.   However
    she balanced that by recording that the  appellant  himself  had  close
    family  in  Nepal.   Moreover  S  himself  is  about  to  become   more
    independent of family ties and in any event his family ties will not be
    broken by the appellant's removal.

17. So far as  private  life  is  concerned  Mr  Walsh  accepted  that  the
    appellant's private life had always been precarious and therefore ought
    to be given little  weight.   He  also  acknowledged  that  he  was  in
    difficulty  since  according  to   his   own   note   the   appellant's
    representative had objected to the previous determination being put  in
    by the respondent.  It is therefore not open to the  appellant  now  to
    argue that  the  judge  erred  in  law  by  accepting  the  appellant's
    arguments at the hearing.

Decision

18. The judge did not err in law.

19. The decision stands.

20. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 24 April 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
