
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17562/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 July 2019                       |On 8 July 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                               mr harshan sasi
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, Counsel instructed by York Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is  an  Indian  citizen  born  on  19  August  1951.  The
    Respondent refused the application for leave to remain on 5 July  2016.
    His appeal against this was dismissed by  Judge  Khawar  ("the  Judge")
    following a hearing on 17 December  2018.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Judge Hollingworth on 14 May 2019 on two grounds.   Firstly,
    it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  had  erred  in  relation   to   his
    understanding of  the  Appellant's  daughter's  status  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Secondly, the Judge may have given insufficient weight to the
    Appellant's medical problems. I have considered all the submissions and
    papers.

 2. In relation to ground 1,  the  Judge  said  at  [24],  "...  it  became
    apparent during this appeal that  the  Appellant's  daughter  only  has
    limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  Such leave  expires  on
    14th May 2019".  The Judge  noted  that  she  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom along with her husband as a student.  He said, "she cannot have
    any reasonable expectation of being allowed to settle here".  When  the
    Judge heard the appeal, an application had been made for  her  to  have
    indefinite leave to remain.  No application had been  made  before  the
    Upper Tribunal for fresh evidence to be introduced, and  accordingly  I
    have to look at the evidence before the Judge.  As  at  that  date  the
    Appellant's  daughter  did   not   have   permanent   settled   status.
    Accordingly,  the  Judge   was   factually   accurate   regarding   the
    circumstances of the case before him and he did not materially  err  in
    his recitation or understanding of the facts.

 3. The Judge made findings in relation to the Appellant's family life that
    have not been challenged, and concluded that he does not have a  family
    life in the United Kingdom capable of  meeting  the  required  criteria
    under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 4. Therefore, all that was remaining for the Appellant to argue about  was
    his private life.  In Patel v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72, we are reminded that
    in the context of Article 8 claims, private life carries little weight.
    The Judge did consider the Appellant's circumstances and made perfectly
    adequate findings in [29 to 31] concluding in  him  not  accepting  the
    Appellant's assertion that he had no property, assets,  and/or  savings
    to rely on  if  returned  to  India.    At  the  date  of  the  hearing
    therefore, the Judge considered the evidence and made findings to which
    he was entitled.  In those circumstances, there was no  material  error
    of law in relation to ground 1.

 5. In relation to ground 2, it is clear  that  the  Appellant  has  health
    problems and has received medical treatment  the  most  significant  of
    which was having a  stent  inserted  for  a  heart  condition.   It  is
    abundantly clear that the extent of his health  problems  come  nowhere
    near the relevant thresholds identified, first in relation to Article 3
    in N v The UK (Application 26565/05), and in relation to Article  8  SL
    (St Lucia) [2018] EWCA Civ 1894, GS (India) & Ors v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 440, Akhalu (health claim: ECHR Article 8) [2013] UKUT 00400 (IAC),
    and MM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 279, and that  the  Judge  was
    perfectly entitled to find  that  treatment  was  available  in  India.
    Quite  properly  Ms  Iqbal  did  not  pursue  this  ground.   In  those
    circumstances, there was no material error of law in relation to ground
    2.

 6. The Judge did not materially err. I do not set aside the decision.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.

 8. The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.  There
    is no basis for a costs award.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
5 July 2019
