
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17601/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford via Skype          |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 August 2020                    |On 06 October 2020                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                           DANIYAL SHAHID QURESHI
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain instructed by Justmount Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Borsada ('the Judge') promulgated on 8 January 2020 in
       which he dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.
    2. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal on 15 April 2020.




Background


    3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  4  January  1987  who
       appealed the decision of 10 October 2019 refusing him leave to remain
       in the United Kingdom on family and private life grounds pursuant  to
       the Immigration Rules ('the Rules') and article 8 ECHR.
    4. Having set out in the decision a summary of the respondent's  reasons
       why the application was refused, and the appellants reasons  why  the
       appeal should be allowed, the Judge sets out  his  findings  of  fact
       from [6] of the decision under challenge.
    5. The Judge accepts on the basis of the oral and written evidence  that
       the appellant and his partner ('the partner'), a UK citizen, are in a
       long term relationship that would meet the requirements of the  Rules
       with regards to its subsisting  nature.  The  Judge  also  noted  the
       partner's medical history and was satisfied that the  evidence  about
       the chronic nature of her mental and physical health was accurate  in
       the sense that she is clearly a vulnerable  individual  who  requires
       fairly  frequent  monitoring  of  her  health;   in   particular   in
       consequence of her bariatric surgery but also  with  respect  to  her
       poor mental health.  The Judge refers to the appellant being a  great
       source of emotional support and without him in his partner's life her
       well-being would be jeopardised [7].
    6. The Judge notes at [10] that it was not disputed that the matter came
       down  to  the  exceptions  provided  within  the  Rules.   The  Judge
       specifically  confirms  that  he   has   taken   into   account   the
       'insurmountable obstacles test' which the Judge did not find  on  the
       evidence had been met, which was  found  to  warrant  the  respondent
       rejecting the application under the Rules.  The  Judges  reasons,  in
       addition to accepting the arguments put forward by the respondent set
       out at [4] of the decision under challenge, are set out at [11 -  14]
       of the decision under challenge in the following terms:

           "11    Whilst I note and  accept  that  the  difficulties  there
                would be for the appellants partner in  living  in  Pakistan
                but I am not satisfied that this evidence of  insurmountable
                obstacles and the test on the evidence  provided  concerning
                the difficulties for the appellants partner is not met.  The
                evidence with regard to health services  does  not  indicate
                that provision in Pakistan is more problematic than  in  the
                UK but there is provision and so therefore no clear evidence
                the appellant and his partner would not have access to it on
                their return. I certainly do not find that  the  couple  are
                likely to be destitute in Pakistan such that they would come
                into the category of being poor or being forced to live in a
                rural area with limited/no access to health provision. There
                is no clear evidence  that  the  healthcare  of  either  the
                appellant or his partner is at such a critical level that  a
                change to their  living  circumstances  would  result  in  a
                significant deterioration in their well  being  particularly
                in circumstances in which health care provision is available
                in Pakistan even if at a lower level.


           12.    I note again that  whilst  the  appellant's  partner  has
                never lived outside the UK and  is  not  familiar  with  the
                customs, language and traditions of  Pakistan  there  is  no
                clear evidence that she would not be able to adapt given  in
                particular  the  help  and  support  she  would  undoubtedly
                receive  from  the  appellant.   Again  there  is  no  clear
                evidence that being in an interfaith marriage would be  such
                as to cause the couple  to  become  ostracised/isolated  and
                this  submission  therefore  amounts   to   mere   unfounded
                speculation. I do accept the importance of  the  appellant's
                relationship with his partner  in  maintaining  their  joint
                well being but the decision of the  respondent  is  not  one
                that would result in their being separated and  family  life
                between a couple would in my  view  be  entirely  viable  in
                Pakistan.


           13.    With regards to how the couple would be able to  maintain
                themselves in Pakistan: the appellant is not without  skills
                and he has clearly been educated to a fairly high level such
                that it is not my view that  he  has  demonstrated  that  he
                would not have the means to maintain himself and his partner
                on returned to Pakistan albeit that  I  do  accept  that  it
                would be more difficult for the appellant's partner to  find
                work given the difficulties of language and  culture.  There
                is no clear evidence that the couple would be  destitute  or
                without resources if they went to Pakistan together.


           14     As to the appellants partners  family  life  outside  her
                relationship with the appellant: I note that the contact she
                has with her  mother  is  mostly  indirect  and  this  could
                continue after she left the country with visits from time to
                time in the UK admittedly these would be less frequent  than
                twice a month. As to her children, there is  effectively  no
                contact with them at the current time and in the  sense  the
                decision of the respondent does not affect this status quo."

    7. The reference to the appellants partners children ties  in  with  the
       Judge noting the partners past experiences of having been involved in
       a very violent previous relationship in which she was the  victim  of
       domestic violence, when she was stamped on by  her  partner  who  was
       convicted and sentenced to 13 years imprisonment as a  result,  after
       which the partners two children were taken into care.   Her  son  has
       been formally adopted and  her  daughter  is  cared  for  by  another
       relative. In that respect, it is noted in the  evidence  there  is  a
       letter from her previous family law solicitor indicating the partners
       failure to attend a hearing in the Family Courts in  relation  to  an
       application she made  concerning  her  daughter,  which  led  to  the
       solicitor stating the partners contract remains limited  to  indirect
       contact to the child with there being little evidence of  foreseeable
       change in the future.
    8. Whilst Mr Hussain mentioned the partners past difficulties it was not
       made out her former partner was a national of Pakistan, a person  who
       could create any difficulties for her if he return  to  Pakistan,  or
       that this was a country in which there was a real risk  the  violence
       she was subjected to in the past will be inflicted upon her again.
    9. Mr Hussain also referred to an unfortunate development in relation to
       the partners pregnancy which she tragically lost, although she is now
       pregnant again.  This is a new matter that was not before  the  Judge
       and if the birth of a  British  national  child  warrants  a  further
       application advice can be sought upon the same.
   10. It was not disputed the issue under  the  Rules  related  to  whether
       there were insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  continuing  in
       Pakistan. It was submitted in the pleadings that the appellants  case
       was that medical care would not be adequate, would cost  the  partner
       significantly in circumstances where she or the appellant  would  not
       be working immediately upon return to Pakistan and the appellant  not
       have access to immediate income as they would have no family  support
       in Pakistan, and that there  had  been  no  proper  consideration  of
       matters by the Judge such as the availability or  access  to  medical
       care in Pakistan. The grounds also assert the Judge  failed  to  make
       any reference to the background medical evidence and failed  to  make
       proper  findings  of  fact  regarding  the  appellant  and  partner's
       circumstances they will face in Pakistan with regard to medical care,
       the cost of medication, and proper ongoing treatment for the partner,
       that the Judge failed to take into account the partner's evidence  of
       her fear of going to  Pakistan  in  light  of  threats  made  by  her
       previous partner from whom she suffered  domestic  violence,  or  the
       impact of the partners relationship with her mother, failed  to  take
       proper  account  of  the  serious  and  extensive  medical  care  and
       treatment requirements by the appellant's partner,  and  the  serious
       impact on her well being if she were required to move to Pakistan.
   11. The grounds also assert the Judge failed  to  properly  consider  the
       Chikwamba principles. In this  respect  when  considering  article  8
       outside the Rules the Judge writes at [17]:

           "17    Weighing against the appellant and  his  partner  in  the
                consideration of the  proportionality  of  the  interference
                with their Article 8 rights, is the fact of  the  appellants
                relatively poor immigration history in the UK  and  lack  of
                status for significant period of time. Also in consideration
                of the proportionality  issue  is  the  possibility  of  the
                appellant to making an application for entry clearance  from
                Pakistan i.e.  for  the  partner  not  to  go  with  him  to
                Pakistan. This disruption to family life would not represent
                a  disproportionate  interference  with   family   life   in
                circumstances in which there has been more than a  technical
                failure to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  -
                the failure was one that  was  directly  consequent  on  the
                appellants  lack  of  status  in  the  UK  and  his   having
                overstayed (see case of SSHD v Hayat (Pakistan) [2012]  EWCA
                Civ  1054).  It  is  also  the  case  when  considering  the
                proportionality of such an interference that the partner has
                accepted in her  oral  evidence  that  she  knew  that  when
                entering into this relationship that the appellant  did  not
                have settled status in this country and therefore might have
                to return to  Pakistan.  These  are  all  matters  that  are
                weighed significantly in the  balance  against  this  couple
                even allowing that  their  ability  to  meet  the  financial
                requirements of the Rules is not in doubt."

   12. The Judge dismissed the  appeal  on  article  3  health  grounds  and
       concluded that the decision is proportionate pursuant  to  article  8
       ECHR. The appellant asserts that assessment is flawed  as  the  Judge
       failed to take proper account of the impact on the mental  health  of
       the partner and failed to properly assess whether there was any  good
       reason to require the appellant to leave the UK in order to apply for
       leave to return lawfully.
   13. On behalf of the Secretary of State Mrs Aboni submitted the Judge had
       made no material error of law in a case in which  the  appellant  had
       not demonstrated an ability to meet Immigration Rules  and  in  which
       the Judge had properly considered the question of whether there  were
       insurmountable  obstacles  as  required  by  paragraph  EX1.  It  was
       submitted the appellant can support his partner both financially  and
       emotionally.  The appellants immigration history was relevant to  the
       proportionality  aspect.  Mrs  Aboni  confirmed  it   was   not   the
       respondent's intention to remove the partner, as  she  is  a  British
       citizen, and it was for her to decide whether she wished to  stay  in
       the United Kingdom or not.  In  relation  to  the  submission  by  Mr
       Hussain that any application made by the appellant to re-enter  would
       succeed, Mrs Aboni submitted it was not appropriate to pre-judge  the
       decision of an Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) even though on the  face
       of it the appellant might succeed.  It would depend whether  all  the
       specified evidence had been provided and the  appellant  demonstrated
       to the ECO that the requirements of the relevant  provisions  of  the
       Rules relied upon could be met.
   14. Mr Hussain in his reply referred to the fact the Judge had found  the
       appellant provides support for his partner who is vulnerable and that
       without the appellant being there the partner's well-being  could  be
       jeopardise.  It was submitted  the  Judge  failed  to  undertake  the
       required holistic  assessment  as  there  are  a  lot  of  additional
       elements that needed to be taken into account.

Error of law

   15. It was submitted by Mr Hussain that the reference  by  the  Judge  to
       there being a test indicates a more restricted view being taken,  but
       I find that is not made out. Although the evidence  established  very
       significant difficulties it was not made out that they could  not  be
       overcome on the basis of the evidence before the Judge. The burden of
       establishing this is upon the appellant and claiming  an  alternative
       finding could have been made in the grounds  or  submissions  may  be
       factually correct, but does not establish that the  finding  actually
       made by the Judge was not one reasonably open to him on the evidence.
   16. Insurmountable  obstacles  can  be  established  if  there  are  very
       significant difficulties which would be faced by the appellant or his
       partner in continuing their family life outside the  UK  which  could
       not be overcome. I find the Judge  undertook  the  required  holistic
       assessment of the evidence before finding that settling  in  Pakistan
       together would not entail very serious hardship for either of them.
   17. It was not made out on the evidence,  so  far  as  the  appellant  is
       concerned, that very serious hardship would result.  The Judge  gives
       adequate reasons for why the appellant will be able  to  relocate  to
       Pakistan. So far as his partner is  concerned,  the  finding  of  the
       Judge that adequate medication  will  be  available  which  could  be
       purchased from the appellant's income once he starts work shows  that
       the same is available. There was insufficient evidence  to  establish
       that during the period between leaving the  United  Kingdom  to  that
       point there would be very serious  hardship  to  either  party.   The
       partner receives prescribed medication which no doubt she could  take
       with her and, as Mrs Aboni submitted, as a person  entering  Pakistan
       with leave as a spouse she would be entitled to whatever free medical
       assistance was available, albeit that it  is  limited.  Although  the
       partner may not speak Urdu,  English  is  the  official  language  of
       Pakistan and her husband is fluent in the required languages and will
       be able to assist.  It was not made  out  the  partners  relationship
       with her own mother was such  that  serious  hardship  would  endure.
       Contact could be maintained indirectly, and it was not made  out  any
       change in arrangements would result in serious hardship  for  either.
       The appellants partners mothers care is provided by others.
   18. So far as the partners children  are  concerned,  her  son  has  been
       adopted and although her daughter lives with a relative  it  was  not
       made out that the nature of any contact would change such as to  lead
       to very serious hardship if the partner left the UK to travel with or
       join the appellant.  As a British citizen she would be free to  visit
       the United Kingdom if she wished  to  do  so  although  the  evidence
       clearly showed contact between them was limited with no  evidence  of
       any legitimate expectation being credibly held that the  partner  has
       any realistic prospect of further contact or of having  her  daughter
       come to live with her on the evidence before the Judge.  Although  it
       is noted the partner has suffered at the hands of others the  key  is
       the availability of support which will be provided by the  appellant.
       As noted by the Judge, this has not been 24 hours, seven day  a  week
       support, as the partner has been holding down two jobs on a full time
       basis to enable them to demonstrate the  minimum  required  level  of
       income pursuant to Appendix FM. This clearly  shows  the  partner  is
       capable of being left without the appellants support  which  will  be
       the situation if he found employment in Pakistan.
   19. The Judge's finding concerning the lack of evidence  of  difficulties
       caused by interfaith marriage has not been  shown  to  be  a  finding
       outside the range of those available to the Judge  on  the  evidence,
       and nor was it made out that the partner as a white British  national
       would not be able to settle in Pakistan with her husband, per se.
   20. As noted above, the burden was upon the appellant to show  there  are
       insurmountable obstacles sufficient to show  the  existence  of  very
       significant difficulties sufficient to warrant a grant  of  leave  to
       remain in the United Kingdom.  It was not for the respondent to  show
       that there are no such obstacles. This is a  case  in  which  it  was
       known the appellants immigration status is precarious from the outset
       and although the Judge received evidence establishing  a  significant
       degree of hardship and/or inconvenience the finding the same did  not
       amount to insurmountable obstacles has not been shown to be a finding
       outside the range of those available to the Judge on the evidence.
   21. Article 8 does not give a person the right to choose where they  wish
       to live.
   22. In relation to the Chikwamba argument, the facts of  that  case  were
       very specific as that the partner could not return with the appellant
       to Zimbabwe as they had  been  recognised  as  a  refugee  from  that
       country. In this case there is no such  restriction  on  the  partner
       returning with him to Pakistan. The option of the appellant making an
       application to re-enter the UK lawfully is an application that can be
       made whether the partner accompanies him, or she stays in the  United
       Kingdom.  It may be possible for the appellant if he applies to  gain
       entry clearance but that is a decision that will be made  by  an  ECO
       who will be in possession of all the facts including the provision of
       specified evidence which was not before the Judge.
   23. The Judge clearly undertook the required balancing  exercise  looking
       at both points for and against appellant when assessing the merits of
       the  appeal.  The  conclusion  the  respondent  had  established  the
       decision is proportionate is a finding  within  the  range  of  those
       reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence.  The  grounds  fail  to
       establish arguable legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss
       the appeal on the basis of that evidence.
   24. Whilst there have been post hearing developments  as  advised  by  Mr
       Hussain and the partner is again pregnant; if  such  matters  or  her
       medical condition warrant the matter being reconsidered it is  always
       open to the appellant to make a  further  application  which  can  be
       considered on its merits by the respondent.
   25. It is clear that neither the appellant nor his partner wish to  leave
       the United Kingdom and to return to Pakistan. It is also clear  based
       upon the evidence considered as the whole that  the  appellant  could
       not succeed under the Immigration Rules.
   26. I do not find it made out that the Judge did  not  properly  consider
       with the required degree of anxious scrutiny the evidence relied upon
       by  the  appellant  relating  to   both   his   and   his   partner's
       circumstances, particularly  when  assessing  whether  insurmountable
       obstacles exist. I do not find it made out that the reference by  the
       Judge to a  "test"  indicates  the  Judge  failed  to  undertake  the
       required holistic assessment off the merits of this case.
   27. I do not find it  made  out  the  Judge  was  not  aware  of  or  was
       unsympathetic to the  difficulties  experienced  by  the  partner  in
       relation to her past life.
   28.  The  question  before  the  Judge  was  whether  the  appellant  had
       established very significant difficulties which  would  be  literally
       impossible to overcome making it impossible for family  life  between
       the  appellant  and  his  partner  to  continue  in  Pakistan.   Mere
       disagreement with the Judge's findings he had not, a  suggestion  the
       Judge could have found  differently  in  the  appellants  favour,  or
       desire to remain in the United Kingdom, does not  establish  arguable
       legal error or warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering any further  in
       this matter.

Decision


   29. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   30. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 30 September 2020
