
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:  HU/17025/2017
      HU/17023/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 January 2019                     |On 07 February 2019                 |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                      SW
                                      WA
                           (Anonymity Orders Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Maqsood of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan born in 1976  and  1967.   They
    are a married couple, SW being the wife.  They have a son born in  2009
    and a baby born in early 2018, also Pakistani citizens.

 2. Their application for leave to remain based on family and private  life
    which was made on 30 July 2016 was refused in a  decision  made  on  21
    November 2017.

 3. The basis of the refusal was that SW failed  to  meet  the  suitability
    requirements of S-LTR of paragraph R-LTRP.1.1(d)(i) because she  failed
    to meet paragraph S-LTR 1.6 of Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    In  an  application  made  in  November  2012  she  submitted  a  TOEIC
    certificate from ETS which was fraudulently obtained by the  use  of  a
    proxy test taker.

 4. Also, they failed to satisfy paragraph 276 ADE(1).

 5. They appealed.

First-tier Hearing

 6. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 9 August 2018 Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal NMK Lawrence dismissed the appeal.

 7. In summary, he found that SW had used a proxy.

 8. Moving on to consider best interests of the son, the judge  noted  that
    he had been in the UK for almost nine years but  considered  that  such
    was not determinative in favour of granting  status  in  the  UK.   His
    conclusion was that it would be reasonable for him to leave the UK.  He
    also concluded that there would not be "very significant obstacles"  to
    the family returning to Pakistan.

 9. They sought permission to appeal which  was  granted  on  19  September
    2018.

Error of Law Hearing

10. At the error of law hearing Mr Maqsood adopted the four  points  raised
    in the grounds.  First, the judge made no reference to the second child
    and as such failed to consider her best interests.

11. Second, he misdirected himself in law in considering the reasonableness
    test in respect of the older child who has been in the  UK  for  nearly
    nine years and is therefore a "qualifying child" (section 117D(1)(b) of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 1982) repeatedly  elevating
    the threshold set out in case law from  "strong  reasons  for  refusing
    leave" to "strong reasons for grant of leave."

12. Third, for no apparent reason the judge  had  erred  by  interposing  a
    paragraph  dealing with serious and compelling reasons for a  grant  of
    leave under entry clearance case law.

13. Fourth, the analysis of the ETS matter, a mere  two  short  paragraphs,
    was inadequate.

14. Ms Cunha's response was that failing to refer to the baby was  not,  in
    light of her age, material.  As for ground two whilst it was clear that
    the judge had misdirected him at times on the law,  he  considered  the
    older child's best interests and reached a decision which was  open  to
    him, particularly in light of the decision in KO (Nigeria)  and  Ors  v
    SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 where it was held that it  is  normally  reasonable
    for children to be with their parents; and the assessment is to be made
    (at [18,19]) "in the real world in which the children find themselves."

15. As for ground three the  reference  to  irrelevant  case  law  was  not
    material.   On  the  fourth  ground,  although   brief,   the   judge's
    conclusions were adequate.

16. I reserved my decision.

Consideration

17. I do not find merit in grounds one and three.  The  judge  concentrated
    on the one "qualifying child" because the reasonableness  of  expecting
    the child to leave formed the essence of  the  appellants'  case.   The
    failure specifically to deal with the best interests of the appellants'
    seven month old baby could not have had material impact on the outcome.

18. As for ground three the judge referred to a surfeit of case law.  After
    discussion Mr Maqsood agreed that the reference to an  entry  clearance
    case was simply irrelevant and  not  material  to  the  decision.  That
    ground was not pursued.

19. The main problem with the decision is ground two which I  consider  has
    merit.  The judge referred to MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  705.   He
    set out the test at [31] namely, that the fact that a child  has  lived
    in the UK for seven years or more must be  given  "significant  weight"
    when assessing proportionality and there must be "strong  reasons"  for
    refusing leave.

20. The problem is, as Ms  Cunha  acknowledged,  he  did  not  consistently
    indicate that he had applied that test.

21. Thus, at [24] he stated: "I do not find that there are 'strong reasons'
    (MA (Pakistan) for a grant of leave."

22. Also, at [29]: "My conclusion is that the appellants have  not  adduced
    any evidence amounting to 'strong reasons' for a  grant  of  leave  for
    (the older child)."  In addition, at [32].

23. Moreover, [34]  is  contradictory.   It  reads:  "...  It  is  for  the
    appellants to demonstrate, on balance, that it  is  not  reasonable  to
    expect (the older child) to leave the UK after having lived here for at
    least 7 years, because the circumstances in Pakistan are likely  to  be
    detrimental to his development and life chances.  Namely not his  'best
    interests.'  Therefore, it follows that there are 'strong reasons'  for
    granting him leave to remain in the UK.  In  the  instant  appeals  the
    appellants have done demonstrated this, on balance."

24. A decision is  of  course  not  meant  to  be  a  work  of  literature.
    Occasional typographical errors or  infelicities  of  language,  whilst
    regrettable, are not fatal.  However, the convoluted reasoning at  [34]
    which on the face of it appears to contradict the conclusion ultimately
    reached by the judge and the other incidences when he applied the wrong
    test, in my view fatally flaw the decision such that  it  must  be  set
    aside.

25. I would add that I also find merit in the fourth ground.   The  judge's
    analysis of the TOEIC issue amounts to two short  paragraphs  [13,  14]
    the sole point apparently taken by the judge being that  the  appellant
    was wrong by a month in her recollection of the date  of  the  test  in
    2012. The judge's conclusion is inadequately reasoned.

26. In light of the errors the decision must be set aside.  It  was  agreed
    that in the event of material error being found the  appeal  should  be
    remitted with no findings preserved.

Decision

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   The  nature  of
    the case is such that it is appropriate  under  section  12(2)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice  Statement  7.2
    to remit to the First-tier Tribunal for an entirely  fresh  hearing  on
    all issues.  No  findings  stand.   The  member(s)  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal chosen to consider the case  are  not  to  include  Judge  NMK
    Lawrence.

28. An anonymity order is made.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise, the appellants are granted  anonymity.   Failure  to
    comply with this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                             Date 31 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway



