

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/17868/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated:                 |
|On 2 November 2018                            |On 16 November 2018          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR ORAL FRANKLYN McKENZIE

                          (ANONYMITY NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr O Jibowu      (Counsel)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal,
brought with the permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal,  from  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which it made  after  an
oral hearing  of  28 July 2017  and  which  it  sent  to  the  parties  on
31 August 2017.   In  making  its  decision  the  tribunal  allowed  the
respondent's (claimant's) appeal against a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
State, of 11 July 2016, refusing to grant leave to remain.

2.     By   way   of   background,   the   claimant,   who   was   born   on
28 September 1961, is a national of Jamaica.  He entered the United Kingdom
(UK) as a visitor on 16 June 2001.  He then  obtained  various  grants  of
further leave as a student until 30 October 2004.  On 2 December 2011 he
was granted discretionary leave to remain until 2 December 2014.  I am not
sure whether he had any form of valid leave  between  30 October 2004  and
1 December 2011 but no doubt, if it is  considered  to  be  relevant,  the
parties will be able to address that in future proceedings.  In  any  event,
the grant of 2 December 2011 was made because the claimant had entered into
a relationship with a British citizen who has a British citizen child.   The
claimant was subsequently granted further discretionary leave, on  the  same
basis, until 2 February 2018.  He married the  person  with  whom  he  was
having the relationship but, unfortunately, the marriage  broke  down.   The
Secretary of State learnt of that development  and,  on  19 February 2016,
indicated that his leave was being curtailed so  that  it  would  expire  on
23 April 2016.  However, on 22 April 2016 the claimant applied for leave to
remain in the UK, aided by his current legal  representatives.   The  letter
of application took a range of points based upon a range of  considerations.
 As to the Immigration Rules it was asserted  that  the  claimant  met  the
requirements of paragraph 276 ADE (vi), its being argued that there  would
be very significant obstacles to his integration into Jamaica if he were  to
be returned there.  Other points related to  what  was  said  to  be  a  new
subsisting  relationship  with  one  [LH],  a  British  citizen,   and   his
relationship with his UK based brother Mr Neville McKenzie who has  health
difficulties and who was said to be emotionally dependent upon him.

3.    The Secretary  of  State  explained  why  the  application  was  being
refused in a document headed  "Reasons  for  Refusal"  and  which  is  dated
11 July 2016.  It is clear from that document that the Secretary of  State
considered the  question  of  compliance  with  paragraph 276 ADE  of  the
Immigration Rules but did not consider the possible  applicability  of  any
other Immigration Rules.  It is also clear that, having  decided  that  the
requirements of that  rule  were  not  satisfied,  the  Secretary  of  State
undertook an examination of  the  case  under  Article 8  of  the  European
Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) outside the  rules  noting  that,  in  his
view, the claimant would probably be able to find employment in Jamaica  and
that Ms [H] could accompany him to Jamaica if wished.

4.    The hearing before the tribunal took  place  on  28 July 2017.   The
claimant was represented and  gave  oral  evidence,  as  did  Ms [H].   The
tribunal was not assisted to the extent it should have  been,  because,  for
reasons which are not clear to me, the Secretary  of  State  was  unable  to
field a Presenting Officer.

5.    The tribunal allowed the appeal.   Such  is  clear  from  its  written
reasons of 26 August 2017.  At  the  outset  it  identified  the  relevant
provisions for it to consider as being paragraph 276 ADE and paragraphs S-
LTR.2  to  S-LTR2.3  and  S-LTR3.1  of  the  Immigration Rules.   It  then
summarised the claimant and Ms [H]'s evidence and the submissions  made  to
it on the claimant's behalf.  Having done that, it went on  to  say  why  it
was allowing the appeal.  This is what it said:

      "     12.  I am satisfied that the Appellant discharges the burden  of
      proof that is upon him for the following reasons.  First, there is the
      Appellant's evidence, which I have no reason to disbelieve,  and  have
      actually found to be credible on a balance of probabilities.   He  has
      private/family life interests which are disproportionately  interfered
      with by the SSHD in her decision, because as the Appellant explains in
      his WS, he has a 'loyal clientele in the United Kingdom' (para 8).  He
      has a 32-year old son in Jamaica (para 9).  In the  UK  he  has  many
      family members who  are  British  citizens  (para 10).   His  brother
      Neville suffers from mental illness (para 11) and he is the Appellant
      is the only person he can turn to.  If he was forced to return Neville
      would have no one (para 11).  Since December 2015 he has been  in  a
      relationship with [LH].  (para 12) who herself has a career in the UK
      as a teacher and cannot move to Jamaica.  (para 12).  The Appellant's
      relationships were not created at a time when he was  without  LTR  in
      this country.

            13.  The central  features  of  his  claim  are  (i) his  well-
      established business of Carpentry  in  the  UK,  which  helps  him  to
      support his 32-year old son in Jamaica;  (ii) his  relationship  with
      Ms [H], which is genuine, subsisting and  wholly  committed  on  both
      sides, but one which would still leave her  unable  and  unwilling  to
      relocate to Jamaica were the Appellant to  be  forced  to  leave;  and
      (iii) his parental relationship with the British Citizen child, Lyyon,
      who again would be unable to leave his mother  and  move  to  Jamaica,
      such that his consideration falls to be favourably disposed  of  under
      s.55 BCIA.  The evidence in respect of this is set  out  above  and  I
      need  not  repeat  it.   Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  balance   of
      considerations falls in favour of the Appellant.

            14.  The fact is that the decision in  Agyarko  [2017]  UKSC 11
      assists  the  Appellant  if  regard  is  had  to  the  'insurmountable
      obstacles' undertaken in Agyarko (at paragraph 42)  saw  the  Supreme
      Court refer to Jeunesse, where the Grand Chamber identified, 'a number
      of factors to be taken into account in assessing  the  proportionality
      under  Article 8  of   the   removal   of   non-settled   migrants'.
      (Paragraph 42).  It then stated that:

                 'Relevant factors were said to include the extent to  which
           family life would effectively be ruptured,  the  extent  of  the
           ties in the contracting state, where there were  'insurmountable
           obstacles' in the way of the family living  in  the  country  of
           origin of the non-national concerned,  and  whether  there  were
           factors of immigration control ....'  (Paragraph 42).

            15.  Moreover, the court goes on to say that,

                  'The  Secretary  of  State  has  not  imposed  a  test  of
           exceptionality in the sense that the case  should  exhibit  some
           highly unusual feature, over and above the  application  of  the
           test of proportionality.  On the contrary, she had  defined  the
           word   'exceptional'   as   already   explained,   as    meaning
           circumstances in which refusal  would  result  in  unjustifiably
           harsh consequences for the individual such that the  refusal  of
           the application would not be proportionate.'  (Paragraph 60).


            16.  All of this falls in favour of the Appellant."

6.    That was not the end of the matter  because  the  Secretary  of  State
applied for  permission  to  appeal.   There  were  three  separate  grounds
advanced.  In summary, it was asserted in Ground 1 that  the  tribunal  had
inadequately explained why it was accepting  the  claimant's  evidence.   In
Ground 2 it was asserted that, clearly on the assumption that the  tribunal
had intended to allow the appeal on the basis  that  the  claimant  met  the
requirements  as  a  partner  as   set   out   in   Appendix FM   to   the
Immigration Rules, it had failed to actually consider his ability to do so.
 Further, on the assumption that the tribunal was  intending  to  allow  the
appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds outside the rules, it was argued  that  it
had not applied the correct test.  Ground 3 amounted to  an  argument  that
the tribunal had failed to properly consider the mandatory  public  interest
considerations as set out in section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration
and Asylum Act 2002.

7.    Permission was granted on all grounds.   So,  the  matter  was  listed
before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that it could be considered, at an
oral hearing, whether or not the tribunal had erred in law and, if so,  what
should flow from that.  Representation at that hearing was as  stated  above
and I am grateful to each representative.

8.    Mr Mills maintained  all  three  grounds.   But  the  thrust  of  his
submission was to the effect that it was simply  unclear  why  the  tribunal
had decided to allow the appeal.  It had not explained why it  accepted  the
oral evidence or, if it had, that explanation was  manifestly  insufficient.
It was not apparent which legal provisions it had relied  upon  in  allowing
the appeal and, therefore, it was not  apparent  that  it  had  applied  the
correct legal tests.  Mr Jibowu argued that the tribunal had been  entitled
to accept the oral evidence of the claimant and Ms [H]  having  heard  from
them.  It was not required to specify whether it  was  allowing  the  appeal
under the Immigration Rules or under Article 8 of  the  ECHR  outside  the
rules so long as it properly set out its findings.   Anyway,  the  Secretary
of State had not identified anything that militated against a  finding  that
the requirements of the Immigration Rules had been met.  The  section 117B
factors had been dealt with in the substance of the written reasons.

9.    As I informed the parties at the end of the hearing,  I  have  decided
that the decision of the tribunal involved material errors of law  and  that
its decision, in consequence, cannot stand and has to be  set  aside.   This
is why.

10.   The tribunal, as is well established, has to provide legally  adequate
reasons for its decision.  That is not an exacting test but  it  is  a  test
which has to be met.

11.   In this case it was conceivable that the claimant might succeed  under
paragraph 276 (ADE) of the rules; that he might conceivably (though  it  is
difficult to see this) succeed under the  rules  contained  in  Appendix FM
relating to partners; or that he might succeed on  Article 8  ECHR  grounds
outside the  rules.   On  reading  the  tribunal's  written  reasons  it  is
apparent  that  the  appeal  has  succeeded.   It  must,  presumably,   have
succeeded on one of the above bases.  But it is not ascertainable  from  the
written reasons upon which basis it has succeeded.

12.   In my judgment, if the appeal was being allowed  under  paragraph 276
(ADE), and I do not think it was but I am  not  sure,  it  would  have  been
necessary for the tribunal to make  appropriate  findings  as  to  that,  to
demonstrate it had the correct legal test in mind and then  to  explain  its
reasoning as to that test.  It did not do that.

13.   If it was allowing the appeal under Appendix FM it  was  required  to
explain why it was doing so.  There had been no express  concession  on  the
part of the  Secretary  of  State  with  respect  to  any  elements  of  the
requirements concerning leave under the  Immigration Rules  as  a  partner.
But there is no identification in the decision as to what rules or parts  of
rules were considered to be relevant and how it has been concluded that  the
requirements of any such parts were, in fact, met.

14.   If, as I suspect to be the case, the tribunal was intending  to  allow
the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR outside the rules, it  was  required
to say something about why and the extent to which the rules  were  not  met
and then why, nevertheless, it considered this case to be one which  it  was
proper to allow  under  Article 8  outside  the  rules.   Such  would  have
included a consideration of relevant private and family life findings (I  am
not clear, for example, whether it was accepted  that  the  claimant  enjoys
family life within the meaning of Article 8 with his brother  in  the  UK),
findings about the nature and depth of the  relationship  with  Ms [H]  and
whether the relationship was being characterised as family life  or  private
life (as to that I note that they do not live together or at least  did  not
do so at the time their witness statements were  prepared  for  the  hearing
before  the  tribunal)  and  a  consideration   of   the   public   interest
considerations as set out in section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration
and Asylum Act 2002.  In my judgment all of  those  elements  were  lacking
here.

15.   My having reached the above  conclusions  there  is  no  need  to  say
anything more.  Since I have decided to set aside the tribunal's decision  I
have also decided that remittal is the most appropriate  course  of  action.
That is because I do not intend to preserve the tribunal's  findings  and  I
consider, since matters will be starting afresh, the First-tier Tribunal is
now the appropriate forum.

16.   The Secretary of State's  appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal,  then,  is
allowed on the basis and to the extent explained above.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  errors  of
law and is set aside.  Further, the case is remitted for rehearing before  a
differently constituted tribunal.


Signed:                Date: 12 November 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge M R Hemingway

Anonymity

I make no anonymity directions.  None was made by the  First-tier Tribunal,
none was sought before me and there does not appear  to  be  any  particular
need for anonymity.


Signed:                Date: 12 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge M R Hemingway




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed:                Date: 12 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge M R Hemingway
