
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17604/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision sent to parties on   |
|On 7th September 2018                         |On 28th September 2018        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                              Ana Marie Banluta
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                   Manila
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Damien Krushner, Counsel appearing by direct
access
For the Respondent:    Mr Nigel Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Obhi  dismissing  her  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds
    against the respondent's decision not to grant her entry  clearance  to
    join the sponsor, her claimed British citizen spouse. The appellant  is
    a citizen of the Philippines.



Background

 2. The Philippines Statistics Authority, which is the  record  keeper  for
    marriages and divorces in the Philippines, records in the  bundle  show
    that the appellant has had two previous marriages, the first to a Mr Yu
    in 1990 and the second in 1993.  Her second marriage was  dissolved  in
    2016 in United Kingdom divorce  proceedings,  before  she  married  the
    sponsor.  Divorce is not permitted  in  the  Philippines,  which  is  a
    Catholic country.  However, the appellant was resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom and was able to bring proceedings here.

 3. The appellant came to the United Kingdom as a student and was here from
    2011 - 2016.  Between 2012-2016, she was living with the  sponsor,  and
    in 2016, once her divorce  on  the  1993  marriage  came  through,  she
    married him.

 4. After the marriage, the appellant returned to the Philippines  to  seek
    entry clearance as  the  sponsor's  spouse,  but  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer refused leave  to  enter,  having  seen  from  the  Philippines
    Statistics Authority records that she was not free  to  marry  him  and
    that the British marriage appeared to be bigamous.

 5. The Philippines Statistics Authority retains a record of both the  1990
    and 1993 marriages, neither of which shows on  that  record  as  having
    been annulled or dissolved.  The appellant  maintains  that  she  never
    contracted a genuine marriage to Mr Yu.  Her evidence was that she  was
    living with Mr Yu at university without being  married,  and  that  her
    father obtained a false marriage certificate, to prevent any stigma  to
    the appellant or the family  caused  by  their  living  together.   The
    appellant has not, explained how in that case the 1990 marriage  became
    registered with the Philippines Statistics Authority  (see  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at [18]).

First-tier Tribunal decision

 6. The core findings of the First-tier Tribunal are at [23] and [26]:

         "23. I wish to comment on the evidence of the sponsor.   I  totally
         accept his evidence.  I do not think that it would be proportionate
         for him to have to live in the Philippines.  I accept that this  is
         a genuine relationship and  provided  the  appellant  can  get  the
         Registrar [in the Philippines] to either accept that  the  marriage
         in 1990 was registered on  the  basis  of  a  false  document,  and
         therefore remove that entry, or otherwise show  that  the  marriage
         has ended by divorce, annulment or death, then there is  no  reason
         why entry clearance should not be given.  Whilst I accept that  the
         sponsor cannot go and live in the Philippines, he met the appellant
         in the United Kingdom when he was probably led to  believe  by  her
         that she would be able to  return,  there  is  no  reason  why  the
         relationship cannot be maintained through  visits,  Skype  and  the
         internet, until the procedural matters can be corrected.  It is not
         a decision I reach lightly and I would hope that the appellant  can
         secure some legal advice in her own country about how she addresses
         this issue. ...

         26.   I am satisfied that  there  is  a  family  life  between  the
         appellant and sponsor.  However, I [am] not satisfied  that  it  is
         disproportionate  to  refuse  entry  clearance   in   the   unusual
         circumstances of this case.  It is for the appellant to prove  that
         she was not married at the time she entered into a  legal  marriage
         with the sponsor.  I can only assume that  information  about  that
         marriage was not given to the Registrar in the  United  Kingdom  as
         otherwise it is unlikely that she would have  been  able  to  marry
         [the sponsor]."

 7. The First-tier Judge did not make any finding as to whether  the  first
    marriage certificate was a forgery, but  concluded  that  the  decision
    which the respondent had made was open to him.

 8. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

 9. Leave to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Coker on the  basis
    that it was arguably perverse or irrational on human rights grounds  to
    continue to exclude the appellant for whatever time it would  take  for
    her to resolve her legal position.

Upper Tribunal hearing

10. For the appellant, Mr Krushner  accepted  that  the  assertion  in  the
    grounds of appeal that the First-tier  Judge's  decision  reversed  the
    burden of proof was unarguable.   However,  the  Judge  had  found  the
    relationship of the appellant and sponsor to be genuine and  they  were
    able  to  meet  the  financial  requirements  of  the  Rules.   It  was
    disproportionate to expect the sponsor to go to live in the Philippines
    and arguably perverse to dismiss  the  appeal,  on  these  facts.   The
    sponsor had been found to be a credible witness.  Family  life  between
    the parties was  accepted  and  the  parties'  human  rights  would  be
    disproportionately breached if the appellant were further excluded from
    the United Kingdom.

Discussion

11. I bear in mind that these parties lived together in the United  Kingdom
    for about four years before getting married, that  the  appellant  went
    back  to  the  Philippines  specifically  to  make  an  application  to
    regularise her position and to re-enter the  United  Kingdom  lawfully,
    and that the relationship has been found to be genuine.  However, it is
    for the appellant to show that she  is  indeed  the  sponsor's  spouse,
    including, on these facts, that she was free  to  marry  him  when  the
    marriage in the United Kingdom was contracted.  I note that nine months
    have elapsed since  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refusal  but  there
    appears to be no new evidence and there has been no  application  under
    Rule 15(2)(a) to adduce additional evidence.

12. It was unarguably open to the First-tier  Judge  to  conclude,  on  the
    evidence before him, that the appellant had  failed  to  discharge  the
    burden of showing that the 1990 marriage recorded  on  the  Philippines
    Statistics Authority database was not a genuine marriage.  That is  not
    a trivial matter: bigamy is a criminal offence.  The First-tier Judge's
    finding that the 1990 marriage was a valid marriage  and  a  continuing
    obstacle to a lawful marriage in the United Kingdom is neither perverse
    nor Wednesbury unreasonable.   He was entitled to find, as he did, that
    on these facts, the appellant's exclusion from the United Kingdom until
    the  question  of   her   first   marriage   was   resolved   was   not
    disproportionate nor a breach of  the  United  Kingdom's  international
    human rights obligations.

13. The grounds of appeal disclose no material error of law in the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal and I dismiss the appeal.

DECISION

14. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law.


    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.


Signed:        Judith  A  J  C  Gleeson                          Date:    25
September 2018
              Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


