
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17296/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 9 April 2021                    |On : 15 April 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                               akekelwa mwala
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Shaw, instructed by IHRC Legal
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Zambia, born on 6 July  2001.  He  appeals,
   with  permission,  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal
   dismissing his human rights appeal.

2. The appellant applied, on 1 July 2019, for  entry  clearance  to  the  UK
   under Appendix FM of the immigration rules as the child  of  his  mother,
   Irene Mukatimui Muhongo, the sponsor, who was  settled  in  the  UK.  The
   respondent refused the application on 23 September 2019  on  the  grounds
   that it was not accepted that the appellant and sponsor were  related  as
   claimed and it was not accepted that the sponsor had sole  responsibility
   for the appellant's upbringing, or that there were serious or  compelling
   circumstances which made his exclusion  from  the  UK  undesirable.   The
   respondent also considered that were no exceptional circumstances leading
   to unjustifiably harsh consequences for the appellant for the purposes of
   Article 8.

3. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet on 9 October  2020,  by  which  time  the
   respondent had conceded that the appellant and the sponsor  were  related
   as claimed. The sponsor gave oral evidence before the judge. Her evidence
   was that she had left  Zambia  in  October  2003  and  had  been  granted
   indefinite leave to remain on 15 June 2010. She had made  various  visits
   to Zambia, the last one being from February to April 2019. Her  daughter,
   the appellant's older sister, remained in  Zambia  and  was  studying  at
   university. The appellant had had mental health problems,  in  particular
   schizo-affective disorder, since April 2016 and had dropped out of school
   in 2019. He had been living with  different  family  members  and  family
   friends and was admitted to hospital in  April  2019.  He  was  currently
   living with a family friend, Iven, since July 2020,  after  his  previous
   carer Brian, an uncle, left, but the current arrangement  was  temporary.
   The appellant's father had played little part in his life  since  he  was
   two years of age. The sponsor had attempted to bring the appellant to the
   UK in 2013 but his application was refused and  his  appeal  against  the
   decision was dismissed in March 2014.

4. The  judge,  having  regard  to  the  determination  of  the  appellant's
   previous appeal in 2014, noted that there had been two changes since that
   time, namely the appellant's mental health  and  the  acceptance  of  the
   relationship between the appellant and the sponsor. However  he  did  not
   consider that the weight of the evidence  supported  a  finding  of  sole
   responsibility or of serious and compelling circumstances which made  the
   appellant's exclusion from the UK undesirable. The judge considered  that
   the appellant took his medication himself  and  made  his  own  decisions
   about his daily life and that it was his uncle  Brian  who  took  him  to
   hospital in April 2019. The judge did not accept that the sponsor had had
   continuous control of  the  appellant's  upbringing  and  he  accordingly
   dismissed the appeal.

5. The appellant sought permission to appeal the decision on  the  following
   grounds: that the judge had failed to consider the numerous other reasons
   presented for departing from the previous determination; that  the  judge
   failed to engage with relevant evidence and relied on irrelevant  matters
   when assessing whether sole responsibility had  been  demonstrated;  that
   the judge failed to place weight on relevant factors; that the judge made
   findings based upon erroneous submissions from the respondent;  that  the
   judge failed to consider the best interests test under section 55 of  the
   Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009; and that the judge  failed
   to provide reasons for dismissing the appeal  under  paragraph  297(i)(f)
   and to consider the appellant's mental illness in that respect.

6. Permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on 1 December 2020  and
   the matter then came before me for a remote hearing.

7. Having heard submissions from the parties I have to agree  with  Ms  Shaw
   that Judge Sweet's decision is materially lacking in  its  reasoning  and
   assessment of all the evidence. Mr Whitwell made  a  valiant  attempt  to
   support the judge's decision, submitting that the determination addressed
   all relevant matters when read as a whole and that the judge had referred
   to the relevant immigration rules, set out the evidence and made findings
   under paragraph 297(e) and (f). However, he properly left  it  to  me  to
   decide if that was in itself adequate and I have to conclude that  it  is
   not.

8. Whilst Judge Sweet properly took the earlier determination of the FTT  as
   his starting point,  further  to  the  principles  in  Devaseelan,  I  am
   entirely in agreement with Ms Shaw that he erred  by  relying  upon  that
   earlier decision to the extent that he did and without  giving  full  and
   proper  consideration  to  the  limitations  of  the  decision  and   the
   availability of  supporting  evidence  and  changes  in  the  appellant's
   circumstances since that time. As the grounds properly assert the  judge,
   when referring to only two changes since the previous decision  in  2014,
   namely the appellant's mental health and the fact  that  the  appellant's
   relationship with his mother was accepted,  failed  to  consider  various
   other factors, in particular the fact that the decision of 27 March  2014
   was made without the benefit of any oral evidence and the fact  that  the
   appeal failed at that  time  largely  on  the  basis  of  an  absence  of
   supporting evidence as is apparent at [10] of that decision.

9. Whilst there was a lack of supporting evidence  before  the  FTT  at  the
   appeal in March 2014, Judge Sweet had before  him  a  51-page  bundle  of
   evidence as well as the oral evidence of the sponsor. Although the  judge
   referred to parts of the evidence, there is merit in the assertion in the
   third ground of appeal, that relevant parts of the evidence  were  either
   not considered or were not accorded any weight, such as evidence from the
   school the appellant previously  attended  and  evidence  of  his  mental
   illness which the judge merely referred to in passing. Indeed,  it  seems
   to me that the 'findings' at [31]  are  largely  observations  about  the
   evidence without any proper analysis and without any reasons given as  to
   why  it  did  not  demonstrate  sole  responsibility.  The  judge  simply
   expressed the view that "the weight of evidence (both new  and  previous)
   does not  support  a  finding  of  sole  responsibility  or  serious  and
   compelling family  or  other  considerations"  but  it  is  difficult  to
   understand from a reading of the decision overall how that conclusion was
   reached, other than by reference to the earlier unsuccessful appeal.

10. Likewise, whilst the judge referred to TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e):  "sole
   responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049 at [31], there was  an  absence
   of any proper analysis of the test and a lack of reasoning as to  why  he
   considered that the test was not met. Indeed, the  fact  that  the  judge
   found  against  the  appellant  and  sponsor  on  the   issue   of   sole
   responsibility on the basis that it was the appellant's uncle  Brian  who
   took him to hospital suggests a misunderstanding  by  the  judge  of  the
   test, as the grounds assert, with some merit, at [10(iii)] and [17(b)].

11. For all of these reasons it seems to me that  the  judge's  decision  is
   materially flawed and that it simply cannot stand. Accordingly, I set the
   decision aside. In view of the lack of analysis of the evidence  and  the
   absence of properly reasoned findings of fact, the appropriate course  is
   for the case to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  de
   novo.

DECISION

12. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The  decision  is  set  aside.  The
   appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh,
   pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement
   Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(a), before any judge aside from Judge
   Sweet.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  12 April 2021
