
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17001/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House,                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 March 2019                     |On 10 April 2019                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE JEFFORD
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant (the Secretary of State):  Mr D Clarke, Senior Home
                                   Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (AM):   Mrs Nicholas, counsel, instructed by Perry
                                   Clements Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  8  January
    2019.  In that appeal, AM was the appellant/claimant and the  Secretary
    of State was the respondent.  In this decision, for ease of refence, we
    shall refer to them respectively as "the claimant" and  the  "Secretary
    of State".

 2. The claimant was born  on  3  June  1993  and  is  a  national  of  the
    Democratic Republic of Congo.  He entered the United Kingdom legally on
    12 May 2007 when he was 13  years  old.   In  2014  and  2015  he  made
    unsuccessful No Time Limit applications.  He came to the  attention  of
    the Home Office in 2016 when he was on remand following his  arrest  on
    drugs offences.  On 9 September 2016, having  pleaded  guilty,  he  was
    convicted and sentenced in the Gloucester Crown Court on two counts  of
    possession with intent to  supply  Class  A  drugs  (heroin  and  crack
    cocaine).  He received a sentence of 30 months  on  each  count  to  be
    served concurrently.  He pleaded guilty to, but  received  no  separate
    penalty for, a further offence of possession of cannabis.

 3. As a result, as a foreign criminal who had been sentenced to  a  period
    of imprisonment of at least 12 months, the claimant became  subject  to
    deportation pursuant to section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007.   The
    claimant was served with Notice of Decision to  Deport  on  25  October
    2016.  The claimant then made a human rights claim  which  was  refused
    and certified under section 94B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 on 29 December  2016.   The  claimant  sought  judicial
    review of that decision.  In light of the decision of the Supreme Court
    in Kiarie and Byndloss v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2017] UKSC 42, that decision was withdrawn.  Because of various delays
    (which are not material) two further decisions were served.

 4. The last decision was dated 30 November 2017.  The Secretary  of  State
    refused the claimant's human rights claim and found that  the  claimant
    did not fall within any of the exceptions  in  section  33  of  the  UK
    Borders Act.  The Secretary of State was, therefore,  required  to  and
    did make a deportation order. It is that decision which was the subject
    matter of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Under section 33(2) of the UK Borders Act, Exception 1 to the automatic
    deportation under section 32(5) arises where  the  deportation  of  the
    foreign criminal  would  breach  his  Convention  rights  or  the  UK's
    obligations under the Refugee Convention.  Only the first of  those  is
    potentially relevant in the claimant's case.

 6. Sections 117A to 117D of Part 5A of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 apply in this case.  Section  117A  applies  where  the
    tribunal  is  required  to  determine  whether  a  decision  under  the
    Immigration Acts breaches the claimant's right to respect  for  private
    and family life under Article 8 and, in the case of a foreign criminal,
    requires the tribunal to have regard to the matters  in  both  sections
    117B and 117C.  Section 117C sets out that following considerations:

         "(1)  The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

 7. Those requirements are also reflected in the Immigration Rules 399  and
    399A.

         "399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c) applies
         if -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
             the 7 years immediately preceding the date of the  immigration
             decision; and in either case

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported; or ....




         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -

         (a)  the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of
         his life; and

         (b)  he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."

 8. In summary, the judge of the First-tier Tribunal found that two of  the
    exceptions were engaged, namely that under paragraph 399 and that under
    paragraph 399A.

 9. It is convenient to take first the Secretary of State's  second  ground
    of appeal which relates to the judge's decision that the claimant  fell
    within the exception in paragraph 399A.  In order to come  within  this
    exception, the claimant must meet each of the three criteria set out in
    that paragraph (and in section 117C(4)), the first of which is that  he
    must have been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of  his
    life.

10. At paragraph 72 of her decision, the judge found as  a  fact  that  the
    claimant was 13, nearly 14, years old when he  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  That was plainly a correct finding of fact.  It followed from
    that that, at the time of the Secretary of State's decision  (and  even
    now), the claimant had not been resident in the United Kingdom for most
    of his life but for less than half  his  life.   Despite  that,  in  an
    earlier paragraph [70], the judge stated that it was accepted that  the
    claimant "had resided lawfully in the United Kingdom for  the  majority
    of his life" and she so found based on the chronology she had set out.

11. On this appeal, the Secretary of State initially said that he would not
    seek to take an additional ground of appeal on  this  basis  but  would
    draw the error of fact to our attention.  This was not, however, in the
    nature of an error in the making of a primary  finding  of  fact.   The
    primary facts were not in issue, namely the claimant's  date  of  birth
    and the date of entry to the United Kingdom.  The  error  was  one,  it
    would appear, of calculation.  No  further  evidence  or  argument  was
    required.  We, therefore,  considered  it  appropriate  to  permit  the
    Secretary of State to rely on this additional ground of appeal to which
    the claimant had no answer.

12. We add that it is unclear to us, from  the  decision  letter,  on  what
    basis the claimant is said to  have  lawfully  resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom but no further issue was raised about that.

13. We therefore allow the appeal on this ground for the  reason  that  the
    claimant does not meet the statutory criterion of having resided in the
    United Kingdom for most of his life.

14. The  claimant's  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  however,  also
    succeeded  on  the  basis  that  he  had  a  genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with his two children and that it would  be  unduly  harsh
    for them to remain in the United Kingdom without him.  The  judge  also
    found that it would be unduly harsh for the children to  accompany  him
    out of the country and there is no appeal against that  aspect  of  the
    decision.

15. We set out the relevant evidence as found by the judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal below and we use the same abbreviations to refer  to  the
    children and their mothers as were used in that decision.

16. The claimant has two male children who are both British citizens.   The
    elder, Ty, is the child of the claimant's former partner, C,  who  gave
    evidence at the hearing below.  He is 9 years old.  He lives  with  his
    mother.  They do not live close to the claimant.  The  claimant  visits
    when he can and speaks to Ty on the phone.  Ty stays with the  claimant
    every second weekend and has  done  so  for  most  of  his  life.   C's
    evidence was that Ty's behaviour could be difficult and out of control.
     He had been uncontrollable when the claimant was  in  prison.   C  had
    taken him to the doctor who had recommended screening for ADHD and  she
    was  waiting  for  pre-screening.   The  claimant  provided  her   with
    emotional support, helped her cope  with  Ty's  behaviour,  and  was  a
    positive influence on this behaviour.  Ty was calmer and  happier  when
    he spoke to the claimant.  The claimant was the only male role model in
    Ty's life.

17. Tr is the younger child  and  is  the  son  of  the  claimant's  former
    partner, I.  Tr is about 7 years old.  He too lives with his mother but
    they live close to the claimant.  The claimant takes him to school  and
    Tr also stays with him every second  weekend.   In  May  2017,  Tr  was
    referred to Barnet Child and Adolescent Mental Health  Service  (CAMHS)
    because of concern about his ability to concentrate  and  some  sensory
    issues (including avoiding messy play and avoiding getting messy  while
    eating).  The school expressed concern about anxiety and low mood while
    his father was in prison.  Between September 2017 and February 2018, Tr
    attended 6 therapy sessions and a report was provided dated 5  February
    2018.  The judge noted that the mental health worker stated that it was
    apparent that Tr had struggled to fill the gap caused by the claimant's
    absence and that, after the claimant was released, Tr's low mood became
    far less evident and he seemed happier and more settled both at  school
    and at home.  That is an accurate reflection  of  the  content  of  the
    report but we note that the mental health worker also  stated  that  Tr
    seemed happiest talking about his mother and his  extended  family  and
    that he spoke positively about his peers and teachers at school.

18. Contact between the two children comes about  because  they  both  stay
    with the claimant every second weekend.  C's evidence was that the  two
    mothers had a civil relationship but did not really speak to each other
    unless it was necessary for the sake of the boys.

19. The judge made the following findings:

      i) "... [the claimant] is the key  to  his  two  children  maintaining
         their sibling relationship and it is  reasonably  foreseeable  that
         their relationship would break down in his absence.  They  are  too
         young to be able to maintain  the  relationship  independently  and
         would be unable to have direct contact without the  support  of  an
         adult. ... it would be detrimental to both  children  to  lose  the
         relationship they have with each other." (paragraph 64)

     ii) "For the appellant to be completely removed from their lives  would
         be significant and detrimental for both children  ...."  (paragraph
         65)

    iii) ".... [the  claimant's]  absence  during  his  imprisonment  had  a
         detrimental effect on Tr's emotional wellbeing and [the claimant's]
         absence for an indeterminate period is reasonably likely to  result
         in a  deterioration  in  his  mental  health.   The  impact  of  an
         indeterminate  separation  from  his  father  is   likely   to   be
         significantly more difficult for Tr to deal with  compared  with  a
         determinate  (and  relatively  short)  period   of   imprisonment."
         (paragraph 68)

20. At paragraph 68, the judge then reached the following conclusion:

         "Having taken into account all these factors, I  find  that  it  is
         unduly harsh to expect either of the appellant's children to remain
         in the United  Kingdom  without  him.   I  have  placed  particular
         reliance on the fact that the appellant is the common bond  between
         the two children and the difficulties both  have  experienced  when
         separated from the appellant in the past.  I am satisfied that  for
         them, the consequences of  the  appellant's  deportation  from  the
         United Kingdom would be harsher than  for  any  other  child  of  a
         person being deported such that they can properly be termed  unduly
         harsh."  (Our emphasis)

21. The meaning of "unduly harsh" in section 117C(5)  (and  paragraph  399)
    was considered by the Supreme Court in  KO  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC  53.   The  particular  issue
    that arose was whether the relative seriousness of the  offence  was  a
    matter to be taken into account.  In his speech,  Lord  Carnwath  (with
    whom the others agreed)  dealt  with  the  meaning  of  the  expression
    "unduly harsh" as follows:

         "... the word  "unduly"  implies  an  element  of  comparison.   It
         assumes that there is a "due" level of "harshness", that is a level
         which may be acceptable or justifiable  in  the  relevant  context.
         "Unduly" implies something going beyond that level.   The  relevant
         context is that set by section 117C(1), that is the public interest
         in deportation of foreign criminals.  One is looking for  a  degree
         of harshness going beyond what would necessarily  be  involved  for
         any child faced with the deportation of a parent.  What it does not
         require in my view (and subject to the discussion of the  cases  in
         the next section) is a balancing of the relative levels of severity
         of the parent's offence other than is inherent in  the  distinction
         drawn by the section itself by reference to the length of sentence.
         ...."

22. In the section that follows, Lord Carnwath referred to the decision  of
    the Presidential Tribunal in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2015] UKUT 223 as providing authoritative guidance
    as to the meaning of "unduly harsh":

         "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that "unduly harsh"  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult.   Rather,  it  poses  a   considerably   more   elevated
         threshold.  "Harsh" in this context,  means  something  severe,  or
         bleak.   It  is  the  antithesis  of   pleasant   or   comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb "unduly" raises an  already
         elevated standard still higher."

23. It is apparent that the First-tier Tribunal judge was referred  to  the
    decision in KO, as she cited it at paragraph  60  of  her  decision  as
    authority for the proposition that the assessment of whether  it  would
    be unduly harsh for the children to accompany him or to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom without him did not involve  any  consideration  of  the
    seriousness of the offence.  She made  no  further  reference  to  this
    decision, however, and does not appear to have directed herself  as  to
    the meaning of "unduly harsh" by reference to the degree  of  harshness
    going beyond what would necessarily be involved  for  any  child  faced
    with the deportation of a parent.

24. It may be that that was the test that she had in mind in  reaching  her
    conclusion at paragraph 68 but, if she did, she  reached  a  conclusion
    which is plainly unsustainable, namely that these children would suffer
    more than any other child.  It is easy to envisage  circumstances,  for
    example, a disabled child living with both  parents  and  requiring  24
    hour care, who would suffer more from the deportation  of  one  parent.



25. In this case, the conclusion that the  sibling  relationship  would  be
    harmed was based on the slimmest of evidence and despite the fact  that
    the two mothers have a civil relationship and talk for the sake of  the
    children.  The position of these two children, in this respect, is  not
    uncommon.  Further, the evidence was that each child  had  exhibited  a
    degree of low mood and/or difficult behaviour when the  father  was  in
    prison and could be expected to do so if he was deported.   Again  that
    was not an unusual situation.  The  impact  on  the  children,  if  the
    claimant is deported, is unfortunate and may be harsh, but  we  do  not
    consider  that  goes  beyond  what  is  necessarily  involved  in   the
    deportation of a parent so as to meet the test of being "unduly  harsh"
    and we do not consider that the conclusion  that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh was open to the judge on the evidence.

Notice of Decision

We, therefore, allow  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal.   We  remake  the
decision and dismiss the claimant's appeal from  the  Secretary  of  State's
decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:

[pic]
pp Mrs Justice Jefford Date: 2 April 2019

