
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/17727/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 July 2019                       |On 23rd July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                     R S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Coleman, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Jones, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 1 August 1962.  He appealed
    against the decision of the respondent on 29 June 2018  to  refuse  his
    human rights claim.  His appeal came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Lloyd-Lawrie ("the FTTJ") who, in a decision promulgated on 29
    March 2019, dismissed his appeal on human rights grounds

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bird  in
    the following terms:

         "...

         2. The appellant seeks permission to appeal against  this  decision
         on the grounds that in failing to adjourn the appeal [sic]  despite
         there being a letter from the appellant's GP  saying  that  he  was
         unfit to attend the hearing, the judge acted unfairly in proceeding
         in the appellant's absence.

         3. The judge refers to this letter indirectly at paragraph  19  and
         paragraph 7. It is also referred to by the  Presenting  Officer  in
         submissions made by her which are set out at  paragraph  9  of  the
         decision.  It is arguable that in failing to note that the  GP  had
         indicated that the appellant was unfit to attend  the  hearing  and
         considering whether it would be appropriate to adjourn  the  matter
         for further  investigation  the  judge  has  failed  to  allow  the
         appellant a fair opportunity to present his appeal.

         4. This amounts  to  procedural  unfairness  and  therefore  is  an
         arguable error of law."

 3. Hence the matter came before me.

 4. Mr Coleman, for the appellant, submitted that it had been  procedurally
    unfair  for  the  FTTJ  to  proceed  with  the  hearing:  the  evidence
    identified a request by the appellant, through his  solicitors,  for  a
    hearing on the papers, on medical grounds, and that did not  occur.   I
    pointed out to Mr Coleman that a notice of hearing had been  issued  on
    18 March to the parties by email to  the  effect  that  the  Tribunal's
    caseworker had decided that, notwithstanding  the  appellant's  request
    for a hearing on the papers, "the Tribunal had  decided  in  accordance
    with Rule 4(3)(g) that the apeeal [sic]  will  be  listed  as  an  oral
    hearing to allow the Respondent to make submissions as appropriate". Mr
    Coleman had not  been  made  aware  of  this  notice  of  hearing.   He
    submitted that, as the decision to hold an oral hearing had  been  made
    by a caseworker, the appellant should have been given  the  opportunity
    for the decision to be considered afresh.  He said that the failure  of
    the tribunal to proceed to hear the appeal on the papers was  an  error
    of law. He noted  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  ("HOPO")  had
    opposed the hearing being on the  papers  but  this  was  a  unilateral
    position and the appellant had not been represented or in attendance to
    deal with the respondent's opposition. He submitted that the  FTTJ  had
    made the decision to proceed with the oral hearing on the basis of  one
    view only and this was procedurally unfair.  Furthermore, the FTTJ  had
    made adverse credibility findings; the hearing had not  been  "a  level
    playing field", the HOPO having attacked the appellant's credibility in
    submissions.

 5. Mr Coleman referred to the guidance in Nwaigwe (adjournment:  fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC), submitting that  reasonableness  was  not  the
    test;  arguably  the  FTTJ  did  not  engage   with   the   appellant's
    application.  He submitted that the FTTJ should have engaged  with  the
    medical evidence and the reason the  appellant  wanted  the  matter  to
    proceed on the papers.

 6. Ms Jones,  for  the  respondent,  submitted  there  was  no  procedural
    unfairness to the appellant.  His solicitors had notified the  tribunal
    by letter on 13 March that he would not be attending  the  hearing;  he
    was in poor health and requested a hearing on the papers. It  had  been
    clear he would not attend.  Insofar as any potential error of  law  was
    concerned,  the  issue  was  whether  the  hearing  should  have   been
    adjourned.  The appellant did not seek an adjournment.  The appellant's
    solicitors had responded to the notice of hearing issued on 18 March by
    letter dated 20 March confirming he would  not  attend  and  seeking  a
    hearing on the papers.  Ms Jones submitted the respondent was  entitled
    to object to that request.  The appellant knew what was in dispute; the
    HOPO had merely adopted the reasons for refusal in her submissions.

 7. Mr Coleman submitted, in reply, that once the FTTJ  had  made  a  final
    decision to hear the oral submissions of the HOPO, he should have given
    the  appellant  the  opportunity  to  be  represented  or   make   oral
    submissions. That was the point, he submitted, where  consideration  of
    an adjournment was required. Having made the decision to hold  an  oral
    hearing, it was incumbent on the FTTJ to adjourn the hearing  to  allow
    the appellant's solicitors to respond.  It was not in  doubt  that  the
    appellant could not attend.  The failure of the  FTTJ  to  adjourn  for
    that purpose was, he submitted a procedural error of law.

Discussion

 8. The primary ground of appeal is the alleged  failure  of  the  FTTJ  to
    adjourn the hearing "in the interests of fairness and justice".  Indeed
    this was the sole issue addressed in Mr Coleman's oral submissions. The
    background to this assertion is relevant.

 9. In his grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  appellant
    requested an oral hearing. However, in his statement prepared  for  the
    hearing, dated 11 March 2019, he said "My physical and mental health is
    at a critically low level there [sic] I am not  in  good  condition  to
    attend court hence I request that the  matter  be  heard  on  paper.  A
    letter for [sic] my GP is attached".

10. The appellant's solicitors sent the First-tier Tribunal, under cover of
    their letter of 13 March 2019, an appeal  bundle  which  the  appellant
    "wishes to rely on".  They  also  stated  "Note  that  our  client  has
    instructed us to request that the matter be listed for a paper  hearing
    instead as he is at present suffering of poor health".   Apparently  in
    response to this letter, which is stamped as having  been  received  by
    the Tribunal on 15 March  2019,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  issued  the
    following notice on 18 March 2019:

         "The appellant has requested the appeal  be  heard  on  the  papers
         only.

         The Tribunal has decided in accordance with Rule 4(3)(g)  that  the
         appeal will be listed as an oral hearing to allow the Respondent to
         make submissions as appropriate.

         This decision is made by a Tribunal Caseworker  in  exercise  of  a
         specified power granted by the Senior President of Tribunals  under
         rules  3(1)  and  (2)  of  the  Tribunals   (First-tier   Tribunal)
         (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) rules 2014.   You  may  within  14
         days of the date of this decision apply in writing to the  Tribunal
         for the decision to be considered afresh  by  a  judge  under  rule
         3(4)."

11. This notice was served on the appellant's solicitors and the respondent
    by email during the morning of 18 March 2019 under the heading  "Notice
    in Response to Request for Hearing on the Papers".  On  20  March  2019
    the appellant's solicitors wrote to the tribunal by fax and post in the
    following terms:

         "... We write further to the Notice of 18/3/2019 and submit  herein
         a further letter, provided by our  client,  from  our  client's  GP
         confirming that he cannot attend court for the upcoming hearing.

         We have advised the client thoroughly of the importance  of  making
         oral submission [sic] and that it  is  in  his  bests  interest  to
         attend court however he has insisted that he is unable  to  attend.
         The matter has been  explained  in  its  entirety  and  the  client
         confirmed that he understood but wishes to  proceed  as  instructed
         regardless.

         Therefore at this juncture  we  again  request  court  to  consider
         listing the matter as an oral [sic] hearing inn [sic] light of  the
         evidence enclosed."

12. The Tribunal's copy of the letter from the  appellant's  solicitors  is
    endorsed with a handwritten note which appears to have been made  by  a
    member of staff at the Tribunal: "Representatives confirm meant "paper"
    above. Also confirm appellant + representative not attending. Therefore
    interpreter cancelled."

13. Enclosed with the solicitors' correspondence  was  a  letter  from  the
    appellant's GP dated 19 March 2019 to the effect that the appellant had
    "documented osteoarthritis. He has been having  severe  back  and  knee
    pain for a few days despite medication.  In  my  clinical  opinion,  he
    will not be medically fit to attend his interview with you on 21  March
    2019."  A further letter was sent  by  the  appellant's  solicitors  by
    special delivery on 20 March 2019 to the First-tier Tribunal  enclosing
    "the original GP's letter for your consideration".

14. It is significant that the appellant made  no  formal  request  for  an
    adjournment of the hearing, merely for the hearing to  proceed  on  the
    papers.  It is not clear to me why  the  appellant,  believing  himself
    unable to attend the hearing on health grounds, wanted the  hearing  to
    proceed on the papers. This is a  process  which  might  be  considered
    disadvantageous to the appellant.

15. The decision to refuse the appellant's application for a paper  hearing
    was made by a Tribunal caseworker pursuant to rule 3 which provides  as
    follows under the heading "delegation to staff":

         "3.-     (1)  Anything of a formal or administrative  nature  which
             is required or permitted to be  done  by  the  Tribunal  under
             these Rules may be done by a member of the Tribunal's staff.

             (2) Staff appointed by  the  Lord  Chancellor  may,  with  the
             approval of the  Senior  President  of  Tribunals,  carry  out
             functions of a judicial nature permitted  or  required  to  be
             done by the Tribunal.

             (3) The approval  referred  to  at  paragraph  (2)  may  apply
             generally to  the  carrying  out  of  specified  functions  by
             members of staff  of  a  specified  description  in  specified
             circumstances.

             (4) Within 14 days after the date on which the Tribunal  sends
             notice of a decision made by a member of staff under paragraph
             (2) to a party,  that  party  may  apply  in  writing  to  the
             Tribunal for that decision to be considered afresh by a judge.



16. There is no suggestion  by  either  party  that  the  decision  of  the
    caseworker was outwith the Rules.

17. While the main ground of appeal before me is that the FTTJ erred in law
    in failing to adjourn the hearing as a result of  the  absence  of  the
    appellant, this is but part of the whole picture.  It would  or  should
    have been clear to the FTTJ that the appellant had  requested  a  paper
    hearing on grounds of ill health and that  a  Tribunal  Caseworker  had
    exercised  case  management  powers  and   decided   to   reject   that
    application.  Rule 3(4) makes it clear that the appellant was  entitled
    to apply in writing to the Tribunal for the decision to  be  considered
    afresh by a judge. While the appellant's solicitors did not, in  terms,
    request that the decision was reviewed by a  judge,  they  did,  having
    been notified of the caseworker's decision,  "again  request  court  to
    consider  listing  the  matter  as  a  [paper]  hearing"  (albeit   the
    solicitors had inadvertently referred to requesting an  oral  hearing).
    This was a request which complied with the spirit of Rule  3(4)  albeit
    that Rule was not cited in the appellant's  solicitors'  letter.   This
    request (as amended by the Tribunal staff to refer to a request  for  a
    paper hearing) was on the Tribunal file at the date  of  hearing.  Thus
    the FTTJ was on notice of that request.

18. I was provided with a copy of the HOPO's minute relating to the hearing
    before  the  FTTJ.  This  refers  to  the  appellant's   absence,   the
    appellant's request that the hearing be on the papers and the lack of a
    request for an adjournment.  It also states: "I opposed it being  heard
    on the papers and made submissions on the case based on the rfrl  ...".
    There is no reference in  this  document  to  the  FTTJ  reviewing  the
    decision of the caseworker although this could perhaps be inferred from
    the HOPO's opposition to the appeal being heard on the papers.

19. The FTTJ's record of proceedings is silent  on  the  issue  of  review.
    Unlike the HOPO's minute, it refers  only  to  the  HOPO's  substantive
    submissions.  In the decision itself the FTTJ states merely that  "Only
    the  Presenting  Officer  attended  the  hearing".  Thus  there  is  no
    information or evidence as to what decision was taken, if any,  by  the
    FTTJ with regard to the appellant's renewed request for a paper hearing
    because of his ill health.  If the FTTJ  did  review  the  caseworker's
    decision (as might be inferred from the  HOPO's  minute)  there  is  no
    indication as to the reasons  for  maintaining  it  and  rejecting  the
    appellant's  renewed  application.  In  the  circumstances,  given  the
    absence of judicial record, it cannot be reasonably inferred  that  the
    FTTJ addressed the appellant's application pursuant to Rule 3(4).   Nor
    can it be inferred that the FTTJ considered afresh whether the  hearing
    should proceed on the papers.

20. While the outcome of such  a  review  might  reasonably  have  been  to
    continue with the oral hearing, the failure of the FTTJ to  review  the
    caseworker's decision is a procedural error amounting to  an  error  of
    law.  It was unfair to have failed to take  into  account  the  renewed
    request for a paper hearing and the appellant's reasons for making  it.
    I accept the submission that, had the  FTTJ  reviewed  and  decided  to
    maintain the decision to hold an oral hearing, he might have decided to
    adjourn the hearing to enable the appellant to attend. Thus  the  error
    is a material one.

21. The representatives agreed that if I found a material error of law, the
    matter should be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing. That is the appropriate course.  It is open to  the  appellant
    to renew his request for a hearing on the papers. In the meantime,  the
    appeal should be listed for an oral hearing, as originally requested by
    the appellant in the notice of appeal.

Decision

22. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  a
    material error on a point of law.  The FTTJ's decision is set aside.

23. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with
    afresh, pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunal  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v),  before  any  judge
    aside from FTTJ Lloyd-Lawrie.

24. Given my references to the appellant's health condition as set  out  in
    the GP evidence, he is entitled to anonymity in these proceedings.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 17 July 2019



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 17 July 2019

                                 DIRECTIONS


 1. Any further documentary and/or witness evidence relied upon  by  either
    party is to be filed with the Tribunal and served upon the other  party
    by no later than 28 days before the date of the hearing  in  the  First
    Tier Tribunal.


 2. If the appellant wishes to apply for a hearing on  the  papers,  he  is
    directed to make such an application to the First-tier Tribunal  within
    14 days of the date of these directions, sending a copy of his  request
    to the respondent.  The appellant is directed to  explain  his  reasons
    for the request.


 3. The appeal is listed at Taylor House with a time estimate of two  hours
    to be heard at 10.00 am on ............................

 4. A Punjabi interpreter is required.






A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 Dated: 17 July 2019

