
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/17093/2018
                                                               HU/17095/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 March 2019                               |On 15 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                        Rookyan [K] (First Appellant)
                       Mohammad [K] (Second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr G Davison, counsel instructed by S G Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants, nationals of Mauritius, dates of birth  respectively  1
    October 1967 and 20 August 1964,  appealed  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision, dated 31 July 2018, to refuse leave  to  remain  upon
    private life grounds.  Their appeals came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge F M Eden (the Judge) who, on 13 November  2018,  dismissed  their
    appeals.  Permissions to appeal was given on 21 January 2019.

2.   At its heart this was undoubtedly a difficult case for the  Appellants,
    given the time that they have been in  the  United  Kingdom  and  their
    identified family circumstances  here.   The  consideration  which  the
    judge gave to this matter, I conclude, helpfully set out with care  the
    evidence which had been advanced and the conclusions  which  the  Judge
    reached on that evidence.  It is right to say I might not have  reached
    the same conclusion, but that is not  the  basis  of  establishing  any
    error of law.

3.   Mr Davison argued, in essence, against the immigration history and  the
    findings that the Judge made as to family life in the  United  Kingdom,
    that  when  weighing  up  either  the  difficulties  in   relation   to
    reintegration or, in effect, the proportionality case, the  Judge,  had
    failed to assimilate those points into a proper  consideration  of  the
    proportionality exercise.  Although it was not in  an appeal under  the
    Immigration Rules, I did not agree with Mr Davison  that  the  factors,
    for example, the eldest daughter of the Appellants having  a  condition
    of leukaemia or their second daughter having a fitting problem, because
    of epilepsy or fainting fits, or the health of  the  First  Appellant's
    mother or the care and assistance they give to the eldest  daughter  of
    the  First  Appellant,  constitute  difficulties  in  terms   of   very
    significant obstacles to reintegration into Mauritius.  Plainly,  those
    matters would be of concern to them knowing of the family  difficulties
    back in the UK, but their background and length of time and development
    in Mauritius did not seem to me to get close to  showing  the  kind  of
    obstacles that would prevent reintegration.

4.   However, the stronger point that Mr Davison really argued, in my view,
    was that the findings that the Judge made, were not assimilated to show
    that the Respondent's decision was disproportionate.  In a subsidiary
    argument, Mr Davison sought to find support for his points by reference
    to Section 117B of the NIAA 2002 as amended. It   did not seem to me
    that the NIAA in really helped.  It is simply a repetition of the same
    points that he wished to make as to the lack of weight the Judge gave
    to a number of factors relied upon and recorded by the Judge. Rather
    the substance of his complaint was that there was a disagreement with
    the weight the Judge gave to the issues and the conclusions that the
    Judge reached.

 5.    It is possible, if one scrutinised most decisions with a very narrow
    view, to find some measure of inconsistencies and differences or shades
    of emphasis which might support a view that there is an error of law.
    However, one needed to read the decision fairly and as a whole, rather
    than descend into taking small details and disaggregating them for the
    purposes of arguing that there has been an error of law

6.   It seemed to me that the Judge properly   considered Article 8 outside
    of the Rules the circumstances as raised, the personal circumstances of
    the Appellants and the difficulties faced by their daughters for
    different reasons.  It was unnecessary for me to descend into the
    question of whether or not the weight the Judge gave to those matters
    was an error of law for there was manifestly no arguable material error
    of law.  For these reasons therefore, although this was not the outcome
    that the Appellants would like, I concluded that the Judge did enough
    to provide adequate and sufficient reasons for the conclusion that the
    appeals failed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

7.   The Original Tribunal's decision stands.  There was no  material  error
    of law. The appeals are dismissed

ANONYMITY

8.   No anonymity direction was made, nor was one pressed for,  nor  is  one
    required.



Signed                                  Date12 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

The appeal has failed and therefore no fee award is appropriate.



Signed                                  Date 12 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


