
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/17736/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House, Edinburgh     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|by Skype for Business                |                                     |
|On 4 November 2020                   |On 10 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 HASNIJA [O]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, instructed by Medlock, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The appellant's representations to the respondent, made on 10  July
         2019.

     ii) The respondent's decision, dated 21 October 2019.

    iii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

     iv) The decision of FtT Judge Landes, promulgated on 1 April 2020.

      v) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  her
         application for permission to appeal (in the form  of  quite  fully
         developed submissions), dated 8 April 2020.

     vi) The grant of permission by FtT Judge E M Simpson, dated 4 May 2020.



 2. I conducted the hearing from George House, Edinburgh.   No  members  of
    the public attended, either in person  or  remotely.    Representatives
    attended remotely.  Mr Ahmed connected by audio only.   The  technology
    enabled an effective hearing.

 3.  The  appellant's  grounds  and  submissions  firstly  emphasise  those
    findings of the FtT which tended in her  favour:  [6],  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with her children; [27], unduly harsh  for  the
    children to live in Bosnia; [39], better for the children to live  with
    the appellant; [42],  emotional  dependence  of  the  children  on  the
    appellant, and her particular importance  in  their  lives.   The  main
    theme of the appellant's case to the UT is that it was evident that the
    appellant's role in the children's lives was more important than  their
    father's; the "unduly harsh" test was satisfied; there was no basis  on
    which to conclude otherwise (grounds at [19] and [36 -  37]);  and  the
    outcome should reversed (oral submissions).

 4. The second main theme for the appellant was that in observing  at  [42]
    an absence of independent evidence on deterioration in  the  children's
    behaviour and school performance while separated from their mother, the
    judge erred by requiring corroboration; erred in finding  the  evidence
    of the appellant and of  the  children's  father  exaggerated  on  this
    aspect; should not have rejected the father's evidence "simply" because
    he wished the  children  to  live  with  their  mother;  there  was  no
    inconsistency between that wish and giving reliable evidence; and  gave
    no adequate evidence for rejecting the father's evidence.

 5. At [32 - 37] the grounds submit that the cases cited by  the  judge  on
    "undue harshness" are to be distinguished because the present appellant
    is no longer in a relationship with the children's father,  an  element
    which leads to the test being satisfied.

 6. Having also considered the submissions for the respondent, I find  that
    the grounds are not established.

 7. Mr Whitwell submitted that the main argument for the appellant at least
    verges on a perversity challenge, being to the effect that no  tribunal
    could do otherwise than to find for the appellant.   Mr  Ahmed  replied
    that he did not go so far  as  to  say  the  outcome  in  the  FtT  was
    irrational, but he did say that once its errors were corrected, it  was
    very clear that the ill effects which deportation  would  have  on  the
    children were such that  the  outcome  should  be  in  the  appellant's
    favour.

 8. I find it within the FtT's rational scope to find at [43] that for  the
    children to live in the UK without the appellant  was  harsh,  but  not
    unduly harsh.  That is precisely the type of fine  judgement  which  is
    the tribunal's task.

 9. It is inherent in many (probably most) cases of  this  nature  that  it
    would be better for children to live also with  the  departing  parent,
    that they depend on her emotionally, and that she is important in their
    lives.  The departing parent may be the more  important  one  (although
    perhaps less often).  There is no legal rule that positive findings  on
    all the foregoing elements axiomatically lead to undue harshness.  That
    remains a judgment of fact and degree in each case.

10. No doubt it will also always be important to note whether an  appellant
    is living with or apart from the  other  parent,  but  that  is  not  a
    legally conclusive distinction.

11.  The  judge  did  not  commit  the  elementary  blunder  of   requiring
    corroboration.  She noted at [42], as  she  was  entitled  to  do,  the
    absence of evidence which might have been provided.  The grounds do not
    fairly reflect that this is only one element in the judge's  meticulous
    explanation, from [31 - 43], of  why  she  does  not  accept  that  the
    welfare of the children either had been in the past, or would be in the
    future, as seriously affected as was claimed.

12. The suggestion that the judge rejected the  father's  evidence  "simply
    because" he wished for the children to  live  with  their  mother  also
    fails fairly to reflect the decision. She found his evidence unreliable
    because it was not  supported  by  a  detailed  examination  of  school
    records, at [35 - 37]; in light of exaggeration by the  appellant;  and
    because she  understood  his  preference  in  view  of  the  children's
    interests and his own for them to stay with their mother - that  is  to
    say, only after a careful and nuanced and examination.

13. The crucial assessment at [43] that it was harsh, but not unduly harsh,
    for the children to be separated from their mother is  firmly  grounded
    in detailed assessment of all the facts  of  the  case,  and  does  not
    involve the making of an error on any point of law.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

15. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      4 November 2020
      UT Judge Macleman




                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.

