
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17797/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At a Remote Hearing via Skype               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Heard on 10 March 2021                      |On 18 March 2021                |
|                                            |                                |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                BAHADUR SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Raza, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The  appellant  has  appealed  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal ('FTT') Judge O'Hagan, sent on 16 January 2020, dismissing
         his appeal on Article 8, ECHR grounds.

Background

      2. The appellant is a citizen of India who claims that he  arrived  in
         the United Kingdom in 1998 and has resided  here  unlawfully  on  a
         continuous basis since that time.  The respondent  did  not  accept
         this contention and refused his human  rights  claim  that  he  was
         entitled to leave to remain in the light  of  his  claimed  lengthy
         residence, in a decision dated 17 October 2019.  The  FTT  did  not
         accept that the appellant discharged  the  burden  of  proving  his
         length of residence and in particular did not accept  his  evidence
         or the evidence of his four witnesses to be reliable.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

      3. The appellant appealed against that decision in written grounds  of
         appeal prepared by Mr Uddin of Counsel.   In  a  decision  dated  8
         April 2020 Judge Bird granted permission to  appeal.   He  observed
         that the FTT arguably made contradictory and inconsistent  findings
         and held the appellant's illegal entry and the  witnesses'  conduct
         against him, rather than focussing upon the evidence in support  of
         the claimed lengthy residence.

      4. At  the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Raza  acknowledged  that  it  was
         regrettable that although the grounds of appeal  were  prepared  by
         Counsel, they were not enumerated.  He  agreed  with  me  that  the
         pleaded grounds of appeal could be summarised as follows:

                   1) The FTT made  contradictory  findings  regarding  the
                      witnesses' credibility and the available paper trail.



                   2) The FTT overly focussed upon the  adverse  inferences
                      to be drawn about the credibility  of  the  witnesses
                      and failed to weigh all the evidence in the round.

                   3)  The  FTT  provided  inadequate   reasons   for   the
                      conclusion that the  appellant's  removal  would  not
                      breach Article 8, ECHR.

      5. Mr Raza's oral submissions focussed entirely  upon  ground  2.   He
         submitted that the single fundamental issue of concern was that the
         FTT was not entitled to dismiss the evidence of  the  witnesses  on
         the basis that it did in the particular  context  of  this  appeal,
         wherein it was entirely accepted that the appellant's residence  in
         the UK had been entirely unlawful.   Mr  Raza  reminded  me  of  ZH
         (Bangladesh) v  SSHD  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  8,  which  considered  the
         previous long residence rule  that  required  14  years  continuous
         residence.  Mr Raza did not take me the  judgment  in  ZH  (or  any
         other authority) but I note that at the time that it  was  decided,
         rule 276B was in two parts: first,  lengthy  residence  had  to  be
         established and second, there had to be no reasons why it would  be
         undesirable for the person to be given indefinite leave  to  remain
         on the ground of long residence.  The  rule  as  currently  drafted
         simply requires 20 years lengthy residence subject to  the  general
         and suitability provisions of the Rules (which do not apply  here).
         In ZH Sedley LJ (with whom Keene and Smith LJJ agreed) observed  at
         [3] that rule 276B was "in effect an amnesty clause".  At  [13]  he
         urged caution against rendering the "amnesty pointless by demanding
         of an illegal immigrant a degree of civic virtue incompatible" with
         the rule itself.   In other words evasion  of  immigration  control
         and other related countervailing factors should not be  used  as  a
         reason to deny leave to a person who had amassed 14 years  unlawful
         residence.  As Sedley LJ said at [20]:

             "In every such case the relevant  nature  of  the  appellant's
             stay is that it was unlawful, and its extent is by  definition
             14 years or more. Since these  are  treated  by  the  rule  as
             neutral gateway factors, they cannot be double-counted by then
             placing them in the public interest debit column.  The  public
             interest in an unlawful stay which has lasted 14 years or more
             is treated by the rule as met by a grant of  indefinite  leave
             to remain provided there are no countervailing  factors  which
             tilt the public interest balance the other way."

      6.  Mr  Bates  relied  upon  written  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent dated 5 August 2020.  He  submitted  that  the  FTT  was
         entitled to regard the witnesses' evidence to be unreliable for the
         reasons  provided.   After  hearing  from  both  representatives  I
         reserved my decision, which I now provide with reasons.

Discussion

      7. I am satisfied that it is clear from  reading  the  decision  as  a
         whole that as stated at [4] and [20],  the  FTT  gave  careful  and
         anxious consideration to all the available evidence.  That evidence
         included the written evidence in the bundles and the oral  evidence
         of four witness, Mr Thani, Mr Balwant Singh, Mr Manjit Singh and Mr
         Harneek Singh.  At [9], [13] and [14] respectively, the  FTT  noted
         that the appellant, Mr Thani and Mr Balwant Singh  confirmed  their
         respective witness statements.   These  statements  each  make  the
         clear and consistent claim that the appellant was living in  Tipton
         with Mr Balwant Singh (his elder brother) and  his  family  members
         (including Mr Thani - Mr Balwant Singh's son  and  the  appellant's
         nephew) since 1998.  The FTT noted at [17]  and  [18]  respectively
         that Mr Manjit Sigh and Mr Harneek Singh  confirmed  the  truth  of
         very short letters and were asked additional questions.

      8. After considering the legal framework the  FTT  accepted  that  the
         appellant was in the UK since at least 2010 because that is when he
         sought to regularise his immigration status  with  the  respondent.
         The FTT then considered each item of significant evidence  relevant
         to the appellant's case that he was continuously resident in the UK
         from 1998 from [31] to [42].  This included: NHS  cards  issued  in
         2002  and  2009;  sparse  documentary  and  photographic  evidence;
         supporting letters and affidavits and; the evidence provided by the
         appellant and the four witnesses who gave oral evidence.

      9.  The  FTT  carefully  considered  the  evidence  individually   and
         holistically and came to findings open to it.   It  is  regrettable
         that the FTT referred to the appellant as "she" at [48] but  it  is
         clear from reading  the  decision  as  a  whole  that  this  was  a
         typographical error.   I prefer  the  careful  written  submissions
         prepared on behalf of the SSHD to the vague submissions made in the
         grounds of appeal.  For completeness I deal  with  each  ground  of
         appeal, albeit Mr Raza only relied upon ground 2.

Ground 1 - The FTT made contradictory findings

     10. Contrary to the appellant's grounds of appeal, the FTT did not make
         contradictory findings regarding the witnesses.  At  [38]  the  FTT
         acknowledged that their evidence was "on the face of it...clear and
         consistent" and specifically, Mr Manjit Singh's admission  that  he
         did not bother that  much  regarding  immigration  rules  "had  the
         virtue of being honest".    The FTT was  nevertheless  entitled  to
         regard their evidence as unreliable for the reasons set out at [38]
         and [39], for the reasons I set out below when addressing ground 2.
          In short, the witnesses showed no concern whatsoever regarding the
         appellant's illegal residence in the UK and were  prepared  to  say
         what was necessary  to  achieve  the  objective  of  the  appellant
         remaining.

     11. I entirely accept that ZH provides a salutary  warning  that  those
         who remain unlawfully for a lengthy period inevitably have inherent
         difficulties  in  seeking  to  establish  that  there  were  indeed
         resident, when they probably spent much of their  time  seeking  to
         avoid any type of formality that might lead to their detection.  As
         Beatson LJ observed at [61] of Khan, R (on the  application  of)  v
         SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 416:

             "... as recognised, for example in ZH (Bangladesh) v Secretary
             of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 8 at [3], the
             14-year rule  set  out  in  Rule  276B(i)(b)  is  specifically
             directed to people who have managed  to  stay  in  the  United
             Kingdom for 14 years or more without lawful authority, and  is
             in effect an amnesty clause. It is likely that  those  in  the
             United Kingdom without leave, and  therefore  without  status,
             will have no official documentation, particularly in the early
             period of their residence."

     12. The FTT was clearly conscious of all of this and  acknowledged  the
         conundrum faced by a  person  seeking  to  establish  his  unlawful
         residence,  before  concluding  that  it  was  not  a  particularly
         material consideration for this appellant.  At [34]  the  FTT  took
         into account the likely limitations  involved  in  having  a  paper
         trail of residence when that residence was  illegal  but  explained
         why in this particular case that was not a significant hurdle - the
         appellant seemed willing and  able  to  obtain  NHS  and  electoral
         papers.  However, as the  FTT  observed  at  [31]  the  papers  the
         appellant relied upon were limited in placing the appellant in  the
         UK at the highest from the end of 2002.  Furthermore, the  FTT  was
         entitled to correctly observe at [41] that the appellant registered
         for an NHS card and to vote when he was  not  entitled  to  do  so.
         This does not contradict an expectation that there  might  be  some
         form of  a  paper  trail  in  relation  to  matters  that  did  not
         necessarily require lawful  residence  to  obtain  such  as  mobile
         phones, invitations, letters, emails, bills etc.

     13. The FTT was entitled to attach limited weight to  the  letters  and
         affidavit that supported the appellant's case  on  the  basis  that
         their authors did not attend the hearing.  In any  event,  the  FTT
         expressly considered this evidence in the round - see [37].

Ground 2 - approach to the evidence of the witnesses

     14. The submission at [6]  of  the  grounds  is  difficult  to  follow.
         Contrary to the  assertion  therein,  the  FTT  did  not  find  the
         witnesses to be honest.  The grounds  suggest  that  the  appellant
         should have been given credit for  honestly  admitting  to  working
         without paying taxes.  This is difficult to follow - it is  unclear
         how the appellant could plausibly maintain that he was not  working
         since 1998, when he accepted that he entered the UK as an  economic
         migrant without any financial support from others, apart  from  his
         brother who worked as a market trader.

     15. I now turn to the issue relied upon by Mr Raza, which he  submitted
         was encapsulated in the observations of Judge  Bird  when  granting
         permission to appeal  -  the  FTT  ignored  the  substance  of  the
         witnesses'  evidence,  in  particular   the   evidence   from   the
         appellant's brother and nephew that he resided with them from 1998,
         for reasons that were not open to it.   I  have  already  indicated
         that the FTT paid careful regard to all the evidence relied upon by
         the  appellant.   That  included  a  paucity  of   photographs   to
         demonstrate the claims of the family.  The  FTT  acknowledged  that
         the evidence of the witnesses was clear and consistent.   In  other
         words, the FTT fully understood and took account of the  clear  and
         consistent evidence that the appellant had been residing  with  his
         brother's family in Tipton from 1998 - that evidence was  contained
         in the three witness statements the FTT expressly took account  of.



     16. The real issue is whether the  FTT  was  entitled  to  reject  that
         evidence for the reasons it provided.  As Mr  Bates  observed,  the
         FTT was prepared to accept  the  documentary  evidence  placed  the
         appellant in the UK from the end of 2002.   The  only  evidence  of
         note that placed the appellant in the UK between 1998 and 2002 came
         from the appellant and the four witnesses, and the sparse (not date-
         stamped) photographs they sought to date.   The  FTT  regarded  the
         witnesses' evidence as unreliable because on their own account they
         were aware  of  the  appellant's  illegal  entry  and  longstanding
         unlawful residence but they were all unconcerned about  this.   The
         FTT assessed the position adopted  by  the  witnesses  at  [39]  as
         "based on the belief that the appellant's decision  to  ignore  the
         law was a legitimate choice that should be respected" and then said
         this:

             "In those circumstances, I was not satisfied that  these  were
             men on whose word  I  could  place  any  particular  reliance.
             Rather, I was left with the view that they would  readily  say
             whatever  they  considered  was  necessary  to  achieve  their
             desired objective of enabling the appellant to remain  without
             concern as to whether it was true  or  not,  I  have  attached
             little weight to their evidence."

     17. This demonstrates that  the  FTT  attached  little  weight  to  the
         witnesses' clear and consistent evidence that the  appellant  lived
         in the UK from 1998, not because of the appellant's own actions  in
         remaining in  breach  of  the  immigration  laws  but  because  the
         witnesses  demonstrated  a  sustained  and   worrying   nonchalance
         regarding the importance of complying with the law.   The  FTT  was
         entitled to be concerned by  these  attitudes  and  to  regard  the
         witnesses as unreliable.  In so doing the FTT was clearly aware  of
         the relevant context i.e. the appellant was relying  upon  unlawful
         long residence.  Mr Raza submitted that the FTT completely  ignored
         the crux of the witnesses' evidence.  I do not agree.  The FTT  was
         well aware  of  the  core  aspects  of  the  witnesses'  clear  and
         consistent evidence but was entitled  to  regard  the  evidence  as
         unreliable for the reasons provided.  This must  be  considered  in
         context.  The crux of the witnesses' evidence was  predicated  upon
         the bald assertion that the appellant lived in the UK  continuously
         since 1998.  There was no meaningful attempt by Mr Manjit Singh and
         Mr Harneek Singh to go beyond this in  their  short  letters.   The
         short one-page witness statements from the appellant's brother  and
         nephew made some attempt to provide further particulars  but  these
         were brief and vague.

     18. The weight to be attached to the witnesses' evidence was  a  matter
         for the FTT.  The FTT's approach might be described as harsh but it
         cannot be described as perverse, in the particular circumstances of
         this case.  The FTT was clearly entitled to be concerned that every
         single witness showed a prolonged and unexplained disregard for the
         known fact that the appellant was said to have remained in  the  UK
         in blatant disregard of immigration law.  That does not necessarily
         mean  that  the  witnesses  were  obliged  to  address   this   for
         themselves.  Rather, the FTT  was  particularly  concerned  at  the
         absence of any recognition whatsoever that what the  appellant  did
         was wrong as well as the witnesses' views that  he  made  a  choice
         worthy of respect.

Ground 3 - Article 8

     19. The FTT's findings of fact are such that the appellant demonstrated
         a flagrant disregard for immigration law.  In  those  circumstances
         there is a patently strong public interest in his removal.  The FTT
         properly addressed all relevant factors from [44]  to  [54]  before
         concluding  at  [55]  that  the  public  interest  outweighed   the
         appellant's private life.

     20. The appellant's grounds of appeal are not made out.  I am satisfied
         that the decision does not contain a material error of law.

Notice of decision

21. The FTT decision does not contain an error of law and I do not  set  it
    aside.


Signed: Melanie Plimmer                          Dated:
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                          11 March 2021


