
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17280/2019
                                                               HU/17042/2019
                                                               HU/17043/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC via Skype    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 October 2020                   |On 03 December 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               LEJLA TABAKOVIC
                               DINO TABAKOVIC
                               OMER TABAKOVIC
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Komusanac of Igor & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                       ERROR OF LAW FINDNG AND REASONS

    1. The appellants' a family unit composed of a mother and her two  adult
       sons, all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, appeal with  permission
       the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Richardson  ('the  Judge')
       promulgated on 10 February 2020 in  which  the  Judge  dismissed  the
       appeals on human rights grounds.
    2. Permission to appeal was refused by another judge of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal but granted on a renewed application by the Upper  Tribunal.
       The operative part of the grant being in the following terms:

           "3.    The grounds of appeal contend, in  summary,  as  follows.
                Firstly, that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  decide
                whether  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to
                integration on return to Bosnia and Herzegovina by  applying
                the correct test set out in SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 81
                and the facts of this  case  which  include  significant  on
                going  threats  of  domestic  violence  and  mental   health
                problems; secondly  it  is  argued  that  little  weight  is
                wrongly given to the private lives of the appellants because
                of their precarious residence but given  that  this  private
                life is found to be "substantial" by the First-tier Tribunal
                this is not correct in light of the decision of the  Supreme
                Court in Rhuppiah [2018] UKSC 58.


           4.     The grounds are arguable. It is arguable that there was a
                failure to address the test in Kamara with a  fact  specific
                analysis looking at all the evidence in the round."


Background

    3. At [13] the Judge writes: "I  found  all  the  witnesses  gave  their
       evidence sincerely and in a straightforward manner and I accept their
       written and oral evidence. Mrs Tabakovic clearly found  the  evidence
       about the abuse she had suffered a testing experience."
    4. The Judge refers to an earlier decision by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       Hawden-Beale promulgated on 13 February 2014 in which it was found at
       [25]:

           "25.   Although I have every sympathy with  the  appellants  and
                their wish to stay here in the UK, which  would  undoubtedly
                give them a happier and probably much better life, there  is
                protection available to her and her sons in Bosnia in  spite
                of the first appellant's claims and  they  can  take  action
                against  their  husband/father.  The  first  appellant   has
                reported her husband before not only for the assault in 2002
                but also for the threats in 2010  and  the  authorities  did
                take action, albeit that  the  action  they  took  2010  was
                constrained by the first appellant herself. Given that I  am
                satisfied that protection, albeit limited, is  available  to
                the appellant and her sons in Bosnia  and  that  they  still
                have family there who have assisted them in the past, I find
                that there are no compelling  circumstances  which  merit  a
                grant of leave to remain outside the rules under Article  8,
                nor do I consider that it would be  unjustifiably  harsh  to
                expect them to return to family with  whom  they  live  from
                2010 - 2012."

    5.  The  appellant  asserts  the  Judge  failed  to   consider   country
       information or  the  question  of  integration,  focusing  solely  on
       sufficiency protection and failing to undertake  the  required  broad
       holistic assessment.   It  is  also  asserted  the  Judge  failed  to
       consider the issue of the  appellant's  private  life  on  return  or
       relationships and applied the wrong test between [9] and [12]. It  is
       asserted the appellant has PTSD but there is  no  evidence  regarding
       availability of treatment in Bosnia.  The case was not about  article
       3 ECHR on  medical  grounds  and  the  lack  of  treatment,  but  the
       appellant argues the Judge was  required  to  factor  this  into  the
       assessment.
    6. The Judge is criticised in the article 8  assessment.  The  appellant
       asserts the Judge has some flexibility in determining the  weight  to
       be given to a person's private life even if their immigration  status
       is precarious and that the Judge was required to consider this on the
       basis of his or her own discretion and not limit matters.
    7. It is also asserted the Judge erred  as  the  issue  in  relation  to
       article 8 was the proportionality  of  the  decision.  The  appellant
       argues there are barriers to the appellants reintegration; being lack
       of police protection, being the  victim  of  domestic  violence,  the
       medical condition of the first appellant and how it will  deteriorate
       on removal, length of residence in the United Kingdom of eight years,
       stability in the United  Kingdom  with  another  family  member  (her
       uncle) in the UK, and lack of support on return.

Error of law

    1. Full consideration has been given  to  the  submissions  and  written
       pleadings forming the grounds of appeal.

  The Judge sets out the correct self-direction at [7]  that  in  a  human-
       rights appeal the relevant point at  which  the  issues  have  to  be
       considered is at the date of hearing.

    2. Even if the Judge did not mention Kamara the grounds do not establish
       a material misdirection in the approach taken by  the  Judge  or  the
       manner in which the evidence was assessed.
    3. The Judge clearly considered  the  issue  of  domestic  violence  and
       whether the same  would  amount  to  very  significant  obstacles  to
       integration into Bosnia.
    4. The  Judge  clearly  considered  country  material  and  the  medical
       evidence that had been provided.
    5. The appellants had not established they are 'outsiders' and there was
       no evidence before the Judge that either the first appellant  or  her
       children had lost their language skills, knowledge of life in Bosnia,
       or would not be accepted on return or be able to integrate.
    6. As noted, there was no contact with the appellant husband and the two
       sons are now adults. The findings at [24] relating  to  the  lack  of
       very significant obstacles to integration has not been shown to be  a
       finding outside the range of those available  to  the  Judge  on  the
       evidence. In that paragraph the Judge writes:

           "24.   Therefore  on  the  evidence  before  me  and  given  the
                previous judge's finding on the sufficiency of protection  I
                find that the first appellant could seek assistance from the
                Bosnian authorities if she considered that she was  at  risk
                from her husband.  Since  the  appellants  left  Bosnia  the
                evidence provided in the  appellant's  bundle  which  I  was
                taken to by Mr  Komunsanac  shows,  in  my  view,  that  the
                treatment and protection of victims of domestic violence has
                improved from around 2012 due to  the  introduction  of  new
                legislation, the training of police  and  the  provision  of
                services  for  victims  of  domestic  abuse  by   both   the
                authorities and NGOs. I accept that may  require  the  first
                appellant to make a positive report against her husband  and
                pursue any action against him but from the  evidence  before
                me I find that there is sufficiency of protection  from  the
                Bosnian authorities so that the threat of domestic  violence
                from her husband and her sons  does  not  create  the  "very
                significant obstacles" that are  required.  Furthermore  for
                the reasons given above there are no other grounds  that  on
                the evidence before me allow me to find that there are  very
                significant obstacles to them living in Bosnia."

    7. Having found the appellant unable to succeed  under  the  Immigration
       Rule the Judge went to consider article 8 ECHR.  There  is  merit  in
       the submission of Mr Kotas that the Judge was not required to set out
       the matters which had previously been considered or the findings made
       again.
    8. The Judge  undertakes  a  properly  structured  assessment  in  which
       competing interests are weighed against each other.
    9. It has not been made out that  the  weight  the  Judge  gave  to  the
       evidence, due to immigration status or otherwise, was irrational.
   10. In relation to health matters the Judge writes at [20]:

           "20.   Mr Komunsanac also highlighted medical condition of first
                appellant. I was taken to two letters from  the  appellant's
                GP [AB2 27-29]. They explain that her GP records  show  that
                she has a history of anxiety and depression as well as post-
                traumatic stress disorder.  Her GP believes her condition is
                one of severe anxiety and feels that  if  the  appellant  is
                returned to Bosnia mental health would deteriorate  further.
                The appellant has been referred to  the  wellbeing  services
                for help with her PTSD however  she  is  still  awaiting  an
                appointment. I accept the appellants evidence on this  point
                but I have no evidence that the  appellant  could  not  seek
                assistance or treatment in Bosnia. In light of this I am not
                satisfied that her  medical  conditions  provide  sufficient
                reasons that would prevent or  seriously  inhibit  her  from
                being able to integrate into the county of return."

   11. The Judge's conclusion is set out at [30] in the following terms:

           "30.   Therefore, in totality, and  having  considered  all  the
                evidence presented me in the round, and after  referring  to
                my findings given in paragraphs 17 to 24 above, I find  that
                any interference would be in accordance with  the  law,  and
                for the legitimate public  and  necessary  in  a  democratic
                society of the interests of the economic well-being  of  the
                country referred to  in  Article  8(2)  which  includes  the
                maintenance of proper immigration control. There is  nothing
                before me which is capable of showing that the  decision  to
                refuse the appellant's permission to remain in the UK  would
                constitute  a  disproportionate   interference   under   any
                freestanding Article 8 claim in  considering  their  matters
                outside the Immigration Rules."

   12. Whilst it is understandable that the appellants may wish to remain in
       the UK article 8 does not give a person the  right  to  choose  where
       they wish to live.
   13. Whilst the appellants disagree with the manner  in  which  the  Judge
       assessed the evidence, the findings made,  and  suggests  alternative
       more favourable findings,  it  has  not  been  made  out  that  those
       findings actually made are outside the range of those reasonably open
       to the Judge on the evidence. The finding in relation to  the  medial
       evidence does not undermine the decision on proportionality,  and  in
       fact supports it.
   14. The Court of Appeal have reminded appellate courts that  they  should
       not interfere with a decision of a judge below unless there  is  good
       reason to do so based upon established legal error  material  to  the
       decision. In this  appeal  the  appellant  has  failed  to  establish
       sufficient legal error material to the decision to warrant the  Upper
       Tribunal interfering any further in relation to this matter.

Decision

   15. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   16. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 26 November 2020

