
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17022/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House via Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On Thursday 25 March 2021                   |On 27 April 2021               |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

                                 DOUGLAS [K]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Grutters, Counsel instructed  by  Turpin  Miller
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

1. The Secretary of State is the appellant in this appeal.  For ease of
   reference, however, I refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier
   Tribunal.  The Respondent appeals against the decision of First-tier
   Tribunal Judge S Y Loke promulgated on 17 September 2020 ("the
   Decision"). By the Decision, the Judge allowed the Appellant's appeal
   against the Respondent's decision dated 8 October 2019, refusing his
   human rights claim based on his private and family life in the UK.  The
   claim was made in the context of a decision to deport the Appellant to
   Uganda.
2. The Appellant is a national of Uganda.  He entered the UK in 1996 in a
   false identity, then aged seventeen years.  His mother and siblings were
   granted indefinite leave to remain ("ILR") and later were naturalised as
   British citizens.  After DNA evidence was provided to show that the
   Appellant was related to his mother as claimed, he too was granted ILR on
   10 May 2005.


3. The Appellant has received a number of criminal convictions in the UK.
   Between 2001 and 2009, he amassed a number of convictions for driving
   related offences.  He was warned that if he continued to offend he would
   be considered for deportation action but no action was taken at that
   time.  In spite of the warning, the Appellant went on to commit an
   offence involving fraud for which he was convicted in 2014.  On 22 August
   2018, the Appellant was convicted of theft by an employee and was
   sentenced to 26 weeks in prison. Again, he was warned that his continued
   offending might lead to deportation action if he did not desist.  On 22
   January 2019, the Appellant was convicted of a further offence of fraud
   by abuse of position and false accounting.  He was sentenced to twenty
   months in prison. On this occasion, deportation action was taken leading
   to the decision under appeal.

4. The Judge recorded at [7] of the Decision that it was accepted that the
   Appellant does not fall within either of the exceptions in the
   Immigration Rules or, therefore, Section 117C Nationality, Immigration
   and Asylum Act 2002 ("Section 117C").  Nonetheless it was submitted on
   the Appellant's behalf that there are factors in his case which amount to
   very compelling circumstances going beyond the exceptions and which
   enable him to succeed.

5. Those factors are summarised at [7] of the Decision as being the
   Appellant's long residence and integration in the UK since arriving here
   as a child, family life with parents and siblings going beyond normal
   emotional ties, the Appellant's rehabilitation from his gambling habit
   which was the cause of his offending and the high risk of homelessness
   and destitution on return to Uganda.

6. The Judge gave weight to the Appellant's offending.  She recognised at
   [18] of the Decision that the claim would have to be "a very strong" one
   to outweigh the high public interest.

7. In relation to the Appellant's private life, the Judge gave some weight
   to the lawfulness of the Appellant's residence prior to the index
   offence.  She observed at [24] of the Decision that, had he been granted
   ILR at the same time as his parents and siblings, he would have been here
   lawfully for just short of half his life ([24]).  The Appellant was
   accepted to be socially and culturally integrated in the UK ([25]). In
   relation to the position on return to Uganda, the Judge found that there
   would be very significant obstacles to integration in Uganda ([29]).

8. In relation to the Appellant's family life, the Judge accepted that the
   Appellant's brother, [A] who is HIV positive and has Aspergers syndrome
   has a "very close relationship" with the Appellant and "depends on him
   emotionally and practically" ([26] of the Decision).  Although the Judge
   accepted that the Appellant assists his sister with his nephews who are
   non-verbal and suffer from autism, she gave that factor less weight as
   the Appellant sees his nephews only weekly.


9. The Judge reached the conclusion, balancing the factors for and against
   the Appellant, that deportation would be a disproportionate interference
   with the Appellant's family and private life.  She therefore allowed the
   appeal on Article 8 grounds.


10. The Respondent's grounds can be summed up in the following way:


   1) In relation to the Judge's findings on the Appellant's family life,
      "these circumstances do not amount to a situation whereby very
      compelling circumstances prevent the appellant's deportation" ([7] of
      the grounds).
   2) In relation to the findings about his private life, "[t]he starting
      point is to assume that the Appellant has a cultural nexus to Uganda
      and therefore reintegration would not cause such severe hardship such
      as to amount to very compelling circumstances" ([8] of the grounds)
   3) Overall, "[i]t is submitted that the circumstances described in the
      appellant's case do not meet the very high threshold required to
      establish that the public interest requires the appellant's
      deportation, nor that it is prevented by very compelling
      circumstances."


   As Mr Melvin put it in his submissions, the Respondent's case is that the
   Decision is irrational or inadequate in its reasoning.  I will come on to
   the detail of the submissions below.


11. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Nightingale on 25 September 2020 in the following terms so far as
   relevant:


         "..3.    Contrary to the pleaded grounds, the Judge's finding
         regarding the appellant's likely destitution was based upon both an
         expert's report relating to the circumstances in Uganda and the
         bank statements of the appellant's family showing their financial
         difficulties.  The Judge gave sustainable reasons for the finding
         made.
         4.   The Judge gave detailed consideration of all the appellant's
         circumstances including his close relationship with his disabled
         brother and the assistance provided to his family.  Whilst the
         appellant might be considered fortunate to have been found to
         establish very compelling circumstances over and above the
         exceptions found at Section 117C, the Judge gave sustainable
         reasons for all findings made and the conclusion was not one which
         is arguably perverse or arguably outside a range of reasonable
         conclusions.  The grounds pleaded amount to a disagreement with the
         Judge's conclusion and disclose no arguable error of law."


12. Following renewal of the application to this Tribunal, permission to
   appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic in the following terms:


         "Although this application for permission to appeal is brought by
         the Secretary of State, I continue to refer to the parties as they
         were before the First-tier Tribunal.
         The respondent challenges the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
         Loke to allow this appeal against deportation following a criminal
         conviction in 2018 for which he received a 26 month prison
         sentence.  He had previously twice been warned of the risk of
         deportation after a number of convictions between 2001 and 2009 and
         a further conviction in 2014.
         Arguably, the circumstances pertaining to the appellant's family
         life with a brother and nephews did not amount to very compelling
         circumstances.  It is also arguable that the Judge erred in her
         conclusion that the appellant would be unable to support himself in
         Uganda and would become destitute when he had spent his formative
         years there, retained cultural ties with his country of origin and
         would be able to use his education and work experience to find
         employment."


13. Judge Kekic was provisionally of the view that the error of law issue
   could be determined without a hearing.  However, the Appellant requested
   a hearing.  It was therefore determined that the error of law issue
   should be considered at an oral hearing.


14. So it is that the matter comes before me to determine whether the
   Decision contains an error of law and, if I so conclude, to either re-
   make the decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do
   so.  The hearing was attended by representatives for both parties.
   Although Mr Grutters lost his video connection in the course of the
   hearing, that did not impact on his ability to make submissions without
   visual contact.  The hearing proceeded with no other technical
   difficulties.


15. The documents before me are limited to those in the Respondent's bundle
   before the First-tier Tribunal to which I refer as necessary below as
   [RB/xx] and the Appellant's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal which
   consists of the Appellant's witness statement and a few supporting
   documents.  I do not need to refer to that bundle in what follows.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

16. Mr Melvin confirmed that the Respondent's case is that the Decision is
   irrational and/or that the Judge has failed to provide sufficient reasons
   to justify her conclusions.  He drew my attention to the Supreme Court's
   decision in Hesham Ali v Secretary of State for the Home Department
   [2016] UKSC 60 ("Hesham Ali") in support of a submission that commonplace
   incidents of family life are generally insufficient to justify the
   allowing of an appeal.  Whilst that case might not be the best
   illustration of the point, I accept that this is a broad summary of the
   case-law, at least insofar as concerns family life between adult
   relatives.


17. In this case, however, the Judge was faced with a situation where the
   Appellant has a particularly strong bond with [A] who suffers from
   Aspergers syndrome.  The evidence given by the Appellant's mother as
   regards [A] and his relationship with the Appellant appears at [14] of
   the Decision as follows:


         "[RN] gave evidence and adopted her witness statement.  In response
         to questions put to her by the representatives she gave the
         following answers:
         a) Her son [A] had Aspergers and it was difficult to deal with him.
             He only bonded rarely and had problems relating to people and
            making friends.  He talked freely to the Appellant, and they had
            a close bond.  [A] saw the Appellant as a role model and she did
            know how he could cope if the Appellant was not there.
         b) ..
         c) Ms [N] had not received assistance from social services to help
            with [A] as he would refuse the help.  The social services
            indicated that as he was an adult it was his choice..."


   I do not find surprising that latter comment concerning external
   assistance in light of [A]'s condition.

18. Mr Melvin's submission however is that the Judge has failed to take
   into account the Appellant's absence during his terms of imprisonment.
   He said that the Appellant would have been in prison and away from his
   family for eighteen months.  In total that may well be right.  However,
   the longest period of custody was that following the 2019 conviction.
   That was a sentence of twenty months of which the Appellant would have
   served ten months in custody.  Whilst that is a lengthy period, it was
   one with a finite end date.  The Appellant's mother has support from
   other family members, namely her daughters but, as the Judge also
   recorded at [14] of the Decision, those daughters have their own
   families.  One daughter has children who suffer from serious autism.  As
   Mr Grutters also pointed out, the tenor of the Appellant's mother's
   evidence is that she struggled to cope during the Appellant's absence.


19. The Judge made the following findings about the Appellant's family
   life:


         "26. Secondly, with respect to the Appellant's family life, it was
         accepted that the Appellant lives with his mother and brother.  I
         accept the family's evidence that the Appellant has a close
         relationship with [A] and is one of the few people [A] trusts.  I
         accept that the Appellant assists in looking after [A].  While the
         Appellant's mother could access support from public services, I
         accept that [A] has a very close relationship with his brother and
         depends on his [sic] emotionally and practically.
         27.  It was not disputed that the Appellant assists his sister with
         his nephews, however I give this aspect of the Appellant's family
         life less weight given he only sees his nephews weekly.  I do find
         that the Appellant and his family are a close family, and since the
         disclosure of his gambling addiction they have clustered around him
         to support him."


20. As those findings show, it was the Appellant's relationship with [A]
   which particularly impressed the Judge and fed into her conclusions as I
   come to below.


21. The other element which the Judge had to consider was the extent of the
   Appellant's private life. The important aspect of this part of the case
   was the situation which the Appellant would face on return to Uganda.  As
   Mr Melvin pointed out, the Appellant is a healthy male, aged forty-one
   years who is well educated.  He has worked in the UK albeit the nature of
   his criminal convictions will doubtless not assist him in finding
   employment either in the UK or in Uganda.  The Appellant speaks a
   language generally spoken in Uganda.  He has cultural association to that
   country via his mother.  He also lived there during his formative years.
   In summary, Mr Melvin submitted that the Judge had merely "doffed her
   cap" to those factors without giving them proper consideration.


22. The Judge referred to the Appellant's expert evidence regarding the
   situation in Uganda at [29] of the Decision as follows:
         "I also take into account the expert report of Karen O'Reilly dated
         5 May 2020, which was not disputed by the Respondent.  She states
         that job opportunities in Uganda are limited, and are mainly in the
         agricultural sector.  Finding work depends on professional and
         community contacts.  The majority of the population in Uganda is
         unemployed.  Her view is that it is unlikely he would be able to
         find work.  Homelessness is also a serious problem in Uganda, and
         given the lack of family support it is likely he will face
         destitution."


23. As the Judge there points out, the Respondent did not dispute that
   evidence.  She did not counter it with general background evidence or
   seek to cross-examine the expert or even cast doubt on the expert's
   expertise and/or the weight which should be placed on the report.  It was
   open to the Judge to rely on that report about the general situation.


24. Ultimately, however, it was not the general situation in Uganda which
   impressed the Judge.  Her findings in relation to the situation which the
   Appellant would face on return are at [30] of the Decision as follows:


         "The general situation in Uganda, in my assessment holds limited
         weight in itself, however the particular circumstances of this
         case; where the Appellant has no family or friends in Uganda, has
         never visited Uganda since he was a child and will be unable to
         access any financial support, amounts to a very significant
         obstacle to his integration and this is a feature to be taken into
         account in the balancing exercise."


25. Those findings have to be read in the context of the evidence which the
   Judge received.  At [24] of the Decision, she records that the Appellant
   has been in the UK since the age of seventeen and has never returned to
   Uganda.  She points out that, had the Appellant's relationship with his
   mother been accepted from the outset, he would have lived lawfully in the
   UK for nearly half his life.  As it was, he had lived here lawfully for
   fifteen years.  She accepted at [25] of the Decision that "the Appellant
   is culturally and socially integrated into the United Kingdom".  She went
   on to record that "[i]t was not disputed that he no longer has family in
   Uganda, and that he has no contact with anyone in Uganda."


26. Following the findings made about the Appellant's relationships with
   his family in the UK to which I have already referred, the Judge went on
   to make the following findings about the Appellant's ability to integrate
   in Uganda:


         "28. Thirdly I turn to the ability of the Appellant to integrate
         back into Uganda.  I make the following findings and observations:
         a) The Appellant left Uganda as a child.  He had been in a boarding
            school in Uganda from the age of six until his departure.  He
            will have some familiarity with the culture in Uganda, however
            it will be historic.
         b) The Appellant has no friends or family in Uganda to provide
            support.  He has not visited Uganda since his departure.
         c) The Appellant's family in the United Kingdom have financial
            issues and will be unable to provide him with meaningful
            financial assistance.  I am satisfied this is the case, not only
            due to the oral evidence but also the bank statements provided
            in the bundle.
         d) The Appellant has achieved A-levels in the United Kingdom and
            completed some courses which may assist him in Uganda."


27. It cannot sensibly be suggested that any of those factors are
   irrelevant to the question the Judge had to answer concerning the
   Appellant's ability to integrate on return to Uganda.  She accepted that
   the Appellant had "some familiarity" with the culture of Uganda but, as
   she noted, that was from many years ago.  As she also observed, the
   Appellant had lived, from the age of six until he left Uganda in a
   boarding school.  That is a very different prospect from having to fend
   for himself on return.  The Judge accepted that the Appellant's education
   might assist him in Uganda but, having taken note of the expert evidence
   about the importance of connections to finding employment (at [29] of the
   Decision), the Judge was entitled to reach the conclusion she did at [30]
   of the Decision.  The Judge was entitled to find that there would be
   "very significant obstacles to his integration" in Uganda on all the
   evidence and for the reasons she gave.


28. Ultimately, the only factor to which Mr Melvin could point as being
   absent from the Judge's consideration is the availability of funding from
   the UK Government as part of the facilitated returns system.  I have been
   unable to find any reference to the availability of such support in the
   Respondent's decision ([RB/T2-12]).  It is far from apparent to me that
   such support would be available in a deportation case (as opposed to a
   removals case).  If it is, however, then it was for the Respondent to
   make that point.  There is no evidence that she did so.


29. Finally, Mr Melvin criticised the Judge's conclusions regarding the
   nature and importance of the Appellant's offending and previous failures
   to rehabilitate.


30. The starting point in this regard is the Judge's record of the extent
   of the offending at [9] and [10] of the Decision.  That record includes
   reference to the sentencing Judge's remarks when the Appellant was
   sentenced for the latest offence (in early 2019). The Judge's record of
   the evidence about the offending (at [13] to [15] of the Decision) was
   that the Appellant had committed the offences in order to fund a gambling
   addiction and had been attending gamblers anonymous meetings since 2018.
   It is worthy of note that the index offence which led to the 2019
   conviction was committed over a period in 2016 and therefore prior to the
   Appellant's attendance at those meetings (see sentencing remarks at
   [RB/P1-5] and reference at [13(d)] of the Decision).  The Judge also
   recorded at [15] of the Decision the evidence of the Appellant's sister
   that she and the family "knew nothing about the Appellant's gambling and
   much was unveiled as he went through the court process".  The Appellant's
   sister went on to say that "[n]ow they knew about the situation things
   had changed tremendously".


31. I do not accept Mr Melvin's submission that the Judge has sought to
   downplay the Appellant's offending history.  At [23] of the Decision, the
   Judge makes the following findings:


         "I note that the Appellant is a repeat offender. He has two
         convictions of a similar character, both of which involved theft in
         breach of trust.  The index conviction involved 19 transactions
         amounting to a significant amount over some months to the
         Appellant's account.  While I do not find this would have involved
         particular sophistication, the offending was clearly sustained over
         a relatively long period of time and only ceased upon the agency
         discovering the fraud."


32. Mr Melvin focussed on [31] of the Decision setting out the remainder of
   the Judge's findings about the offending and rehabilitation as follows:


         "Finally with respect to the Appellant's offending, I have already
         noted the aggravating and worrying feature when considering the
         public interest from the outset, namely that the index offence was
         a repeat offence.  Furthermore I note the Appellant had received
         two warning letters prior to the commission of the index offence. I
         also make the following findings in the Appellant's favour:
         a) The Appellant pleaded guilty at the earliest opportunity and the
            OASYS report indicates he expressed remorse.
         b) The letter from the Appellant's Probation officer dated 10
            August 2020 indicates that the Appellant has complied well with
            the terms of his licence and has been assessed as a low risk of
            serious harm in the community and custody.
         c) The sentencing judge accepted, as I do, that the Appellant's
            offending was motivated by a gambling addition, which he had
            taken steps to remedy.  The support of his family and his wish
            to rehabilitate should be taken into account in his favour.  I
            note that evidence of rehabilitation carries some weight, but
            not great weight bearing in mind the wider policy considerations
            of deterrence and public concern; Danso v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ
            596.
         d) The Appellant's offending, while serious, does not involve
            violent or sexual offences.  The sentence received was 26
            months, rendering him a medium offender.  This is relevant in
            that the proportionality exercise to be conducted with respect
            of 'very compelling circumstances' does not involve the same
            threshold than if the Appellant was a serious, rather than a
            medium offender."


33. Those findings have to be read with what is said at [23] as set out
   above.  Although Mr Melvin is right to say that the offence for which the
   Appellant was convicted is one which has an impact on the exchequer and
   is for that reason serious, the Judge has taken into account the nature
   of the offence.  She has also had regard at [22] of the Decision to the
   "high level of importance attached by Parliament to the deportation of
   foreign criminals".  As she there says, where, as here, the exceptions do
   not apply "the public interest can only be outweighed by very compelling
   circumstances".  That is an accurate self-direction.  The Judge was
   entitled to have regard also to the fact that the Appellant's offending
   did not involve violence or sexual attack.  The Judge took into account
   that the Appellant is a repeat offender.


34. As Mr Grutters pointed out, the Judge has emphasised the great weight
   in deportation.  It was for the Judge to carry out the balancing exercise
   taking into account all the factors whilst giving due weight to the
   public interest.  The Judge has reached findings which were open to her
   in relation to the factors relevant to the Appellant's family and private
   life.  The Judge has undertaken the final balancing exercise, in
   accordance with the balance sheet approach advocated in Hesham Ali at
   [32] of the Decision as follows:


         "I take into account the significant public interest in deporting
         the Appellant, particularly taking into account his criminal
         history.  Against this I also balance against this [sic] all the
         factors in the Appellant's favour, which include his strong family
         life particularly with [A], the significant obstacles to his
         integration into Uganda, and the mitigating features which can be
         identified with respect of his offending.  I bear in mind that I
         must look at all the factors relied upon collectively in order to
         determine whether taken together they are sufficiently compelling
         to outweigh the high public interest in deportation.  On balance
         taking into account all the factors in this case I am satisfied
         that there are very compelling circumstances in this case which
         outweigh the strong public interest in the Appellant's
         deportation."


35. I do not accept that the Judge's conclusions in this regard disclose an
   inadequacy of reasons.  What is said at [32] of the Decision has to be
   read in conjunction with the earlier findings regarding the extent of the
   Appellant's family and private life which the Judge finds to be
   established.  That includes in particular the strong bond between the
   Appellant and [A] and the emotional and practical dependency of [A] on
   his brother which the Judge finds to amount to family life.  It includes
   also the "very significant obstacles" to the Appellant's integration in
   Uganda which the Judge finds to be established for the reasons given at
   [30] of the Decision taking into account all the evidence about the
   situation which the Appellant would face in Uganda.  The Judge has also
   found that the Appellant is socially and culturally integrated in the UK
   and that he has lived for much of his time in the UK lawfully.  Those are
   all relevant considerations as set out in the judgment in Hesham Ali.


36. The Judge has given the public interest the weight which it deserves.
   She has taken into account the level of risk which the Appellant
   continues to pose and his work to rehabilitate himself.  As I have
   already pointed out, the index conviction is one for offences committed
   before the Appellant started to attend meetings to deal with his gambling
   addiction and in fact prior to his 2018 conviction for a similar offence.
    The Appellant has been compliant with his licence terms since his
   release. He has accepted his guilt and pleaded guilty to the offences.
   The Judge has taken into account the fact of repeated offending.  Again,
   all of those are relevant considerations.


37. Ultimately, the balance between interference and justification and
   whether interference with family and private life is proportionate is an
   issue for the Judge.   As I remarked in the course of the hearing, the
   outcome in this case is not one which all Judges would have reached.  I
   doubt that I would have reached the same conclusion.  That is however not
   the issue.  As Mr Grutters pointed out, in order to show that the
   Decision is irrational, the Respondent has to show that no Judge properly
   directed could reach the same conclusion.  That is a high threshold and
   one which the Respondent has not shown to be met in this case.

38. For those reasons, I am satisfied that there is no error of law in the
   Decision.  I therefore uphold the Decision.  The Appellant's appeal
   remains allowed.

CONCLUSION

39. For the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that there is no error of law
   disclosed by the grounds.  Accordingly, I uphold the Decision with the
   result that the Appellant's appeal remains allowed.


DECISION
The Decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge S Y Loke promulgated on 17
September 2020 does not involve the making of an error on a point of law.
I therefore uphold the Decision.  The Appellant's appeal remains allowed.




Signed: L K Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

Dated:  14 April 2021

