
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/17982/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard At: Manchester Civil Justice   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Centre                               |On 05 July 2019                      |
|On: 21st May 2019                    |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     WKT
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Hussain, Equity Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born in 1973. He  appeals  with
    permission the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Andrew
    Davies) to dismiss his human rights appeal.

 2. The matter at the heart of the appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was whether  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with his three British children. If he did then the appeal
    fell to be determined in accordance  with  the  principle  set  out  at
    s117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal found that it could not be satisfied  that  the
    Appellant did in fact play any active parental role in  the  upbringing
    of his children, who were living permanently with their mother.   As  a
    result the appeal was dismissed.

 4. Permission was granted on the 19th March 2019  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kelly who considered it arguable that the  Tribunal's  conclusion
    was  contrary  to  the  evidence  and  to  jurisprudence  including  JG
    (s117B(6) 'reasonable to leave'  United  Kingdom)  Turkey  [2019]  UKUT
    00072 (IAC).

 5. By his letter dated the 16th April 2019 the Secretary of State conceded
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  flawed  for  material
    error of law.  Before me Mr McVeety withdrew  that  letter,  explaining
    with apologies that it had been sent in error.   Although I offered  to
    put the matter back, Mr Hussain was very helpfully content  to  proceed
    directly to make submissions on whether the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside

 6. I heard submissions from both parties and I reserved my decision  which
    I now give.

 7. Mr Hussain squarely based his appeal on a single ground: that the First-
    tier Tribunal decision was flawed for a lack of  reasoned  findings  on
    the material evidence.

 8. The positive evidence of the Appellant's involvement in his  children's
    lives consisted of the following material:

      i) The evidence of the Appellant himself;

     ii) A letter from the mother of the children dated 18th  November  2018
         in which she states that the Appellant looks after the children  on
         weekends and that he also picks them up from  school,  particularly
         when she is unable to do so because she is caring for her  disabled
         daughter. She states that they have not gone a single  day  without
         seeing their father;

    iii) An undated letter from the mother of  the  children  in  which  she
         stated that the Appellant has contact with the  children  and  that
         they speak to him every evening on the telephone. She  writes  that
         the children have a strong bond with their dad and asks that he  be
         allowed to stay in the United Kingdom;

     iv) A letter dated the 14th November 2018 from a support worker at  the
         children's primary school which confirmed that  the  Appellant  has
         "on occasion" collected the children from, or brought the  children
         to, school. The letter states that no contact details are held  for
         him;

      v) A letter dated 14th January 2019 from the headteacher of  the  same
         school adds that on the 30th November 2018 the Appellant registered
         his name and contact details as 'next of kin' with the school.

 9. Of this evidence  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  as  follows.    The
    Appellant's own evidence consisted  of  four  sentences  in  a  witness
    statement which revealed little about his relationship  with  them.  He
    gave no detail and no explanation as to what  role  he  might  play  in
    making decisions in their lives.  His oral evidence that  he  collected
    the children three times  per  week  was  to  be  contrasted  with  the
    evidence from the school that  he  had  done  so  "on  occasion".   The
    Tribunal further considered it relevant to note that up until the issue
    arose in the context of this appeal, the Appellant had  not  considered
    it necessary to ensure that he was listed as an emergency contact  with
    the school.  In oral evidence the Appellant could not name the teachers
    or the head at the school.  The fact that the school had confirmed that
    the details had now been given took the matter little further.

10. The most important evidence in the appeal came from the mother  of  the
    children. Again, her claim that the Appellant took an  active  role  in
    for instance getting the  children  to  and  from  school  appeared  to
    contradict the evidence of the school itself. It was  also  significant
    that this witness was not  called  to  give  oral  evidence.  That  was
    because in December 2016 she had written to the Respondent to say  that
    she and the children were forced to flee domestic violence at the hands
    of the Appellant and that since January of that  year  he  had  had  no
    contact with the children at all.   She  said  that  she  had  suffered
    domestic violence since 2011 but  had  only  dropped  criminal  charges
    against the  Appellant  at  the  instigation  of  her  mother  who  was
    concerned about family 'honour'. The gist  of  her  long  and  detailed
    letter is summed up in this line: "he only used my children to get  the
    visa".  Of this witness' evidence the Tribunal concluded:

         "It is the contrast between the two letters  that  made  it  highly
         desirable that the Appellant's ex-wife  was  called  to  give  oral
         evidence. Without the opportunity to have that evidence  tested  in
         cross-examination I am not satisfied that I can put any  weight  on
         her letter and the inconsistency with the evidence from school only
         strengthens my concern...."

11. Having considered all of  that  evidence  the  Tribunal  concluded,  at
    paragraph 25, that the Appellant had failed to demonstrate that he  was
    playing a genuinely parental role.

12. It is perhaps evident from my rehearsal of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings that I am unable to  accept  that  this  was  a  determination
    flawed for a lack of reasons.  The Tribunal gave  reasons  for  placing
    limited weight on the evidence of the Appellant himself: it was  scant,
    contained no detail and was contradicted by other  evidence.  Upon  the
    supportive letters from his ex-wife the Tribunal placed  little  weight
    because she had not appeared to speak to the fundamental contradictions
    in her evidence. That left the letters from the school  which  said  no
    more than the Appellant had  "on  occasion"  brought  his  children  or
    collected them. He was unable to name his children's teachers and until
    it was raised as an omission the school did not even have him on record
    as  next  of  kin.  The  Tribunal  concluded  that  this  evidence  was
    insufficient to demonstrate a  genuine  parental  relationship.  As  Mr
    McVeety pointed out, weight is  a  matter  for  the  Tribunal.  In  the
    absence of perversity I am unable to interfere with the conclusions  it
    reached.   Nothing in the caselaw cited in the grounds of appeal  could
    have compelled the First-tier Tribunal to reach a  different  decision.
    For that reason I must uphold its decision.




    Anonymity

13. The Appellant's case relates to  his  children.  I  am  concerned  that
    identification of the Appellant could lead to the identification of the
    children  involved,  contrary  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I  therefore  consider  it
    appropriate to make an order in accordance with Rule 14 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"

    Decisions

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and it is upheld.

15. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                              [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           Dated 22nd May
                                    2019








