
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17503/2016 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34 without a      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Hearing                              |On 09 July 2020                      |
|On 25 June 2020                      |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                          OMONIYI OLUFUNSO KOMOLAFE
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appealed against a decision of 11 July 2016 which refused
    an application for indefinite leave to remain. His appeal was dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal Haria in a decision dated 23 August 2018.

 2. The applicant challenged that decision but was refused permission to
    appeal by the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal. He challenged
    the refusal of permission successfully in the Administrative Court and
    on 3 February 2020 the Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. In a decision dated 10 March 2020, a Presidential panel of the Upper
    Tribunal found an error of law in the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal and set it aside to be re-made. Directions were issued for the
    parties to clarify their positions, in particular where the question of
    the respondent potentially withdrawing the underlying decision had been
    canvassed at the error of law hearing.

 4. The respondent indicated in a written submission dated 19 June 2020
    that her position was now that removal pursuant to the decision under
    challenge would be unlawful as it would amount to a breach of Article 8
    ECHR and therefore Section 6 of the Human Rights Act.

 5. The respondent proposed that the Upper Tribunal re-make the appeal as
    allowed where it was conceded that removal would breach Article 8 ECHR.



 6. Following further correspondence, the appellant's legal representatives
    indicated that allowing the appeal under Article 8 ECHR was an
    appropriate disposal.

 7. After considering the history of the appeal, the written submissions
    and the correspondence of the parties, the Tribunal finds that it is
    appropriate to allow the appeal under Article 8 ECHR where removal
    would amount to a disproportionate breach of Article 8 ECHR.



DECISION

The appeal is allowed under Article 8 ECHR.


Signed: S Pitt                                   Date: 25 June 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
