
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/17717/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 6 February 2018                  |On: 2 March 2018                     |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Paramjit [B]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
                    Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Rehman, Mayfair Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the secretary of state  and  to  the
      respondent as the claimant.

   2. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey who in a decision  promulgated  on
      15 November 2017,  allowed  the  claimant's  appeal  on  human  rights
      grounds.

   3. The claimant is an Indian national born on  [  ]  1979.  She  appealed
      against the secretary of state's decision dated 8 July 2016 to  refuse
      her application for leave to remain in the UK. Her  partner  is  a  UK
      citizen.

   4. Judge Povey found that the claimant entered the UK illegally  in  2007
      but did nothing to regularise her status in the UK until she submitted
      her current application on 22 May 2015 based on her relationship  with
      her partner and her child. It was not in dispute that  she  was  in  a
      genuine and subsisting relationship with Mr [S],  a  British  citizen.
      Nor was it an issue that Mr [S] has two other children in the UK  from
      a previous relationship, with whom he has a parental relationship.  Mr
      [S] and "the couple's child are both UK citizens" [17].

   5. Judge Povey accordingly found that there was family life  between  the
      appellant, Mr [S] and their child.[18]

   6. It was conceded at the outset of the hearing that but for the  alleged
      deception which triggered a  finding  that  the  claimant  failed  the
      suitability requirements of Appendix FM to the Rules, her  application
      would have met the Immigration Rules.

   7. He found that given the existence of family life as  he  found,  there
      are compelling circumstances for considering the appeal under  Article
      8 of the Human Rights Convention [23]. He found that the provisions of
      s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 had been
      met, namely, that the claimant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental
      relationship with her child who is a qualifying child. It would not be
      reasonable for the child to leave the UK as conceded by the presenting
      officer '... in her acceptance that the  Immigration  Rules  were  met
      (save for the issue of suitability) [24].

   8. It was submitted on behalf of the secretary of state at the First-tier
      Tribunal hearing that  even  though  s.117B(6)  was  met,  the  public
      interest in effective immigration control generally and the claimant's
      removal specifically was not dislodged. Judge Povey stated that he was
      unable to agree. The public interest in not requiring  the  claimant's
      removal prevails over  the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of
      effective immigration control. He stated at [26] that "...  Where  the
      conditions under s.117B(6) are met (as here) that is determinative  of
      the proportionality assessment, the public interest does  not  justify
      removal and Article 8 has  been  infringed  (per  MA  at  [16]  -[20];
      Rhuppiah)".

   9. He accordingly found that the secretary  of  state's  decision  was  a
      disproportionate interference with  the  claimant's  family  life.  He
      reached that conclusion "even if" the claimant did not  sit  and  pass
      the English language test as alleged by the  secretary  of  state.  He
      referred to the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MA  (Pakistan)
      [2016] EWCA Civ 705 at [17].

  10. On 18 December 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge JM  Holmes  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal.  It  was  arguable  that  the
      Judge was obliged to address the issue of  whether  a  false  language
      certificate was relied upon. If it  was,  that  added  weight  to  the
      public interest in refusal: the Chikwamba exception. Arguably  as  the
      grounds identify, the Judge  failed  to  address  this  issue  in  the
      decision at all. All grounds were arguable.

  11. Ms Brocklesby-Weller relied on the grounds of appeal. She  noted  that
      the claimant was refused  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  because  the
      secretary of state was satisfied that  she  had  obtained  an  English
      language certificate by deception.

  12. She submitted that the Judge failed to make  a  clear  finding  as  to
      whether  he  found  the  claimant  to  be   credible   or   not.   The
      proportionality assessment was inadequate as the Judge failed to  view
      Article 8 through the lens of the Rules.

  13. The Judge failed to consider that if the claimant has  a  fraudulently
      obtained English language certificate,  she  had  a  poor  immigration
      history. Obtaining leave to remain by deception constitutes a criminal
      offence and is evidence of criminality, even if there is no conviction
      as yet. Accordingly there may be powerful  reasons  in  this  case  to
      render it reasonable for family life to continue abroad.

  14. It is further contended that  the  Judge  gave  inadequately  reasoned
      findings in identifying compelling circumstances such  as  to  justify
      consideration of a breach under Article 8.

  15. Ms Brocklesby-Weller thus submitted that the Judge in  effect  ignored
      the deception points.

  16. The approach that Lord Justice Elias favoured in MA  was  inconsistent
      with the decision of the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda) v SSHD  [2016]
      EWCA Civ 450. The Court of Appeal in MA did not think that they  ought
      to depart from that decision [45]. It was accordingly held in MA  that
      the  fact  that  the  child  is  a  qualifying  child  must  be  given
      significant weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise.  It
      is a factor of some weight in favour of leave to remain being granted.



  17. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted  that  Judge  Povey  adopted  a  "child
      centric" approach. His failure to have regard to the  public  interest
      considerations constitutes a material error as the  circumstances  may
      not have been so compelling as to require a consideration of Article 8
      outside the Rules.

  18. She also contended that the Judge did  not  give  'reasoned  findings'
      when identifying  compelling  circumstances  'rendering  a  breach  of
      Article 8'. There is nothing to prevent the  claimants'  returning  to
      India to apply for the appropriate entry clearance.  Separation  would
      be temporary and proportionate.

  19. She submitted that the decision should accordingly be set aside and re-
      made after consideration of all the evidence.

  20. On behalf of the claimants, Mr Rehman submitted that Judge Povey dealt
      with the issues. He referred to [19] where a concession was made  that
      but for the alleged deception  the  application  would  have  met  the
      immigration rules.

  21. He referred to MA (Pakistan) at [17], where Lord Justice Elias  stated
      that s.117B(6) must be read as a self contained provision.  Where  the
      conditions are satisfied the public interest will not justify removal.
      I indicated to Mr Rehman however,  that  it  was  pointed  out  during
      argument in MA, that counsel on  behalf  of  the  secretary  of  state
      argued  otherwise  at  [18].  Further,  at  [45]  Lord  Justice  Elias
      acknowledged that the  approach  favoured  was  inconsistent  with  MM
      (Uganda).

  22. Mr Rehman further submitted that the approach by Judge Povey  at  [20]
      was also informed by the Upper Tribunal  decision  in  SF  and  Others
      (Guidance, Post 2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120.  He  referred  to
      the policy identified at paragraph 7 of SF. He acknowledged  that  the
      Judge made no findings in respect of the asserted deception.  However,
      he submitted that the error is not material.

  23. He referred to the decisions in  Chikwamba  and  Beoku-Betts.  In  the
      latter decision the House of Lords decided that the  effect  on  other
      family members and their right to respect for their family life had to
      be taken into account in an appeal to the  Tribunal  on  human  rights
      grounds.

  24. In reply, Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that  having  regard  to  the
      conduct of the  claimant  the  proportionality  assessment  is  simply
      defective. The Judge ignored the  public  interest  considerations  in
      their entirety. It cannot simply be asserted  that  it  would  not  be
      reasonable for the claimants' child to leave the UK and that "would be
      the end of the public interest."

      Assessment

  25. Judge Povey had regard to the decision of Lord Justice Elias  at  [17]
      in MA, supra. However, even though referring to that decision at [28],
      no consideration was given to the decision of the earlier decision  by
      the Court of Appeal in MM (Uganda), supra. In MA  the  Court  did  not
      think that they would be able to depart from that decision - [45].

  26. In MM the Court had held that while the public interest considerations
      must be taken into account in applying the  "unduly  harsh"  criteria,
      that must be equally so with respect to the reasonableness criteria in
      s.117B(6).  Lord  Justice   Elias   noted   that   in   applying   the
      reasonableness test, the fact that a child has  been  here  for  seven
      years  must  be  given  significant  weight  when  carrying  out   the
      proportionality exercise. He referred to the guidance in  August  2015
      and the IDIs in which it was expressly  stated  that  once  the  seven
      years' residence requirement was satisfied there needs to  be  "strong
      reasons" for refusing leave.

  27. First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey did not make any finding as to whether
      the claimant obtained the  English  language  test  by  deception.  He
      concluded that even if he had, the public interest in not removing the
      claimant must prevail [28].  He relied on  the  approach  favoured  by
      Lord Justice Elias in MA at [17] but did not  consider  MM  which  the
      Court of Appeal found applied.

  28.  The  proportionality  of  the  proposed  removal  was  not   properly
      considered. There has been no  consideration  of  the  fact  that  the
      appellant might have obtained leave to remain by  deception.  If  that
      fact were  established  it  might  constitute  a  proper  basis  under
      s.117B(6) for rendering it reasonable  for  family  life  to  continue
      abroad. This gives added weight to the  public  interest  in  refusal,
      notwithstanding the Chikwamba exception.

  29.  I  have  also  had  regard  to  Mr  Rehman's  submission  as  to  the
      applicability of SF and Others, supra. However, the policy referred to
      at [17] in that case noted that it may indeed be appropriate to refuse
      to grant  leave  where  the  conduct  of  the  parent  gives  rise  to
      considerations of such weight as to justify separation  if  the  child
      could otherwise stay  with  another  parent  in  the  UK  or  EU.  The
      circumstances envisaged  could  cover  another's  criminality  falling
      below the threshold set out in paragraph 398 of the Immigration  Rules
      as well as a very poor immigration history such as  where  the  person
      has repeatedly and deliberately breached the immigration rules.

  30. I accordingly find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      involved the making of an error on a point of law.  I  set  aside  the
      decision which will have to be re-made.

  31. I indicated to the parties during the hearing that in the event that I
      reached this conclusion the case should be remitted to the  First-tier
      Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made. Neither representative  made
      any submissions to the contrary.

  32. I have had regard to the President's Practice Statement concerning the
      remitting of  an  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
      decision.  I am satisfied that the extent  of  judicial  fact  finding
      which will be necessary in order for the decision  to  be  re-made  is
      extensive. I have had regard to the overriding objective and  conclude
      that it would be just and fair to remit the case.

      Notice of Decision

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and is set aside.

      The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Newport) for a  fresh
      determination to be made.

      Anonymity direction not made.





      Signed                             Date 23 February 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

