
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18911/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester    Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 5th April 2019 On 9th April 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                MR TONIN DODA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms N Wilkins, Counsel, instructed by My UK Visas.
For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a national of Albania, born on 30 April 1968. On 1
       September 2017 he made a claim based upon his article 8 rights for
       leave to remain in the United Kingdom. He claimed to have entered the
       United Kingdom on 18 July 1997. If this were correct then under
       paragraph 276 ADE 1(iii) the 20 years provision in the immigration
       rules would be met in respect of his private life.

    2. The respondent, on 31 August 2018, refused his application on the
       basis he had not demonstrated residence for this length of time.
       There was no evidence of any family life in the United Kingdom. No
       exceptional circumstances were identified which would otherwise
       justify the grant of leave.

The First tier Tribunal

    3. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Morris at
       Manchester on 30 October 2018. In a decision promulgated on 12
       November 2018 it was dismissed. The appellant was represented by
       Counsel and there was a presenting officer in attendance.

    4. In support of his appeal, statements were provided from various
       people as to the length of time he had been in the United Kingdom.
       The judge heard from a Mr Naim Maleci and a Mr Agron Elezi who
       adopted their statements. The appellant's claim was that he travelled
       to the United Kingdom with Mr Naim Maleci. They arrived on 18 July
       1997 and made a claim for protection shortly after. This was
       subsequently dismissed. Thereafter, they lived at various shared
       addresses until 1999 when Mr Malaci was returned. He then began to
       live with Mr Agron Elezi who had arrived in the United Kingdom in
       2000.

    5. Mr Naim Maleci subsequently obtained limited leave to remain. He had
       returned the United Kingdom in 2001 and then returned to Albania in
       2003. He returned here again in 2005 to 2009, and then again in 2010.
       He subsequently married and has 2 children. He was cross-examined
       about criminal convictions and it was recorded he accepted he had
       used another name to obtain identity documents. The evidence of Mr
       Agron Elezi was that he knew the appellant in Albania and was aware
       he came to the United Kingdom in 1997.

    6. At hearing, the presenting officer accepted Home Office held some
       records confirming the appellant's presence in the United Kingdom in
       2000.

    7. At paragraph 50 onwards of the decision, the judge refers to the
       evidence presented. The judge found that some of the letters of
       support referred to events after 2000, which had been accepted. There
       was one letter from a Mr Martini stating the appellant had been here
       since 1997. He did not attend the hearing. The judge referred to the
       appellant's friend, Mr Maleci, and said that his evidence was not
       being discounted solely on the basis he had a criminal conviction but
       this nevertheless this was a factor in the assessment of his
       evidence.

    8. At paragraph 53 the judge concluded the appellant had not discharged
       the burden of proof to show he had been here 20 years. The judge
       concluded that whilst private life was engaged the outcome was
       proportionate.



The Upper Tribunal

    9. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis
       it was arguable the judge had failed to make specific findings in
       respect of the relevant evidence submitted, including the written
       evidence presented in the form of letters from friends.

   10. At hearing, Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer accepted there is a
       material error of law in the decision. The appellant's appeal bundle
       contains statements in support of his claim of long residence from Mr
       Naim Maleci and Mr Agron Elezi. The judge does make reference to this
       evidence. However within the respondent's bundle are further
       statements at part C which are not commented upon. There are
       statements from a Mr Vullnet Curaj he said he met the appellant in
       Manchester in 1999. There is also a statement from a Mr Col Maleci he
       states he had known him since 1997 and that they met in Manchester.
       There is also a letter from Mr Tonin Doda it states he knew the
       appellant from Albania and from their time in the United Kingdom. Ms
       N Wilkins, Counsel, states that in all there were 7 letters in
       support and 4 are not assessed in the decision.

   11. On the basis of what has been agreed between the parties no further
       written reasons are required. The requirements of subparagraph
       40(3)(a) and (b) of the Upper Tribunal procedural rules are met. I
       therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunalremitted
       the matter for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal judge Morris materially errs in law and
is set aside. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de
novo hearing.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.

Directions

      1. Relist for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal in
         Manchester excluding First-tier Tribunal Judge Morris.

      2. An Albanian interpreter will be required.

      3. It is estimated the hearing would take around 2 hours.

      4. The appellant's representatives should provide the personal details
         of any witnesses claiming to be aware of the appellant's presence
         in the United Kingdom from 1997.This is so that police checks can
         be made on them. If the respondent wishes to rely upon adverse
         features, such as convictions, they should serve copies of any
         records upon the appellant's representatives who in turn should
         confirm whether they agree or disagree with the accuracy of the
         information.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

Dated 05 April 2019

