
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU /18649/2019
                                                               HU/19991/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Via Teams                            |                                     |
|On 5 August 2021                     |On 21 September 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                AZAM AURANGIB
                                NADIA RAHMAN
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Youssefian
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and the  respondents
    as the 'appellants', as they appeared respectively  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. The appellants are a  married  couple  and  citizens  of
    Bangladesh born in 1983 and 1990 respectively.  They  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State  dated
    20 November 2019 refusing their human rights applications.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 15  January  2021,  allowed
    their appeals.  The Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge found [98] that there existed no very  significant  obstacles
    to the family reintegrating in Bangladesh. Accordingly, the  appellants
    could not satisfy the Immigration Rules and the judge went on  to  find
    that there exist compelling circumstances which required her  to  allow
    the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds [111]. She found that  the  matter
    of delay on the part of the  Secretary  of  State  in  determining  the
    appellants' human rights application  (3.5  years)  was  a  significant
    factor [111] as it had led the appellants to believe (erroneously) that
    they were  not  overstayers.  This,  in  turn,  diminished  the  public
    interest concerned with the removal of the appellants.

 3. The grounds make a number of challenges to the  judge's  reasoning.  As
    regards delay,  the  Secretary  of  State  argues  that,  whatever  the
    appellants may have considered to be  their  immigration  status,  they
    were overstayers and that, in the absence of exceptional circumstances,
    their appeals should have been dismissed.

 4. In my opinion, that ground is without merit. The judge makes  it  clear
    [109] that the appellants did not  believe  that  they  had  indefinite
    leave to remain (and therefore did know  that  their  leave  to  remain
    remained precarious) but it was open to her to find that  they  thought
    that 'their life in the United Kingdom was taking on a  more  permanent
    form' because they genuinely believed that their application  had  been
    made in time [109] and that that finding justified giving 'more than  a
    little  weight'  to  their  private  life  in  the   Article   8   ECHR
    proportionality exercise. Having  thus  determined  that  delay  was  a
    relevant factor in this way, the weight attaching to that factor was  a
    matter for the judge; that she attached significant weight was  not  an
    error of law and the Secretary of State's  challenge  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the Tribunal (see  EB  (Kosovo)  [2008]  UKHL  41  at
    [16]).

 5. I agree also with Mr Youssefian, who appeared for the appellants before
    both Tribunals, that the Secretary of State's complaint that the  judge
    has not clearly found whether either or both of family life and private
    are engaged does not amount to an  material  error  of  law.  The  same
    factors are likely to apply in both cases and there  is  no  indication
    that, in  her  thorough  decision,  the  judge  has  taken  account  of
    irrelevant matters or ignored relevant ones.

 6. The outcome reached by the judge was plainly available to  her  on  the
    evidence. In particular, having properly considered that  delay  was  a
    factor, the judge correctly took account of the effect which it had  on
    the appellants and their  subjective  view  of  their  own  immigration
    status  was  not  irrational.  There  is  nothing  in  the   First-tier
    Tribunal's decision which requires correction of  interference  by  the
    Upper Tribunal  (see  SSHD  v  AH  (Sudan)  [2007]  UKHL  49  at  [30]:
    'Appellate courts should not rush to  find  such  misdirections  simply
    because they might have reached a different conclusion on the facts  or
    expressed  themselves  differently.').  In   the   circumstances,   the
    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.



    Notice of Decision

     The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.



         Signed                              Date 5 August 2021

        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



















