
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/18649/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22 August 2019                       |On 06 September 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                        Mr ray isham kermani fevriere
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Wass of Counsel instructed by TMC Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 12 April  2019  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Richardson which  refused  the  appellant's  appeal
    brought on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of St Lucia, born on 26 July 1989.

 3. Most of the evidence in this appeal was not  disputed.   The  appellant
    applied to join the British Army and was accepted, entering the  UK  in
    October 2016.  However, during his initial training it  was  found  out
    that he had a serious allergy to shellfish.  The army found  that  this
    was a matter sufficiently serious for him to not to be  able  to  serve
    and the appellant was informed on 3  January  2017  that  he  would  be
    discharged.  His official discharge took place on 12 September 2017. By
    that time the appellant  had  formed  a  relationship  with  a  British
    national, Ms Beer and her two children from a previous relationship. On
    the basis of those relationships, the  appellant  applied  for  further
    leave to remain on Article 8 ECHR grounds on 7 October 2017.

 4. The application was refused by the respondent on 23 August  2018.   The
    appellant appealed and had a hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  on
    26 March 2019.  As above, the First-tier Tribunal refused the Article 8
    appeal in a decision dated 12 April 2019.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal  set  out  the  appellant's  case,  stating  in
    paragraph 12:

         "Shortly after arriving in the United Kingdom the Appellant met  Ms
         Beer.  She is a British citizen and has two children who  are  also
         British citizens although by different  fathers  who  are  involved
         with their respective children's lives.  The Appellant  lives  with
         his sister near to Ms Beer and visits Ms Beer's home daily as it is
         a few minutes away.  He is actively involved with the children  who
         have grown very attached to him.  The Appellant treats the children
         as if they are his own and is always there for them, spending a lot
         of time with them.  His departure from the UK would have an adverse
         effect  on  them  especially  the  youngest,  who  has   had   some
         behavioural problems which had been improving since the Appellant's
         involvement in her life."

 6. At paragraph 16 the judge recorded the evidence of Ms Beer as follows:

         "Ms Beer is in employment.  The Appellant has helped her  with  the
         children and has spent a  considerable  amount  of  time  with  her
         children.  The children would be devastated if the Appellant had to
         leave the UK because they are used  to  him  being  around  and  so
         spending a lot of time with him.  Ms Beer would not be able  to  go
         to St Lucia with the Appellant  because  she  could  not  take  the
         children away from their respective fathers. (my emphasis)"

 7. The judge went on to make findings on the appellant's relationship with
    the children in paragraph 30 of the decision:

         "30. I accept the Appellant's evidence that Ms Beer's children have
             become attached to the Appellant and that he  has  a  positive
             influence on their  lives.   He  does  not  however  have  any
             parental responsibility for the children who each continue  to
             see their  respective  fathers.   It  is  understandable  that
             children who become attached to an individual over a period of
             time, in this case over two years, will be upset on separation
             but there was no medical or social welfare evidence  that  the
             Appellant's departure would have a detrimental effect  on  the
             welfare of the children and their development  any  more  than
             the day-to-day absence  of  and  limited  contact  with  their
             respective birth fathers which the children have  experienced.
             Children are resilient and children in the army in  particular
             must become used to fathers being absent for periods of  time.
             There are modern methods of communication  such  as  Skype  by
             which  contact  visual  and  oral  can  be   maintained.   (my
             emphasis)"

 8. The judge also  considered  the  best  interests  of  the  children  in
    paragraph 39 of the decision:

         "39. Turning them to the question of the children  and  their  best
             interests.  They will be  disappointed  and  saddened  by  the
             absence  of  the  Appellant  but  there  was  no  evidence  of
             sufficient weight that the Appellant's absence in their lives,
             would have a permanent detrimental effect on their welfare and
             development.  The Appellant  can  maintain  contact  with  the
             children through modern methods of communication on a frequent
             basis which would ameliorate any sense of loss that they would
             initially feel."

 9. The appellant objects to these findings on the  basis  that  the  judge
    took an incorrect approach by only assessing whether the appellant  had
    "parental responsibility"  and  not  whether  he  had  a  "genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship" with the children, the first part  of
    the test from paragraph 117B(6).

10. The appellant also sought to rely on the ratio of R (on the application
    of RK) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (Section  117B(6);
    "parental relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT 00031.  The headnote  of  that
    case reads as follows:

         "1.  It is not  necessary  for  an  individual  to  have  "parental
             responsibility"  in  law  for  there  to  exist   a   parental
             relationship.

         2.   Whether a person who is  not  a  biological  parent  is  in  a
             "parental relationship" with  a  child  for  the  purposes  of
             s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
             depends on the individual circumstances and whether  the  role
             that individual plays establishes he or she has "stepped  into
             the shoes" of a parent.

         3.   Applying that approach, apart  from  the  situation  of  split
             families where relationships between parents have broken  down
             and an actual or de  facto  step-parent  exists,  it  will  be
             unusual, but not impossible, for more than  2  individuals  to
             have a "parental relationship" with  a  child.   However,  the
             relationships between a child and  professional  or  voluntary
             carers or family friends are not "parental relationships"."

11. I did not find that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  disclosed
    an error on a point of law  regarding  the  assessment  of  appellant's
    relationship with Ms Beer's children or the proper  application  of  s.
    117B(6) of the Nationality and Immigration Act 2002.

12. The facts  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were  that  the  children
    continued to see their fathers.  Additionally, their relationships with
    their birth fathers were sufficiently important for Ms  Beer  to  state
    that she could not go to St Lucia with the appellant because "she could
    not take the children away from their respective fathers". Ms Beer  was
    not divorced from the father of the youngest child.  I have  emphasised
    the evidence showing this to be so in the extracts from the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision set  out  above.  The  evidence  was  also  that  the
    appellant had known the children for approximately two  years  but  had
    never lived with them.

13. The First-tier Tribunal accepted much of the evidence of the  appellant
    and Ms Beer but he  was  not  obliged  to  take  the  evidence  on  the
    appellant's relationship with the children at its highest. Read fairly,
    the First-tier Tribunal found not only that the appellant did not  have
    parental responsibility but that he had not "stepped into the shoes" of
    a parent, as set out in the second paragraph of  the  headnote  of  RK.
    That was a  rational  conclusion  where  the  children  had  continuing
    relationships with their birth fathers  that  their  mother  wanted  to
    protect by keeping the children in the UK. RK also  indicates  that  it
    will be "unusual" for a child to have a parental  relationship  with  a
    third adult in these circumstances. The judge here did  not  find  that
    this "unusual" situation prevailed where the  appellant  did  not  live
    with the children, where they continued to see their fathers, and where
    their relationships with their birth father were  sufficiently  serious
    for their mother to wish them to remain in the  UK  to  continue  those
    relationships.

14. It is therefore my conclusion  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  took  a  lawful  approach  to  the  evidence  concerning  the
    appellant's relationship with Ms Beer's children and shall stand.

15. It is notable, however, that the First-tier Tribunal clearly found  the
    appellant and Ms Beer to be  highly  credible  and  genuine  people  in
    general terms and that even if the appellant's  relationship  with  the
    children could not qualify  under  the  Immigration  Rules  or  Section
    117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, there  was
    a  good relationship with them and a genuine partnership with Ms  Beer.
    The integrity of the appellant and Ms Beer is commented on in a  number
    of places in the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   This  will
    obviously be something that a decision maker will  bear  in  mind  when
    assessing any further applications for leave or  entry  clearance  from
    the appellant.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed:  [pic]                                   Date: 2 September 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt





