
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/18781/2018
                                                               HU/19499/2018
                                                               HU/19505/2018
                                                               HU/19508/2018
                                                               HU/19511/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 June 2019                      |On 22 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                       Muhammad [S] (first appellant)
                        Maryam [A] (second appellant)
                           [H s] (third appellant)
                          [M s] (fourth appellant)
                           [H s] (fifth appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S Randera, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Miss E Groves, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The  appellants,  being  husband  and  wife  and  three  children,  all
    citizens of Pakistan, have permission  to  challenge  the  decision  of
    Judge Davies of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on 12 February  2019
    dismissing their appeals against the decision made by the respondent on
    7 September 2019 refusing them leave to remain.

2.   It is unnecessary to go into detail because at the outset  Miss  Groves
    stated that the respondent conceded the judge had fallen into error and
    no longer opposed the appeals. That in  my  judgment  was  a  realistic
    criticism since the judge's decision was plainly deficient in a  number
    of respects.

3.   For a start, it was extremely cursory.  On no reading  did  it  contain
    an adequate assessment of the best interests of the children or of  the
    issue of whether it was reasonable to expect  them  to  leave  the  UK.
    Second, despite noting that one of the children was a qualifying  child
    born in February 2011, the judge stated that there was "no evidence" to
    indicate that it would not be reasonable to expect them  to  leave  the
    UK.  It may have  been  open  to  the  judge  to  assess  the  evidence
    submitted to be of little weight, but to say there  was  "no  evidence"
    was both absurd and in conflict with his own acknowledgment that  there
    was such evidence at para  18.   Third,  despite  the  existence  of  a
    qualifying  child,  the  judge  nowhere  took  account  of  the   need,
    established by case law and Home Office policy, to ask  whether  strong
    or powerful reasons could be shown for expecting this  child  to  leave
    the UK. Fourth, to the extent that the judge considered  reasonableness
    at all, he appears to have  proceeded,  at  least  in  respect  of  the
    qualifying child, on the opposite basis from the correct one-  that  it
    was for the qualifying child a to show there were powerful reasons  for
    her to remain.

4.   Finally the judge's decision has all the appearance  of  a  boilerplate
    recitation, virtually devoid of any indication that there has  been  an
    individual examination and assessment  of  the  appellants'  particular
    circumstances.  Decisions of this ilk cause quite unnecessary work  for
    the IAC Chambers and it is hoped that the judge will take heed when  it
    comes to dealing with similar cases.

5.   As a result of the judge's  errors,  it  will  be  necessary  that  the
    appeals be heard again de novo.  For that reason  I  remit  it  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  It should not be assumed that my setting aside of
    the decision means that the appellants are entitled to succeed in their
    appeals and indeed the grounds of appeal against the  judge's  decision
    are just as boilerplate as the judge's reasons, which is no help to the
    appellants.

    6.   To conclude:

     The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error  of  law.



     The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Davies).

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 18 August 2019

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



