
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18271/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2018                   |On 14 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   mr s B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Habtemariam, Counsel instructed by Immigration
                    Advice Service
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    1. In a decision sent on 17 July 2018 I set aside the decision of  Judge
       Oliver of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the  appeal  of  the
       appellant, who has claimed at different times to  be  a  national  of
       Liberia or  of  Sierra  Leone,  against  the  decision  made  by  the
       respondent on 18 July 2016 to refuse him leave  to  remain  on  human
       rights grounds. The appellant, who came to the UK  in  October  2003,
       has a history of mental illness and at the  date  of  the  error  law
       hearing and this hearing  was  in  24-hour  supported  accommodation.
       Medical reports from Dr Ahrens and others stated  that  he  currently
       suffers  from  both  positive  and  negative  symptoms  of   paranoid
       schizophrenia.

    2. The reasons I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge
       were (i) that the judge was wrong in law  to  rely  on  the  reported
       Upper Tribunal decision EA & Others [2017] UKUT 00045 since that case
       had been disapproved by the Court of Appeal in AM  (Zimbabwe)  [2018]
       EWCA Civ 64; and  (ii)  that  having  seemingly  concluded  that  the
       appellant would not receive  adequate  medical  treatment  in  either
       Liberia or Sierra Leone (because in neither was clozapine available),
       the judge did not treat that as a relevant consideration in  applying
       the Article 3 test.

    3. In my decision, I  stated  that  I  did  not  consider  it  would  an
       appropriate case to remit to the FtT since it has already been before
       the FtT/predecessor body twice.  Whilst there were issues in  factual
       dispute they were largely confined to the state of background country
       evidence as regards facilities for mental health treatment in Liberia
       and Sierra Leone. I directed that:

           "(1)   The appellant's representatives obtain and produce within
           the next  six  weeks  an  up-to-date  psychiatric  report  which
           addresses, inter alia, whether  the  appellant's  mental  and/or
           physical health would be significantly affected if clozapine (as
           opposed to other antipsychotic drugs) were not available;

           (2)    Both parties use best  endeavours  to  obtain  up-to-date
           country information relating  to  mental  health  facilities  in
           Liberia and Sierra Leone and  the  range  of  locally  available
           drugs for treatment or management of paranoid schizophrenia."

    4.  In  response  to  my  directions  the  appellant's   representatives
       submitted  two  reports,  one  from  country  expert  Huguette  Ticky
       Monekosso dated 3 December 2018 and one from  Dr  Jennifer  Perry,  a
       Consultant Psychiatrist at the Lambeth Low Intensity Treatment  Team,
       South London and Maudsley NHS dated 21 August 2018.

    5. The report from  Ms  Huguette  Monekosso  stated  that  there  is  no
       evidence that clozapine is available  in  either  Liberia  or  Sierra
       Leone and in neither of  these  countries  are  there  facilities  to
       monitor the side effects and safety of  psychiatric  drugs.  Even  if
       clozapine could be purchased over the internet, the  appellant  would
       not be able to afford it in either country and  would  not  have  any
       sophisticated   equipment   and    highly    qualified    psychiatric
       professionals to monitor it for him.  Even in the  "parallel  market"
       he would not be safe as this drug can be counterfeit or out  of  date
       medication which could put him in danger.  In addition, the appellant
       would face adverse societal attitudes towards mental illness.  If  he
       is undocumented and does not know any local community  or  groups  or
       have any attachment in either country, it would be very difficult for
       him to be accepted.  She concludes at para 120 of her report that hat
       "In my view [the appellant] would face serious risks if he  was  sent
       back to Sierra Leone or  Liberia  as  an  undocumented  mentally  ill
       person"; and at para 1122 she adds that he "will face  not  only  the
       medical problem that clozapine does not exist in  Liberia  or  Sierra
       Leone, but he will be regarded as stateless as he is undocumented. In
       addition to societal attitudes about his mental health problems".  At
       para 135 she states:

           "I would also like to comment that if [the appellant] 's current
           friends or his supporters in the UK send money to  Sierra  Leone
           or Liberia to buy [him] any treatment for example... either  the
           treatment will not be available or the people taking care of him
           will prefer to buy counterfeit medicine in the local  market  or
           simply take him to see a traditional doctor instead of trying to
           see the existing rare  psychiatrists  and  neurologists  in  the
           country. Because [he] is a  mentally  ill  person  he  would  be
           accused of witchcraft so that people around home  [sic]  he  may
           live".

    6. The report from Dr Perry chronicled the appellant  treatment  history
       as set out in his medical notes. This confirmed  that  since  he  was
       started on clozapine in 2012 there had been a marked  improvement  in
       his condition. Dr Perry states that:

           "When I reviewed the appellant in August he described ringing in
           his ears on a daily  basis  rather  than  voices.  He  described
           feeling paranoid that people are watching him and talking  about
           him. He seems to  be  afflicted  by  the  negative  symptoms  of
           schizophrenia. He had a blunted affect, poverty of speech,  lack
           of motivation and cognitive  deficits  associated  with  chronic
           psychosis. When asked about suicidal thoughts he said  he  could
           not remember but he said that  he  does  not  have  any  current
           suicidal  thoughts  or  plans.  He  is  currently  treated  with
           clozapine 425mg once  a  day,  aripiprazole  10mg  once  a  day,
           lamotrigine 200 mg once a day.

           It is my opinion that [the appellant]  has  a  severe  psychotic
           illness which is treatment resistant. From reviewing his  notes,
           it seems that clozapine is the medicine which has helped most in
           relation to his symptoms. The NICE Psychosis  and  schizophrenia
           in adults  Quality  standard  (QS80,  published  February  2015)
           states: Clozapine is the only drug with established efficacy  in
           reducing symptoms and  the  risk  of  relapse  for  adults  with
           treatment-resistant schizophrenia. It is licensed only  for  use
           in service users whose schizophrenia has not responded  to,  or,
           who are intolerant of, conventional antipsychotic drugs.

           Healthcare professionals have noted that  clozapine  has  helped
           [the appellant] to be more communicative, and has  significantly
           reduced his auditory hallucinations in  combination  with  other
           medications. He continued to suffer with predominantly  negative
           symptoms. It is my opinion that if he were not on clozapine  and
           instead on another antipsychotic that his  mental  health  would
           deteriorate.

           Finally, I would very strongly support [the  appellant's]  claim
           to remain in the UK. He is a man with severe and enduring mental
           illness which is treatment resistant. The support he  gets  from
           his mental health and supported accommodation  is  important  in
           ensuring this gentleman stays well. "

    7. In her submissions Ms Everett accepted that there was no evidence  to
       suggest that clozapine would be available to  the  appellant  through
       medical treatment sources in either Liberia or Sierra Leone. However,
       it was clear from the expert  report  that  there  were  other  drugs
       available to treat the appellant's mental health condition  and  that
       there were medical facilities in both countries for the treatment  of
       persons with his type of mental condition, albeit  very  few  and  of
       inferior quality.  Dr Perry's view was  that  without  clozapine  the
       appellant's situation would deteriorate but she did not go on to  say
       that this would lead to an irreversible decline. The evidence did not
       establish the level of suffering required to cross the high threshold
       set by the European Court of Human Rights for health cases. Dr  Perry
       had not suggested that the appellant would  not  take  the  drugs  he
       could obtain or access.  His condition was treatment-resistant and he
       had been living with it for a long time.

    8. It could not be assumed from the evidence, added Ms Everett, that the
       appellant had no family or friends in either country or that  friends
       here could not assist him in gaining  access  to  clozapine  via  the
       internet.  He had clearly had friends and or family in the UK who had
       helped him financially in the past.

    9. Mr  Habtermarian  highlighted  the  seriousness  of  the  appellant's
       present condition. He was living in 24 hours  support  accommodation.
       Doctors in the UK had tried to treat his condition with  other  drugs
       but that had proved unsuccessful; only clozapine appeared  to  enable
       him to manage his condition and even then, he required a  great  deal
       of support from health professionals.  Applying the  latest  guidance
       from the Court of Appeal in MM (Malawi) and MK (Malawi)  [2018]  EWCA
       Civ 2482, the appellant came within the second category identified in
       Paposhvili v Belgium [2017] Imm AR 867 at para 183. It was clear from
       the Court of Appeal decision in MM (Malawi) that the burden of  proof
       shifted to the respondent too show the  appellant  would  not  be  at
       risk. The appellant had been in the UK since 2003 and he has no links
       any more with either Liberia or Sierra Leone.

My decision

   10. It is pertinent to set out key paragraphs  of  the  latest  Court  of
       Appeal decision on Article 3 health cases, in MM (Malawi). At paras 7-
       10. Hickinbottom LJ stated:

           "7.    In respect of article 3 medical cases,  the  decision  of
                the House of Lords in N was therefore clear, principled  and
                binding on all domestic courts and tribunals;  and  endorsed
                by the ECtHR.

             1. However, the ECtHR has  recently  revisited  the  issue.  In
                Paposhvili v Belgium [2017] Imm AR 867 at [183],  the  court
                said:

                  "The court considers  that  the  'other  very  exceptional
                  cases' within the meaning of the judgment in [N] ... which
                  may raise an issue under article 3 should be understood to
                  refer to situations involving the removal of  a  seriously
                  ill person in which substantial grounds  have  been  shown
                  for believing that he or she,  although  not  at  imminent
                  risk of dying, would face a real risk, on account  of  the
                  absence of appropriate treatment in the receiving  country
                  or the lack of access to such treatment, of being  exposed
                  to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his or her
                  state of health resulting in intense  suffering  or  to  a
                  significant reduction in life expectancy ...".

                That guidance is clearly different from - and, to an extent,
                more relaxed than - that in N.

             1. The consequences of Paposhvili for medical  cases  in  which
                there is reliance on article 3 were considered by this court
                in  AM  (Zimbabwe)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
                Department [2018] EWCA Civ 64; [2018] 1 WLR 2933,  in  which
                Sales LJ gave the lead judgment with which Patten LJ  and  I
                agreed. For the purposes of the appeals  before  us,  it  is
                unnecessary to set out Sales LJ's comprehensive analysis  in
                detail. The following, relevant to the  appeals  before  us,
                can be drawn from the case.

                    i) Despite the guidance given in Paposhvili, as a result
                    of the principle of stare decisis, i.e. the usual rules
                    of precedent in this jurisdiction, the test in N remains
                    binding on this court,  and  indeed  all  tribunals  and
                    courts in this jurisdiction, subject only to the Supreme
                    Court using its power to overrule it (see [30]).

                    ii)     Paposhvili  at  [183]  relaxes  the   test   for
                    violation of article 3 in  the  case  of  removal  of  a
                    foreign national with a medical condition (see [37]). As
                    Sales LJ put it at [38]:

                        "... [T]he boundary of  article  3  protection  has
                        been shifted from being  defined  by  imminence  of
                        death  in  the  removing  state  (even   with   the
                        treatment available there) to being defined by  the
                        imminence  (i.e.  likely  'rapid'  experience)   of
                        intense suffering or death in the receiving  state,
                        which  may  only  occur   because   of   the   non-
                        availability in that state of the  treatment  which
                        had  previously  been  available  in  the  removing
                        state."

                    iii)   However, whilst acknowledging that relaxation  of
                    the test, Sales LJ considered "it does so only to a very
                    modest extent". The article 3 threshold in medical cases
                    remains high. He said:

                        "41.   It is true  that  if  one  read  the  phrase
                        'would face a real risk ... of being exposed ... to
                        a significant  reduction  in  life  expectancy'  in
                        [183] out of context, it might be taken to indicate
                        a very wide extension of the protection of  article
                        3 in medical cases, since in very many  such  cases
                        where a foreign national is receiving treatment  at
                        a higher level of  effectiveness  in  the  removing
                        state than would  be  available  in  the  receiving
                        state (e.g. in the case  of  those  suffering  from
                        AIDS) they would be able to say they would  face  a
                        real  risk  of  a  significant  reduction  of  life
                        expectancy if they were removed. But this is not  a
                        tenable interpretation of [183] of Paposhvili, read
                        in its proper context. [N] was itself a case  where
                        removal resulted in a very significant reduction in
                        life expectancy (as was also noted in Paposhvili at
                        [178]), in which no  violation  of  article  3  was
                        found, and the Grand Chamber in Paposhvili  plainly
                        regarded that case  as  rightly  decided.  [N]  was
                        itself a Grand  Chamber  judgment,  decided  by  14
                        votes to 3. It is impossible to infer that  by  the
                        formula used  in  [183]  of  Paposhvili  the  ECtHR
                        intended to reverse the effect  of  [N].  Moreover,
                        the Grand Chamber's formulation in  [183]  requires
                        there to be a  'serious'  and  'rapid'  decline  in
                        health  resulting  in  intense  suffering  to   the
                        article 3 standard where death is not expected, and
                        it makes no sense to say in the context of analysis
                        under article 3 that a serious and rapid decline in
                        health is not a requirement where death rather than
                        intense suffering is the harm expected. In my view,
                        the only tenable interpretation of [183],  read  in
                        context, is the one given above.

                        42.    In that regard, it is also significant  that
                        even on the extreme and exceptional  facts  of  the
                        Paposhvili  case,  where  the  applicant  faced   a
                        likelihood of death within 6 months if  removed  to
                        Georgia, the Grand Chamber did not feel able to say
                        that it was clear that a  violation  of  article  3
                        would have occurred for that  reason  had  he  been
                        removed...".

                    iv)    In respect of the correct approach and burden  of
                    proof, Sales LJ said this (at [16]):

                        "It is common ground that where a foreign  national
                        seeks to rely upon article 3 as  an  answer  to  an
                        attempt  by  a  state  to  remove  him  to  another
                        country, the overall legal burden is on him to show
                        that article 3 would be infringed in  his  case  by
                        showing that that there are substantial grounds for
                        believing that he would face a real risk  of  being
                        subject to  torture  or  to  inhuman  or  degrading
                        treatment  in  that  other  country:   see,   e.g.,
                        [Soering]  at  [91],  which  is  reflected  in  the
                        formulations in Paposhvili at [173] and [183].  ...
                        In  Paposhvili,  at  [186]-[187]  ...,  the   Grand
                        Chamber of the ECtHR has given guidance how he  may
                        achieve that, by raising  a  prima  facie  case  of
                        infringement of  article  3  which  then  casts  an
                        evidential burden onto the defending state which is
                        seeking to expel him."

             1. In the two cases before us, the Applicants and  Appellant  -
                rightly - concede that (i) the test for  article  3  medical
                cases set out in N as explained in AM (Zimbabwe) is  binding
                on this court, and (ii) none of them is able to satisfy that
                test. However, they submit that, unlike the individual cases
                in AM (Zimbabwe), they each satisfy the test in  Paposhvili;
                and this court, whilst bound to refuse their appeals, should
                give permission to appeal to the  Supreme  Court  to  enable
                that court to reconsider N in the light of Paposhvili."

   11. Based on the thrust of the submissions I heard, it is  common  ground
       between the parties that the appellant's  appeal  rests  entirely  or
       predominantly on whether or not he can succeed on Article 3 grounds.

   12. The issue of the appellant's nationality remains somewhat unresolved.
        However, at the hearing before Judge Oliver, the Presenting  Officer
       stated that, absent verified evidence to the contrary, the  appellant
       would be returned to Liberia if the appeal failed and Mr Habtermarian
       took the view that  it  made  little  difference  which  of  the  two
       countries he was returned to.  The  judge  proceeded,  therefore,  to
       assess the Article 3 risk that the appellant might face by  reference
       to both countries. No issue  was  taken  with  this  approach  by  Mr
       Habtermariam and  Ms  Everett  accepted  that  to  consider  risk  in
       relation to both countries, ensured fairness to the appellant. Whilst
       the issue of the appellant's nationality remains  unresolved,  it  is
       reasonably likely that he is either a national of Liberia  or  Sierra
       Leone or a national of both. There is no evidential basis to indicate
       that  he  is  stateless.  Nor  is  there  any  evidential  basis  for
       concluding that if the decision to remove the appellant is confirmed,
       that he would be returned to either country undocumented.

   13. I am not persuaded that  the  appellant  can  succeed  on  Article  3
       grounds.

   14. As regards the report from Ms Huguette Monekosso, it is common ground
       that it accurately describes the state of mental health facilities in
       both Liberia and Sierra Leone. I attach considerable weight to it  in
       that connection. However, her  report  also  contains  a  significant
       amount of speculation about the likely circumstances of the appellant
       on  return,  positing  for  example  that  he   would   be   returned
       undocumented or that he is in fact a stateless person.

   15. Mr Habtermariam does not seek to argue  that  if  the  appellant  has
       access to clozapine in both countries he would  still  be  unable  to
       meet the high threshold established by  the  case  law.  The  medical
       evidence relating to the appellant's treatment in  the  UK  does  not
       show that there has been any significant problem with  the  appellant
       taking the drugs that have been prescribed to him.

   16. The report from Ms Monekosso is consistent with the respondent's  own
       assessment that there are mental health facilities in both countries,
       albeit they are very limited and overstretched. On the basis  of  the
       evidence taken as a whole, I do not consider that it can be said that
       the appellant would be unable to access such facilities.

   17. As regards the issue of the availability of clozapine, there  is  not
       now any dispute about the lack  of  clozapine  as  a  drug  used  for
       treatment by mental health facilities  in  both  Liberia  and  Sierra
       Leone.

   18. Does this mean that the appellant's case  must  be  assessed  on  the
       basis that he will not  have  clozapine  available  as  a  drug  upon
       removal to either of these countries?

   19. I am just persuaded that that is the position. It cannot be  excluded
       that the appellant would be  able  to  receive  financial  help  from
       friends in the UK designed to have this drug sent to him  in  one  or
       other of these countries. I regard it as purely  speculation  on  the
       part of  Ms  Monekosso  to  suggest  that  the  result  of  any  such
       arrangement would be that the appellant would end up with counterfeit
       drugs; she does not  evidence  her  assertion  to  that  effect.  The
       question I have to ask however, is whether it  is  reasonably  likely
       that such arrangements would  be  available  to  this  appellant.  Dr
       Perry's report notes that at some point in his period of stay in  the
       UK "family member supported [him] to move to London." She also refers
       to a medical note relating to February 2007 which records an incident
       previous to 2007 when a "family friend" reported that he was sexually
       inappropriate to her daughter. A letter from a health project worker,
       Jamie Grant, dated June 2015 refers to him working with the appellant
       to contact family  friends.   At  the  same  time,  the  respondent's
       position in her refusal decision is that the appellant "was known  to
       be entirely without  family  members"  (see  para  44).  Further,  Ms
       Everett put her submission  regarding  the  potential  for  financial
       support  from  family  and  friends  in  the  UK  at  the  level   of
       possibility, rather than real possibility. Taking the evidence  as  a
       whole, I consider it would be unsafe to decide the case on the  basis
       that the appellant  would  have  financial  support  from  family  or
       friends in the UK to help obtain clozapine over the internet if he is
       removed.

   20. It remains to consider whether the lack of availability of  clozapine
       suffices to establish that the appellant meets the high threshold set
       in Article 3 medical cases.

   21. Applying the principles set out by the Court of Appeal in recent case
       law, I am not persuaded that its absence would result in  a  serious,
       rapid and irreversible decline in the  appellant's  state  of  health
       resulting in intense suffering. His mental illness, that of  paranoid
       schizophrenia, is long-standing and even though it has only  improved
       through treatment involving clozapine, his medical history  does  not
       indicate that when he was treated by other antipsychotic  drugs  this
       caused a serious, rapid and irreversible  decline  in  his  state  of
       health. The medical evidence given most recently by Dr  Perry  states
       that if he faces treatment  without  clozapine  his  condition  would
       deteriorate, but does not assert that the level  and  extent  of  the
       deterioration would be such as to be serious, rapid and irreversible.

   22. As regards the risk of suicide, Dr Perry's report states, echoing  an
       earlier report from Dr Cristina Posada dated May 2015, that from  his
       notes she could not see any history of suicide attempts or violence.

   23. The report from Ms Monekosso states that in both Liberia  and  Sierra
       Leone the appellant would face stigmatisation and ostracism. However,
       although the appellant has stated that both his parents are dead  and
       although he has not been living in either  Liberia  or  Sierra  Leone
       since 2003, he has not sought to claim that he has no other  extended
       family members in these countries who might reasonably be expected to
       offer him some support and assistance.  Against  that  background,  I
       consider it speculative to assert (as  does  Ms  Monekosso)  that  he
       would not be able to exist without falling into a serious  and  rapid
       spiral of self-neglect and poor living conditions.

   24. I have sympathy with  the  appellant's  plight.  He  suffers  from  a
       serious mental health condition. However, the law I have to apply has
       set a high threshold for success in such cases and  the  evidence  in
       the appellant's case falls short of crossing that threshold.

   25. For completeness, I would point out that Mr Habtemariam's  submission
       regarding the burden of proof does not square with what was stated by
       Sales LJ in AM (Zimbabwe). It is clear from that decision that in  an
       Article 3 health case the appellant has the legal burden  overall  of
       proving that there are substantial grounds  for  believing  he  would
       face a real risk  of  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3.  Once  the
       appellant has established a prima facie case, the  evidential  burden
       shifts to the respondent. Taking account of the  appellant's  initial
       claim and the respondent's response (which  relied,  inter  alia,  on
       background country information) I  fail  to  see  that  the  position
       before me now is  one  where  the  respondent  bears  any  particular
       evidential burden; the principal focus in this appeal  has  not  been
       establishment of the facts but evaluation of the legal principles  to
       be applied to them.  Even if the respondent does bear the  evidential
       burden, I am satisfied that on my assessment above she has discharged
       that burden.

   26. Although I was not addressed (except glancingly) regarding Article 8,
       I state for the sake of completeness that I consider the  appellant's
       to be a case where what was said by Laws LJ in GS (India) v Secretary
       of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ  40  has  particular
       resonance. The threshold to succeed in a health case under Article  8
       is also high and neither the appellant's length of stay in the UK nor
       the circumstances of his medical history  or  his  current  treatment
       regime and  supported  24-hour  accommodation  suffice  to  establish
       private life circumstances that outweigh the public interest  in  the
       maintenance of immigration control so as to require  the  appellant's
       removal.

   27. To summarise:

       The decision of the First tier Tribunal judge has  already  been  set
       aside for material error of law.

       The decision I re-make is to dismiss the appellant's appeal.

Direction regarding anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 10 December 2018

     [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

