
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18168/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (by remote video means)  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th February 2021                          |On 1st March 2021             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                            Andrea blanche cyrus
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Toora of Counsel, instructed by Sabz Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using Skype.   There
    were no audio or technical difficulties during the hearing.  A face  to
    face hearing was not held to take precautions  against  the  spread  of
    Covid-19 and as all issues could be determined by  remote  means.   The
    file contained the documents in paper format.

 2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Obhi promulgated on 30 January 2020, in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision  to  refuse  her  human  rights
    claim dated 23 October 2019 was dismissed.

 3. The Appellant is a national of Grenada, born on 10  January  1978,  who
    came to the United Kingdom with entry clearance as a visitor valid from
    24 November 2018 to 24 May 2019.   On  27  March  2019,  the  Appellant
    applied for leave to remain as a visitor,  which  was  refused  by  the
    Respondent on 10 April 2019.  The Appellant then applied for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of private and family  lie  on  22  May  2019,  the
    refusal of which is the subject of this appeal.  The application was on
    the basis that the Appellant lived with her brother and his family (his
    wife and two children, born 2008 and 2016)  assisting  the  family  and
    looking after the children in particular whilst her sister-in-law  (who
    suffers from mental health problems) was in hospital and then following
    her discharge as  additional  support  continued  to  be  needed.   The
    Appellant's brother was  in  employment  and  the  Appellant  therefore
    supported the family whilst he  was  at  work,  which  enabled  him  to
    continue in employment.

 4. The Respondent refused the application on 23  October  2019  the  basis
    that the Appellant  did  not  meet  any  of  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules for a grant of  leave  to  remain  (with  no  parent,
    partner or dependent children  in  the  United  Kingdom)  and  with  no
    insurmountable obstacles to her reintegration in Grenada where she  had
    spent the  majority  of  her  life  and  had  family.   The  Respondent
    considered whether there were any exceptional circumstances to  warrant
    a grant of leave to remain, considering in particular the circumstances
    of the Appellant's brother and his family but  found  that  there  were
    none.  The Respondent considered that it was in the best  interests  of
    the children to remain with their parents and continue in education  in
    the  United  Kingdom.   The  Appellant's  sister-in-law  was  receiving
    appropriate medical treatment in the United Kingdom  and  there  was  a
    lack of evidence that alternative provision for that  provided  by  the
    Appellant was not available.

 5. Judge Obhi dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 30 January
    2020 on all grounds, the detailed reasons for which I return to below.

The appeal

 6. The Appellant, in her written grounds of appeal set out the  following.
    There are three points described  as  'Brief  Grounds'  that  "(a)  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law; (b) insofar the discretion
    has  not  been  exercised  properly  at  all;  (c)  the  decision   was
    incompatible with the Appellant's rights under Article 8 ECHR.".  It is
    of note at this stage that these  appear  to  refer  back  to  the  old
    version of grounds of appeal against a decision of  the  Respondent  in
    section 84 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (amended
    many years ago) rather than even attempting to identify an error of law
    in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

 7. What follows in the  grounds  of  appeal  are  described  as  'Detailed
    Grounds' which do not directly correlate to the brief  grounds  (or  at
    all).  These are that the First-tier Tribunal  has  erred  by  (i)  not
    taking into account the  Appellant's  extensive  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom; (ii) not attaching sufficient weight to the Appellant's
    strong ties with family and friends, that she is not a  burden  on  the
    state, is a valued member of society and has become accustomed to  life
    in the United Kingdom;  (iii)  not  applying  the  correct  test  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights,  in  particular
    that the First-tier Tribunal failed to take into account the inevitable
    establishment of family and private life in the United Kingdom  or  the
    immense difficulties her nieces would face  if  she  were  returned  to
    Grenada; and (iv) failing to take into account the  best  interests  of
    the children pursuant to section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009.

 8. One particular paragraph in the grounds is relevant  to  the  grant  of
    permission, which states as follows:

         "6. The IJ has failed to take into account sufficiently the immense
         difficulties the children are  most  likely  to  face  if  she  was
         removed from the UK and made to return to Grenada.  The  children's
         mother is trying to deal with her mental health  problems  and  the
         father needs to work to provide for the family which has  made  the
         Appellant's stay in the UK vital for the welfare of the children."

 9. The First-tier Tribunal refused permission to appeal on 13 May 2020  on
    the basis that there were no arguable errors of law  in  the  decision.
    Identical grounds of appeal were then put to the Upper  Tribunal  in  a
    further  application.   The  Upper  Tribunal  granted  permission,  the
    reasons for which need to be set out in full:

         "1. The grounds of appeal are vague and make unnecessary  reference
         to case-law.  However, on what  might  be  a  generous  reading  of
         paragraph 6 of the grounds, it is arguable  that  the  judge  might
         have failed to undertake her Article  8  assessment  on  a  correct
         footing.

         2. At the heart of the Appellant's case was  the  position  of  her
         sister-in-law's  serious  mental  health  condition  and  the  best
         interests/welfare of the two children.  These  issues  fell  to  be
         considered on the evidence, such as it  was,  as  at  the  date  of
         hearing and in the context of a human rights claim having been made
         by the Appellant and then refused by the Respondent.

         3. It is arguable that the Judge engaged in undue speculation as to
         what the Local Authority may or may not do once the  Appellant  was
         no longer in the  United  Kingdom,  rather  than  focusing  on  the
         immediate impact of the family unit (in  particular  the  children)
         were a departure to take place:  see  [29],  [34],  and  [38].   In
         addition, it is arguable that the Judge placed too much emphasis on
         the fact that the Appellant's application to the Respondent had not
         been for a short extension of her leave as  a  visitor.   [24]  and
         [38] indicate that if such an application had been made, the  Judge
         may have viewed the proportionality  assessment  differently.   The
         point here is that on appeal the focus of the decision must be  the
         lawfulness of the Respondent's refusal of the human  rights  claim.
         Any leave to remain conferred as a result of a successful appeal is
         a matter for the Respondent (subject to her policy guidance).   The
         question of the appropriate period of leave to remain  is  arguably
         not, as a general matter, a relevant consideration for a Judge."

10. In response to the grant of permission, the Respondent filed a rule  24
    notice on 1 September 2020, in  which  the  appeal  was  resisted.   In
    essence, the grounds relied upon by the Appellant  in  her  application
    for permission to appeal  were  no  more  than  disagreement  with  the
    findings made; the First-tier Tribunal having taken  into  account  all
    relevant matters as to the best interests of the  children  and  having
    found family life in the United Kingdom, but ultimately, it was open to
    the First-tier Tribunal to conclude that the Respondent's decision  was
    not a disproportionate  interference  with  the  Appellant's  right  to
    respect for private and family life.

11. The Respondent further raised concerns  about  the  additional  matters
    raised by the Upper Tribunal in the grant of permission which were  not
    in accordance with the guidance in AZ (error of law: jurisdiction;  PTA
    practice) Iran [2018] UKUT 00245 (IAC).  These focused  on  two  points
    which were not arguable errors of law and ones which were not raised in
    the grounds of appeal lodged, nor did they come even close  to  raising
    these particular points.  There is  further  nothing  to  suggest  that
    these were matters of general importance which needed to be addressed.

12. The Respondent submitted that what was set out in the grounds of appeal
    amounted only to disagreement with the weight to be afforded to  family
    life in the proportionality assessment in circumstances where weight is
    a matter for the Judge in the absence of  any  arguable  irrationality.
    Reliance is also placed on the decision in Durueke  (PTA:  AZ  applied,
    proper approach) [2019] UKUT 00197 (IAC).

13. On behalf of the Appellant, a skeleton argument was submitted prior  to
    the hearing which identified the procedural issue raised in the rule 24
    response and identified the two substantive  issues  as;  (i)  did  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge engage in undue speculation as  to  what  the
    Local Authority may or may not do once the Appellant was no  longer  in
    the UK, rather than focusing on the immediate impact of the family unit
    were a departure to take place; and (ii) did  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge place  too  much  emphasis  on  the  fact  that  the  Appellant's
    application to the Respondent had not been for a short extension of her
    leave as a visitor, and if so, whether the  proportionality  assessment
    would have been viewed differently.

14. The skeleton argument proceeds to rely in more  detail  only  on  these
    issues and made no reference at all to the written grounds  of  appeal.
    As to the grant of permission, it was  submitted  that  the  Respondent
    assumed that the Judge granting permission did not  have  the  relevant
    guidance in AZ available, nor considered whether the grounds identified
    had a strong  prospect  of  success.   The  failure  to  make  explicit
    reference to AZ was not an error of law.   Further,  it  was  submitted
    that the Judge expressly recognised the points to be arguable,  meaning
    that there were in  fact  arguable  errors  of  law  which  had  strong
    prospects of success due to their nature and impact on the  outcome  of
    the appeal, otherwise permission would not have been granted.

15. On the first issue identified, the Appellant submitted that the  First-
    tier Tribunal prejudiced her  own  decision  making  and  fettered  her
    discretion by stating that it was for the local  authority  to  make  a
    determination as to whether the Appellant was the  only  family  member
    able to take care of the children whereas the  Judge  was  required  to
    consider proportionality on the evidence but  failed  to  do  so.   The
    possibility  of  a  further  local  authority  assessment  was  not   a
    sufficient reason upon which to dismiss the appeal, particularly as the
    Respondent could consider the  circumstances  of  the  family  on  each
    application for further leave to remain.

16. Further, the First-tier Tribunal's consideration of any local authority
    intervention assumed that this would only result in a  positive  impact
    for the family, without any consideration of the other possibility; nor
    was there any consideration of the unnecessary expenditure  of  finance
    and resources by the local authority in the absence of the Appellant.

17. The Appellant submits that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  give
    sufficient weight to the evidence of the family  support  worker,  with
    the decision underplaying the serious matters identified.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal also underplayed  the  significance  of  the  Appellant's
    brother's need  to  continue  in  employment  to  avoid  further  local
    authority intervention and continue to provide for his  family.   There
    was  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal   that   without   the
    Appellant's assistance, her brother would have lost  his  job  and  the
    family would be unable to financially support themselves.  In addition,
    it is submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  over  generalised  the
    potential practical  difficulties  for  the  family  if  the  Appellant
    returned to Grenada without considering the specifics of her  brother's
    employment and expenditure (of which there was  some  evidence  in  his
    bank statements which showed a precarious financial position).

18. On the second issue identified, the Appellant submits that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal considered the length of leave to remain applied for as a
    significant factor in the proportionality assessment with the merits of
    the appeal being conditional, or at least influenced by this  and  most
    likely, if this was not  taken  into  account,  it  can  reasonably  be
    concluded that the appeal would have been allowed under Article 8.

19. At the oral hearing, both sides made submissions in accordance with the
    skeleton argument and rule  24  response;  expanding  on  the  same  as
    follows.  Mr Toora confirmed that  none  of  the  original  grounds  of
    appeal as drafted were relied upon by the Appellant.

20. In relation to the grant of permission,  Mr  Toora  accepted  that  the
    grant of permission could only have been on grounds which were Robinson
    obvious and with  strong  prospects  of  success.   He  submitted  that
    although this was not expressly identified in the grant of  permission,
    when one looks at the substance of the grounds, the test is  satisfied.
    The issue before the First-tier Tribunal  was  categorised  as  whether
    there were exceptional circumstances resulting in  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences on the Appellant's family  caused  by  her  removal.   The
    focus was too much on speculation as to  further  support  rather  than
    actual impact of  removal,  which  was  in  any  event  considered  too
    narrowly in relation to the Appellant's brother's working  pattern  and
    failed to consider the implications of him losing his employment, which
    would affect the whole family.  Mr Toora  accepted  that  on  the  last
    occasion, the local authority had assessed him as being  able  to  look
    after the children (the evidence about which had not been submitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal) and there was no evidence  as  to  what  would
    happen if any further assessment was undertaken.

21. Mr Toora accepted that it would be a  relevant  consideration  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal whether any adverse impact on the family  from  the
    Appellant's removal would be short or long term, but the nature of  the
    application or period sought in it was not a relevant consideration and
    it was submitted that this influenced the decision.   The  issue  of  a
    grant of  leave  and  the  period  of  any  grant  is  solely  for  the
    Respondent.

22. On behalf of the Respondent, Ms Everett reiterated  that  this  was  an
    erroneous grant of  permission  as  it  was  not  a  clear  case  of  a
    persuasive ground of appeal, nor anything to  suggest  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal Judge approached the application and grant in the right manner
    in accordance with AZ or Durueke.

23. As to the substance of those two new matters, Ms  Everett  acknowledged
    that certain parts of the  decision  may  be  unduly  speculative,  for
    example as to local authority intervention, but this did not affect het
    safety of the decision.  The only real issue in this case of merit  was
    the impact on the children of the Appellant's  removal,  it  not  being
    claimed that there would be any adverse impact at all on the  Appellant
    herself.  The First-tier Tribunal was satisfied on  the  evidence  that
    the best interests of the children could be met, particularly where the
    case was presented on the basis of practical assistance being given  by
    the Appellant to the family rather than any evidence of any significant
    emotional attachment.  There was no evidence of the children  being  at
    risk and in the context of the case presented, it was relevant for  the
    First-tier Tribunal to consider alternative  support  for  the  family.
    The risk to the Appellant's brother's employment was not sufficient  to
    tip the balance in this case.

24. Ms Everett also accepted that the First-tier  Tribunal's  consideration
    of the period of leave applied for was irrelevant,  but  this  did  not
    relate to whether the  Appellant's  removal  would  have  unjustifiably
    harsh consequences on the children, nor overall on the  proportionality
    balancing exercise undertaken.  This did not amount to a material error
    of law.

Findings and reasons

 1. The preliminary issue in this appeal is as to the grounds of appeal and
    nature of the grant of permission.  As Mr Toora confirmed at  the  oral
    hearing, none of the grounds of appeal as drafted in the application to
    the Upper Tribunal are pursued by the Appellant and  rightly  so.   The
    brief grounds are wholly inept and the detailed grounds not  only  fail
    to identify a material error of law but are unarguable (as shown by the
    fact that none were pursued).  For example,  there  was  little  or  no
    evidence of any private life established by the Appellant in the United
    Kingdom and it is clear that no such case was made on her behalf  which
    relied almost entirely on the impact of her removal on her brother  and
    his family in the United Kingdom.  Contrary to the grounds  of  appeal,
    the First-tier Tribunal found that family  life  had  been  established
    here and made  express  findings  as  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children.  The suggestion of the wrong test  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights  was  not  particularised  and  the
    reference to what is now fairly old case law  on  the  changes  to  the
    Immigration Rules  around  2012  was  not  of  any  assistance  to  the
    Appellant's case.  As noted in the grant  of  permission,  the  grounds
    were vague with unnecessary reference to case-law and  overall,  failed
    to raise anything of arguable merit.

 2. The grant of permission relies on a generous reading of paragraph 6  of
    the grounds (which refers to insufficient weight  being  given  to  the
    difficulties the children are likely  to  face  if  the  Appellant  was
    removed from the  United  Kingdom  given  the  mother's  mental  health
    difficulties and father's employment) that it  was  arguable  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal might  have  failed  to  undertake  the  Article  8
    assessment on  a  correct  footing.   There  is  however  no  immediate
    identification of what that arguable incorrect footing was  or  whether
    it was anything identified  specifically  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.
    Paragraph 2 of the grant of permission does no more than summarise  the
    case and the task of the First-tier Tribunal in the most generic terms,
    adding nothing of substance to the reasons for the grant of permission.

 3. In paragraph 3 of the grant of permission, two matters are raised which
    are not even indirectly referred to in the grounds of appeal  and  were
    not expressly relied upon by the Appellant.   These  are  that  it  was
    arguable that the Judge engaged in undue speculation  as  to  what  the
    local authority may do if the Appellant left the UK and  arguable  that
    the Judge placed too much emphasis on the nature of the application (in
    terms of duration of stay sought).

 4. In AZ, so far as relevant, to this appeal, the Upper Tribunal stated:


         (3)  Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal should  be  granted
            on  a  ground  that  was  not  advanced  by  an  applicant  for
            permission, only if:
            (a)   the judge is satisfied that the  ground  he  or  she  has
                identified is one which has a strong prospect of success:
                (i)    for the original appellant; or
                (ii)   for the Secretary of State, where the ground  relates
                    to a decision which, if undisturbed,  would  breach  the
                    United Kingdom's international Treaty obligations; or
            (b)   (possibly) the ground relates  to  an  issue  of  general
                importance, which the Upper Tribunal needs to address.

 5. In Durueke, the Upper Tribunal added the following guidance:

         i) In reaching a decision whether to grant permission to appeal to
            the Upper Tribunal on a point that has not been raised  by  the
            parties but which a judge considering such an  application  for
            permission considers is arguably a Robinson  obvious  point  or
            other point falling within para 3 of the head-note in AZ (error
            of law: jurisdiction; PTA  practice)  Iran  [2018]  UKUT  00245
            (IAC),  the  evidence  necessary  to  establish  the  point  in
            question must be apparent from the grounds  of  appeal  to  the
            Upper Tribunal (whether or not the appellant is represented  at
            the time) and/or the decision of  the  judge  who  decided  the
            appeal and/or the  documents  on  file.  The  permission  judge
            should not make any assumptions that such evidence  was  before
            the judge who decided the appeal. Furthermore, if permission is
            granted on a ground that has not been raised by the parties, it
            is good practice and a useful aid  in  the  exercise  of  self-
            restraint for the permission judge to indicate which aspect  of
            head-note 3 of AZ applies.

        ii) Permission should only be granted on the basis that  the  judge
            who decided the appeal gave insufficient weight to a particular
            aspect of the case if  it  can  properly  be  said  that  as  a
            consequence the judge who decided the appeal has arguably  made
            an irrational decision. As the Court of Appeal said at para  18
            of Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 412, it is necessary to guard
            against the temptation to characterise as errors  of  law  what
            are in truth no more than disagreements about the weight to  be
            given to different  factors,  particularly  if  the  judge  who
            decided the appeal had the advantage of hearing oral evidence.

       iii) Particular care should be taken before granting  permission  on
            the ground that the  judge  who  decided  the  appeal  did  not
            "sufficiently  consider"  or  "sufficiently  analyse"   certain
            evidence or certain aspects of a case.  Such  complaints  often
            turn out to be mere disagreements with  the  reasoning  of  the
            judge who decided the appeal because the  implication  is  that
            the evidence or point in question was considered by  the  judge
            who decided the appeal but not to the  extent  desired  by  the
            author of the grounds or the judge considering the  application
            for permission. Permission should usually only  be  granted  on
            such grounds if it is  possible  to  state  precisely  how  the
            assessment of the judge who  decided  the  appeal  is  arguably
            lacking and why this is arguably material.

25. The Judge granting permission has not made any reference to AZ  nor  as
    to which of the criteria are applied, which whilst in itself is not  an
    error of law, is contrary to good practice.   In  this  case  there  is
    nothing to indicate either way whether the Judge  had  considered  this
    criteria, nor on what basis the grant of permission was being  made  in
    relation to paragraph 3 of the decision.  There is nothing  to  suggest
    that either of these points were Robinson obvious errors of law (in  my
    view they are not); nor that the points raised were considered to  have
    strong prospects of success.  To  the  contrary,  the  wording  of  the
    decision refers only to  arguability  of  the  points  raised  with  no
    indication of those points having a strong prospect of success.  It can
    not be inferred from the grant of permission, for  which  the  test  is
    only that there is an arguable error of law; that  the  Judge  granting
    permission concluded that there were strong  prospects  of  success  on
    either ground.

26. Further, at its absolute highest, paragraph 6 of the grounds, expressly
    relied upon with a generous reading in the grant  of  permission,  only
    goes  to  the  weight  attached  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  the
    difficulties the children are  likely  to  face  if  the  Appellant  is
    removed and an assertion that her  remaining  here  is  vital  for  the
    welfare of the children.  The two distinct and separate  points  raised
    in paragraph 3 of the grant of  permission  refer  in  part,  to  undue
    speculation on a particular point and in part,  to  the  weight  to  be
    attached to the nature of  the  application  made  and/or  taking  into
    account an irrelevant consideration.  In relation to the weight  to  be
    attached to matters, permission  should  only  be  granted  if  it  can
    properly be said that as a consequence the Judge has made an irrational
    decision.  There is  no  such  suggestion  of  this  in  the  grant  of
    permission, nor does the Appellant rely on any aspect of the First-tier
    Tribunal's decision being even arguably irrational.  These matters  all
    in essence are ones which relate to the consideration and  analysis  of
    certain matters and the weight to be  attached  to  them,  about  which
    significant caution was expressed  in  Durueke,  running  the  risk  of
    amounting to no more than disagreement with the decision.

27. On its face, the grant of permission on points not  raised  at  all  or
    relied upon by the Appellant in the grounds of appeal falls  far  short
    of meeting the criteria in AZ, as  explained  further  in  Durueke  and
    therefore is an erroneous grant of permission.  This is particularly so
    given that it was made by reference to a generous reading of  paragraph
    6 which at its highest, itself only relies  on  disagreement  with  the
    weight to be attached to certain matters  and  goes  on  to  raise  two
    distinct matters which also focus primarily on the  way  in  which  the
    First-tier Tribunal has considered matters and the weight  attached  to
    them without any arguable irrationality.

28. On behalf of the Appellant, it was submitted that although the relevant
    points for a grant of permission on grounds not raised by the Appellant
    were absent on the face of the grant; that as a  matter  of  substance,
    the points had strong prospects of success.  It was on this basis  that
    full argument was heard on both new points, being the only grounds that
    the Appellant pursued at the hearing.  For the reasons set out below, I
    am not persuaded that either point had a  strong  prospect  of  success
    (although they were, as the Judge granting permission decided, at least
    arguable) and certainly not a strong prospect on the basis of  anything
    contained in the grounds or  on  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Nor do I find  that  in  any  event,  in  substance,  either
    amounted to a material error of law.

29. The first point is as to the  First-tier  Tribunal's  consideration  of
    possible alternative support to the Appellant's brother and his  family
    and more specifically, whether there was undue speculation as  to  what
    the local authority may or may not do.  In consideration of this, it is
    necessary  to  set  out  what  the  First-tier  Tribunal  said  in  the
    paragraphs referred to in the grant of permission about this, which was
    as follows:

         "29. In my view, this application is misconceived.  If  the  family
         are unable to care for the  children  then  they  should  seek  the
         assistance  of  the  local  authority.   If  the  local   authority
         determine that the only family member who is able to care  for  the
         children is the appellant, they will decide whether she  cares  for
         them in the UK or Grenada, without such a  detailed  assessment  of
         all the family's circumstances it is not appropriate for me to find
         the children will be at risk if she returns to Grenada.  I am  told
         that there was a family group meeting but that the members  of  the
         maternal family were supportive; however, it is not known what they
         were asked to do.  I note that the children have  a  maternal  aunt
         and maternal grandmother living very close to them.  The  appellant
         is a foreign national who does not have a valid right to remain  in
         the UK, therefore it is not appropriate to rely on her unless there
         is no other option and in that case, there needs to be  a  detailed
         assessment by the local authority of the family situation.  I  note
         that there is a letter from the maternal grandmother  acknowledging
         the care provided by the appellant.

         ...

         34. My primary consideration is the welfare of the children in this
         case.  I am satisfied that they are under the radar  of  the  local
         authority.  I am further satisfied that they are  not  at  risk  of
         harm, but may be children in need under the Children Act, in  which
         case the local authority owes  them  a  duty  of  care  to  provide
         sufficient services to enable them to be cared  for  safely  within
         their own homes.  I am  further  satisfied  that  if  that  is  not
         possible there are duties upon  the  local  authority  to  consider
         whether they can be cared for by, or  with  the  support  of  other
         family members.  If  the  local  authority  determines  that  their
         welfare is best met by them living with the  appellant  or  another
         member of the family, the local authority will carry out a detailed
         assessment of whether that should be in the UK or in Grenada.  I am
         told that the father has been assessed and the local authority have
         decided that the children are safe in his care and have not invoked
         their powers under Part IV of the Children Act 1989.

         ...

         38. As I have stated at the outset of this decision, it seems to me
         that  the  appellant  has  made  the  wrong  application   to   the
         respondent.  This family needs to find permanent solutions  to  the
         crisis it found itself in.   All  the  evidence  suggested  that  a
         further short period would enable the family to  sort  itself  out.
         However, the application made by  the  appellant  did  not  reflect
         that."

30. It is also necessary to consider the context of the application and  in
    particular that there is no particular or significant reliance  by  the
    Appellant in her own right to respect for private and family life;  nor
    that there was any suggestion her removal to  Grenada  would  have  any
    specific adverse impact on her.  It was  expressly  accepted  that  she
    could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules for a grant of
    leave to remain on private or family life grounds.  The  focus  of  the
    appeal and all of the evidence was  directed  towards  the  Appellant's
    support to family in the United Kingdom and the impact of  her  removal
    on them.

31. In relation specifically to the evidence that was before the First-tier
    Tribunal, the majority of this was as to the practical assistance  that
    the Appellant had given her family here, both in supporting her sister-
    in-law with taking medication and in getting the children to  and  from
    school, feeding them  and  generally  looking  after  them  whilst  her
    brother was at work.  There are  references  in  the  evidence  to  the
    Appellant having provided invaluable support to the family and  in  her
    presence helping with the separation anxiety suffered  by  one  of  the
    children (with no detail or  medical  evidence  in  support  of  this).
    However, there was little, if any evidence as to  emotional  attachment
    between the  Appellant  and  the  children  (as  opposed  to  practical
    support) nor as to the need for the Appellant personally to be the  one
    providing additional support to the family.

32. There was also a lack of evidence before the First-tier Tribunal as  to
    what the potential impact of the Appellant's removal would  be  on  the
    family or the children specifically, beyond an inference  of  what  the
    withdrawal of practical support may mean.  The only matter referred  to
    specifically was that the Appellant's brother's employment was at  risk
    if the Appellant were removed, but this appears to be on the assumption
    that there would be no alternative childcare or  flexibility  available
    in working hours, without any evidence of the same.  It was also on the
    assumption that without the Appellant's brother's employment the family
    would  not  be  able  to  financially  maintain  themselves.    Counsel
    submitted that the family's finances  were  precarious  based  on  bank
    statements, however there  was  also  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal of not insignificant savings held by the Appellant's  brother.
    In any event, the  First-tier  Tribunal  expressly  took  into  account
    potential difficulties with employment and gave appropriate  weight  to
    the same.  At its highest, the Appellant submitted that  this  was  not
    considered broadly enough nor sufficient weight  attached  to  it,  but
    there is no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's approach to this,
    it amounts to no more than disagreement.  The weight to be attached  to
    this, on very  limited  evidence,  was  a  matter  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

33. In circumstances where the Article 8 claim was predicated solely on the
    needs  and  best  interests  of  other  family  members,   a   relevant
    consideration for the First-tier Tribunal was as to what, if any  other
    support the family had or could have available to it,  and/or  why  the
    support given by this Appellant (as opposed to another  family  members
    or the local authority) was needed.  There was an almost complete  lack
    of evidence before the First-tier Tribunal as to this.  As referred  to
    in the decision, there were other family members living locally, but no
    evidence of what they had been asked to do to assist or what they could
    do and there had been a previous  assessment  by  the  local  authority
    concluding that the Appellant's brother was capable of caring  for  the
    children and they were not children in need.

34. In all of these circumstances, it was a relevant consideration for  the
    First-tier Tribunal to take into account what, if any support there may
    be for the family in the Appellant's absence, including from the  local
    authority.  It is trite that the local authority has responsibility for
    children in need and/or at risk but in this case, there were previously
    no concerns but further assessment could be sought.  Although the First-
    tier Tribunal's decision descends into arguably unnecessary  detail  as
    to the local authority's potential responsibility in this  case,  I  do
    not find any error of law of  this  material  to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.  In the context of the evidence that was (and was  not)  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and  the  way  this  case  was  presented,  the
    possibility of alternative support and/or assessment of  the  need  for
    this Appellant personally to be the person  providing  support  to  the
    family was a relevant consideration for the First-tier Tribunal to take
    into account.  The weight to be attached to this factor  was  a  matter
    for the First-tier Tribunal and there is nothing arguably irrational in
    the consideration of this.

35. On the second  point,  the  nature  of  the  application  made  by  the
    Appellant, the First-tier Tribunal set out  at  the  beginning  of  its
    findings the basis of its assessment in paragraph 24 as follows:

         "24. The appellant came to the UK as a visitor.  She knew when  she
         came that she could only remain in the UK for a short  period.   In
         her statement and in her oral evidence to me she said that she  did
         not intend to remain in the UK and that she needed about a year  to
         assist her brother.  However, the application which  the  applicant
         has made is not for a further short extension to her visit visa but
         permission to remain for a longer period (10 years initially) which
         suggests that she intends to move indefinitely to the UK and it  is
         on that basis that I will consider her appeal before me.  Had  this
         been an application for a short extension of a visit visa, for 6-12
         months the circumstances would have been different."

36. I read this paragraph, in the context of the remainder of the  decision
    as a whole, to highlight the discrepancy between the Appellant's  claim
    (and at least some of the supporting evidence of the  need  for  short-
    term assistance to the family of around 6 months) of needing to  remain
    to provide  relatively  short-term  support  for  her  family  and  her
    application being for a much longer period.  This point  is  reiterated
    in paragraph 38 of the decision (already quoted above) which highlights
    the need for the family to find a long-term solution for the assistance
    needed.  The discrepancy is essentially relied upon  to  undermine  the
    nature of the claim and the evidence relied upon relating only to short-
    term need.

37. Whilst the nature and period of any leave to remain granted is a matter
    for the Respondent, not the First-tier Tribunal, whether or  not  leave
    is sought for a relatively short or a longer period is relevant to  the
    assessment of the best interests of the  children  and  the  Article  8
    rights of all family members as  to  whether  the  Appellant's  removal
    would have a short or long-term adverse impact.   Again,  however,  the
    difficulty for the Appellant is that there was a  significant  lack  of
    evidence of the likely impact on the children and wider family  of  the
    Appellant's removal even in the short-term,  let  alone  the  long-term
    period applied for.

38. The reference at the end of paragraph 38  to  the  circumstances  being
    different is  not  read  as  any  indication  of  the  outcome  of  the
    proportionality  assessment  being  different,  just  that  the  family
    circumstances in the round may be different.

39. Although the period of leave which the  Respondent  may  grant  if  the
    appeal was successful  on  human  rights  grounds  is  not  a  relevant
    consideration to the question of whether the Appellant's removal  would
    be a disproportionate interference with her and her family's Article  8
    rights; consideration of the nature of the application made (which  was
    inconsistent with the substance of  the  claim  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal) was relevant to consider as to whether there would be a short-
    term or long-term adverse impact on family members.  For these reasons,
    there is no material error of law on the second  point  raised  in  the
    grant of permission either.

40. As accepted by the Respondent at the oral hearing, the decision of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  strays  at  points  in  to  greater  detail  than
    necessary (as to the possible involvement of the local  authority)  and
    considers the period of leave which may be granted; I do not find  that
    these matters are errors of law that could be material to  the  outcome
    of the appeal.  Undoubtedly the decision  could  have  been  much  more
    focused and clearer, but when read as a whole it contains assessment of
    relevant considerations and reasoned findings on the evidence that  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal, including an assessment of family  life
    and the best interests of the children; which were open to it to  make.



41. I would have reached the same conclusion even if the grounds of  appeal
    raised these additional points originally or if the grant of permission
    was  in  accordance  with  the  principles  in  AZ  and  Durueke.   The
    significant difficulty for the Appellant in this case is that her claim
    was based on an adverse impact on her  family  in  the  United  Kingdom
    (rather than any adverse impact on her own right to respect for private
    and family life), particularly on the children but there was little  if
    any evidence of the same  which  could  carry  any  significant  weight
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Whilst there is no doubt that this  is
    a family in the United Kingdom who have, for genuine  medical  reasons,
    been in significant difficulty and who have undoubtedly  been  assisted
    by the Appellant's practical support; there was an almost complete lack
    of evidence as to what, if any alternative support  may  be  available,
    and specifically, why the removal of this  Appellant  personally  would
    cause  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  on  her  family  members  if
    alternative support were available.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   G Jackson                           Date         14th February
2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

