
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18614/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons           |
|On 4th September 2016                        |Promulgated On 9th October   |
|                                             |2018                         |
|                                             |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     IH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, Counsel instructed by Rahman & Company
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity direction in the light of the fact that  there  are
    minor children concerned in these proceedings.

 2. On 29 July 2015 the appellant made a human rights application for leave
    to remain on the basis of family  life  with  his  wife,  EH,  and  his
    stepdaughter, A, who is a British citizen.  The appellant is  also  the
    father of a child AH who was born on 31 October 2016,  thus  after  the
    respondent's decision. That decision is dated 21 July 2016,  and  which
    refused the application for leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and his  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Watson at a hearing in Birmingham on 3
    August 2017, whereby the appeal was dismissed.

    Judge Watson's decision

 4. I summarise Judge Watson's  decision.  She  summarised  the  respective
    parties' cases and identified and summarised  in  detail  the  evidence
    that she had before her,  including  the  oral  evidence  both  of  the
    appellant and of his wife. She set out the relevant legal framework  in
    terms of the Immigration Rules as well as  the  provisions  of  section
    117A-B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("the  2002
    Act").  She set out a detailed chronology of events at paragraph 23  of
    her decision.

 5. She made the following findings which again  I  summarise.   She  found
    that the appellant and his wife  EH  are  second  cousins  who  met  in
    childhood in Pakistan.  Their family arranged the marriage  after  EH's
    second marriage broke down and discussions took place in December  2014
    about such a marriage.  All parties were fully aware at that stage that
    the appellant had no lawful stay in  the  UK  and  that  his  visa  had
    expired.

 6. She found that EH's divorce was finalised in January 2015 and  that  at
    this point the main purpose of the proposed marriage was "to assist the
    appellant's immigration issues".  She concluded that the appellant  and
    EH did not live together at that time.

 7. She said at para  36  that  the  appellant  had  produced  no  evidence
    regarding an Islamic ceremony save for his and EH's oral  evidence  and
    she concluded on a balance of probabilities that the appellant had  not
    started to live with EH from February 2015 as claimed.  She referred to
    inconsistency in the  evidence  about  when  they  had  started  living
    together.  She noted that there were several bills in the sole name  of
    the appellant relating to the beginning of 2015 and it was  clear  that
    EH was claiming single person tax credits up until 2017  and  a  single
    person council tax discount up until sometime in the tax year to  April
    2016.   She  said  that  that  was  not  consistent  with  the  claimed
    commencement of their living together at the beginning of 2015.

 8. At para 37 she said that the chronology showed that the  appellant  was
    arrested for immigration offences in July 2015 and that he  married  EH
    after his arrest and after his application for leave was refused.   She
    concluded that the marriage was entered into for  immigration  purposes
    and that both parties were fully aware of  his  unlawful  status.   She
    said that the discussions between the families prior  to  the  registry
    office wedding were in the full knowledge of the  appellant's  unlawful
    status and that this was  part  of  the  motivation  in  arranging  the
    marriage.  She noted that the appellant was released from detention  in
    November 2015 and that since that time the couple  had  lived  together
    "for some periods" and the appellant's main address is with EH.

 9. She noted a court order dated 8 April 2016 referring to there being  no
    safeguarding issues with regard to the appellant and she said that that
    was consistent with their living together as husband and wife at around
    that time.  She accepted that they have a  child  together,  AH,  which
    supported the contention that they  were  in  a  genuine  relationship.
    Whatever the motivation for the marriage initially, Judge  Watson  said
    she accepted that there was now a husband and  wife  relationship.   It
    was asserted at the hearing that EH was pregnant but at that time there
    was no evidence to support that aspect of the claim.

10. As to the appellant's relationship with A, she found that on a  balance
    of probabilities the appellant had been "based" with his wife  and  her
    daughter A from the end of 2015.  She also accepted that A's father had
    not exercised contact rights in relation to her from the  date  of  the
    last court order (8 April 2016)  and  that  he  had  had  sporadic  and
    infrequent contact between the two  court  orders  (September  2015  to
    April 2016).  On a balance of  probabilities  she  concluded  that  the
    appellant had lived in the same household as A and his wife for  around
    18 months, that being consistent with  the  information  in  the  court
    orders.

11. She then concluded that:

         "The appellant does not have parental responsibility for [A] and  I
         have noted that when [EH] went to Pakistan for 5-6 weeks  that  [A]
         stayed with her aunt and was not cared for  by  the  appellant.   I
         find  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that   the   appellant's
         relationship with [A] is not particularly close and his  role  does
         not  equate  to  that  of  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
         relationship.  The fact that [A]  stayed  with  an  Aunt  when  her
         mother was away is not supportive of a parental  relationship  with
         the appellant".

12. She then went on to examine the issue of the welfare of A.   She  found
    that A was a British citizen and had been in the UK since 2010 although
    was born in Pakistan and speaks Urdu and English.  She  had  spent  the
    first four years of her life in Pakistan.  She concluded that A's birth
    father had been inconsistent in his interest in her  and  had  not  had
    contact for a year.  She said that A does not have a particularly close
    relationship with the appellant at present, and had no  special  needs.
    She said that if her mother wished to go to Pakistan her  mother  would
    have to apply to the court for permission to  do  this  or  obtain  the
    permission  of  her  ex-husband.   She  referred  to  the  decision  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v GD (Ghana) [2017] EWCA Civ
    1126 in terms of the relationship between a child who is subject  to  a
    Family Court order and that child leaving the United Kingdom.

13. At para 41 she found that her best interests were met by being with her
    mother who is her main carer.  She said that that could be in  Pakistan
    if permission is granted by the Family Court or in the  UK.   She  then
    concluded that she did not  find  "that  the  appellant's  presence  is
    necessary for [A's] welfare or that her  welfare  would  be  harmed  in
    particular by the appellant's removal".

14. In relation to AH (the appellant's son), Judge Watson said  as  follows
    at para 42:

         "[AH] is under a year old and his welfare is served by being looked
         after by his mother.  On the balance of probabilities it  would  be
         in his best interests to know his father as he grows up.  This  can
         be through living with both his parents,  or  his  mother  ensuring
         that he has full knowledge of his father with visits and  contact".



15. She then went on to consider paragraph 276ADE(vi).  She concluded  that
    there were no  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's  return  to
    Pakistan, concluding that he has strong ties  there  and  family  there
    that could assist him.  She also noted that the appellant's  wife  gave
    evidence that she also had family members in Pakistan and the appellant
    had confirmed  that  his  parents  live  there.   She  noted  that  the
    appellant's father was a retired solicitor and the family live  in  the
    family home and that that was where the appellant's wife stayed on  her
    visit to Pakistan recently.

16. Other findings were as follows.  She reiterated  that  the  appellant's
    relationship with his wife was in the full knowledge that he  only  had
    temporary leave in the UK and that she was fully aware  of  his  status
    when they entered into the relationship.  She concluded that the couple
    were aware that the appellant had no right to stay on a long term basis
    in the UK before their child was conceived, that child presumably being
    AH.

17. She found that the appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules as  a
    parent as EX.1 under the Rules does not apply to a  joint  carer.   She
    noted that AH is a Pakistani national and not a qualifying child in any
    event, and the appellant's relationship with A was not equivalent to  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship regardless of  the  lack  of  input
    from A's birth father.  Thus, she concluded that the Rules could not be
    satisfied either as a partner or as a parent.

18. She then went on to make an assessment of the factors  under  s.117  of
    the 2002 Act.  She gave little weight to the relationship  between  the
    appellant and his wife because of his unlawful stay.  She  referred  to
    his precarious stay for the years 19 June 2010 to 9 April 2012 when  he
    had been living here without leave after that time.  She said  that  he
    does not speak fluent English and that that  was  a  matter  that  also
    weighed against him.  She found that he had some unspecified  resources
    in his accounts.  He had not  however,  shown  that  he  can  be  self-
    sufficient and EH  specifically  referred  to  borrowing  to  discharge
    debts.  Again, she found that that was a matter  that  weighed  against
    the appellant in the balancing exercise.

19. At para 48 she concluded that the appellant has some relationship  with
    A.  His lack of knowledge of contact with her father however,  and  the
    history of the father's offending and  release  from  prison,  and  his
    vague knowledge of her education and interests indicated  that  it  was
    not at the stage where  it  could  be  categorised  as  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship.  She  noted  again  that  A  was  not
    looked after by him when her mother  went  to  Pakistan.   But  in  any
    event, she said even if she was wrong about  that  she  found  that  it
    would be reasonable to expect A to leave the UK. Both her  parents  are
    of Pakistani heritage as is  the  appellant  and  her  half-brother  is
    Pakistani.  Her welfare, whilst a primary concern, can be looked  after
    abroad by her mother if she chose to leave the  UK  and  her  interests
    would not be damaged by a move such that it could not or should not  be
    contemplated.

20. She noted that there was a current prohibition on her removal and  that
    the Family Court would have to be consulted.  She concluded that  there
    was no information before her that indicated  that  the  child  has  an
    ongoing significant relationship with her birth father  such  that  her
    welfare would be damaged by a move.

21. In her concluding paragraph in  terms  of  assessment  of  the  factual
    matters, Judge Watson noted that the appellant had been in the UK since
    2010 as a student.  She referred again to the status that he  had  when
    he entered into his relationship.  She found that the  appellant  could
    leave the UK and that his wife could  visit  Pakistan  and  they  could
    communicate in that way through Skype and other means.  She noted  that
    the appellant's wife had recently visited Pakistan  and  had  good  and
    recent contacts with family there.  Alternatively, she could consider a
    move to Pakistan before her current leave expired in 2018. At the  time
    of the hearing before Judge Watson the appellant's wife had leave until
    14 June 2018.  She said that a request could be made for permission for
    A to move as well.  She also said that the appellant's wife could  make
    alternative arrangements for A who appears to be close to her  aunt  if
    she feels that such  would  be  in  A's  interests.   Furthermore,  the
    appellant could make an application to enter under the Rules if  he  is
    in a position to do so.

22. She went on as follows:

         "I find it disproportionate (sic) for the appellant who has flouted
         immigration rules and in the full knowledge of his partner to be in
         an advantageous position when compared with others who comply  with
         rules.  The couple have some difficult decisions to make  but  they
         have entered into their current situation in full knowledge of  all
         the facts, and the situation is entirely of their own making".

    She then said that the decision to refuse leave  was  proportionate  in
    all the circumstances and that immigration control was  in  the  public
    interest. She said that "I do not find  it  disproportionate  that  the
    appellant  should   comply   with   immigration   rules,   particularly
    considering his very poor immigration history".

    Grounds and Submissions

23. The grounds of appeal in relation to Judge  Watson's  decision  contend
    that she erred in relation to the assessment of A's best interests.  ZH
    (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  UKSC  4
    is relied on.  The grounds also contend that there  was  an  inadequate
    assessment of AH's best interests.  Those matters constitute ground  1.



24. Ground 2 makes complaint about the assessment  of  the  extent  of  the
    appellant's relationship with A, arguing that that  assessment  is  not
    sustainable on the evidence.   It  is  said  that  no  reasons,  or  no
    adequate reasons, were given and the grounds assert that Judge Watson's
    conclusions appear to have been heavily influenced by the fact  that  A
    stayed with an aunt rather than the appellant when her  mother  was  in
    Pakistan for six weeks.  Evidence is referred to which it is said Judge
    Watson failed to take into account, including witness  statements  from
    the appellant and his wife.

25. Lastly,  in  relation  to  ground  3  it  is  said  that  there  was  a
    misapplication  of  the  Razgar  test,  in  particular  in   terms   of
    proportionality and in one particular  respect  her  decision  was  not
    clear. I shall refer to this in more detail below.

26. In his submissions Mr Gilbert relied on the grounds.  It was  submitted
    that there was no evidence in relation to  what  would  happen  if  the
    appellant left the UK leaving A in the UK.  Her welfare was a  relevant
    consideration and it was not a question of whether she would be harmed,
    which is what Judge Watson appeared to have said  when  she  considered
    the proportionality of the decision.  It was argued that  Judge  Watson
    had imposed a test of "damage" in terms of best  interests  but  damage
    was not determinative of that question.

27. Reference was made to aspects of Judge Watson's decision in relation to
    the  assessment  of  AH's  best  interests.   The  express  or  implied
    suggestion  that  contact  could  be  maintained  at  a  distance   was
    inconsistent with accepted jurisprudence.

28. In terms of the relationship  between  the  appellant  and  A,  it  was
    submitted that there was inadequate reasoning. I was referred in detail
    to the witness statements of the appellant and his partner contained in
    the bundle of documents before the First-tier Tribunal at pages 2-5, in
    particular paragraphs 13-15 and reflected in paragraphs 11-13  of  EH's
    witness statement.  I was also referred  to  a  letter  from  the  GP's
    practice as to the appellant being  registered  as  the  father  of  A.
    Although Judge Watson had said at para 34 that evidence in relation  to
    what the appellant knew about A's schooling was vague, she did  not  in
    fact give that as a reason for concluding that  there  was  a  lack  of
    parental relationship.  Mr Gilbert pointed out that it was  also  found
    that his wife's evidence in that respect was likewise vague and it  was
    submitted that it could not be suggested that that in any way  affected
    her credibility on the matter.

29. The conclusion that it was significant that A chose  to  stay  with  an
    aunt whilst her mother was in Pakistan failed to take into account  the
    evidence to the effect that there were other  children  at  the  aunt's
    house which was the reason given for that prolonged stay.  Thus, it was
    argued that Judge Watson did not take into account all the evidence.

30. In relation to ground 3, it was submitted that the decision was unclear
    and Mr Gilbert sought to make sense of what the judge had said in terms
    of her use of the expression  "disproportionate"  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's actions.

31. Mr Melvin relied on a 'rule 24' response which, to  summarise,  refutes
    the contentions advanced in the grounds on behalf of the appellant.  It
    was submitted that the relationship between the appellant and A  was  a
    matter for the judge to decide and her conclusions were  open  to  her.
    Taking a child to school or to the mosque  does  not  show  a  parental
    relationship. It was submitted that it was open to Judge Watson to find
    that the best interests of the  children  were  to  remain  with  their
    mother.

32. It was submitted that ground 2  was  simply  a  disagreement  with  the
    judge's conclusion in terms of  the  relationship  between  A  and  the
    appellant and Judge Watson was entitled to  find  it  significant  that
    there was a six week period when she stayed with an  aunt  rather  than
    with the appellant.  The doctor's  letter  does  not  take  the  matter
    further because the appellant is not in fact the biological  father  of
    A.

33. Mr Melvin also submitted that the issue was not of credibility as  such
    but of an assessment of the children's best interests and the  evidence
    of  the  relationship  in  order  to  determine  whether  there  was  a
    relationship.

34. Mr Gilbert in reply said that credibility was relevant and there was no
    finding of incredibility in relation to  the  evidence  either  of  the
    appellant or of his wife.  Furthermore, it was not clear whether  Judge
    Watson accepted or rejected the evidence in relation to the appellant's
    involvement with A, for example in taking her to school.

    Assessment and Conclusions

35. I have listened very carefully to  the  arguments  on  behalf  of  both
    parties and considered the documentary evidence put before  me.   I  am
    not satisfied that  there  is  any  error  of  law  in  Judge  Watson's
    decision.

36. The grounds, which I have summarised, raise various issues.  At para  5
    of the grounds Judge Watson's decision at para 41 is quoted whereby she
    said that she found that A's best interests are met by being  with  her
    mother who is her main carer and that that could be in Pakistan  or  in
    the UK.  She concluded that the appellant's presence was not  necessary
    for A's welfare and that her welfare would not be harmed in  particular
    by the appellant's removal.  I am satisfied that,  when  taken  in  the
    context of the other findings, there is an adequate assessment  of  A's
    best interests.  It is to be borne in mind, and  this  is  allied  with
    ground 2, that there was a finding by Judge Watson which I  shall  come
    to in a moment with reference to the grounds, that  the  appellant  did
    not have a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  A.   That  was  a
    finding that was relevant to the assessment of her best interests.   If
    the appellant does not have a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
    her, that is significant in terms of  her  relationship  with  him  and
    provides context to Judge Watson's decision.

37. I do not accept what is said at para 7 of the  grounds  to  the  effect
    that Judge Watson appeared to have  imposed  a  higher  test  than  was
    required in stating that the appellant's presence was  not  "necessary"
    for A's welfare or in the statement  that  her  welfare  would  not  be
    "harmed in particular" by his removal.  Those aspects of  her  decision
    are part of a whole and need to be seen  as  such.   Judge  Watson  was
    assessing whether it was necessary for her welfare, that is to say  for
    her best interests, and whether her welfare or best interests would  be
    harmed by the appellant's removal and she was entitled to come  to  the
    conclusion that it would not.  It was entirely reasonable  and  legally
    sustainable for her to conclude that A could be expected, and  that  it
    was reasonable to expect her,  to  leave  the  UK  notwithstanding  her
    British citizenship.  She noted that both her parents were of Pakistani
    heritage and that the appellant  and  her  half-brother  were  also  of
    Pakistani heritage.  She concluded that her welfare can be looked after
    abroad by her mother, that is the appellant's wife,  if  she  chose  to
    leave the UK and that her interests would not be "damaged"  by  such  a
    move.

38. I do not accept that  Judge  Watson  imposed  a  test  of  "damage"  in
    relation to A's best interests.  This aspect of the grounds, in  common
    with other aspects, amounts to the plucking of a phrase here and there,
    out of context, without considering the judge's overall  assessment  of
    best interests.  In no respect  did  Judge  Watson  impose  any  higher
    threshold or test than was legally permissible.  The phrases  that  the
    judge used were simply a means of describing  how  the  best  interests
    should be assessed and the extent to which those best  interests  would
    not  be  compromised  by  the  appellant's  removal  or  by  the  other
    conclusions she came to in terms of either child leaving the UK.

39. It is said at para 13 of the  grounds  that  Judge  Watson  had  failed
    completely to consider whether it was in AH's best  interests  for  his
    father to be removed from the UK.  I do not accept that contention.  At
    para 42 she noted that his welfare is served by being looked  after  by
    his mother and that on a balance of probabilities it would  be  in  his
    best interests to know his father as he grows up.  She said  that  that
    can be through living with both his parents or his mother ensuring that
    he has full knowledge of his father with visits and contact.  In  other
    words, what Judge Watson was saying there was that it was in a  child's
    best interests to maintain contact with both parents and that that  was
    the preferred state of affairs.  Nothing in her decision  at  para  42,
    brief though it is, amounts to any legal error.  She assessed AH's best
    interests in terms of the options that were available.

40. So far as ground 2 is concerned, I am not satisfied that there  is  any
    error in Judge Watson's assessment of the appellant's relationship with
    A.  It is to be borne in mind that at para 34 she said that  she  found
    that the appellant  had  given  vague  details  when  asked  about  A's
    schooling and interests.  It is true  that  she  also  found  that  the
    appellant's wife was also vague about those matters but it was relevant
    for her to consider the extent to which the appellant  knew  about  A's
    schooling and interests because it was his relationship with her  which
    was being assessed in this context and her assessment of  it  which  is
    the subject of the complaint.  Whilst she did not expressly  advert  to
    that finding (about the appellant's knowledge  of  A's  schooling  etc)
    when she gave her conclusions elsewhere in the decision,  it  is  trite
    that a judge does not have to refer to every aspect of the evidence  in
    expressing conclusions.

41. She did take into account that the appellant's father had not exercised
    contact rights with A from 8 April 2016 and  insofar  para  18  of  the
    grounds suggests that she failed to take that issue into account, it is
    a complaint that cannot be sustained.

42. So far as the witness statements of the  appellant  and  his  wife  are
    concerned, I have already referred to  those  aspects  of  the  witness
    statements which are relied on  in  this  respect  in  terms  of  Judge
    Watson's assessment of the relationship with A and the contention  that
    that evidence was not taken into account.  Again, it is  trite  that  a
    judge does not have to refer to each aspect of the  evidence.   I  have
    already referred to the fact that he gave vague evidence in relation to
    A's schooling and interests. When one looks at the  witness  statements
    in this  respect  it  is  pertinent  to  point  out  that  the  witness
    statements of the appellant and his wife are actually word for word the
    same with necessary changes as to  pronouns.  It  is  true  that  Judge
    Watson did not refer to that issue herself but it is a matter that puts
    into context the contention that there was  significant  evidence  that
    ought to have been taken into account.

43. It was also pertinent for the judge to note that when A's  mother  went
    to Pakistan for five or six weeks (according to the judge's decision or
    six weeks according to the grounds), she stayed with an  aunt  and  was
    not cared for by the appellant.  According to the  evidence  there  was
    "some input" from the appellant whilst she was away but in my judgement
    there is force in the submission made on behalf of  the  respondent  to
    the effect that one would have expected the child to have  stayed  with
    the  other  parent  if  that  parent  had  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship with her.  This is a matter that the judge was entitled to
    consider was adverse to the claim that he had a  parental  relationship
    with her.

44. In relation to ground 3, what Judge Watson said at para 49 (not  48  as
    stated in the grounds), which I have quoted above at my para 22,  is  a
    little muddled. To repeat, she said that "I  find  it  disproportionate
    for the appellant who has flouted immigration rules  and  in  the  full
    knowledge of his  partner  to  be  in  an  advantageous  position  when
    compared with others who comply with the rules". She went on  to  state
    that it was not disproportionate that the appellant should comply  with
    immigration rules particularly considering his  very  poor  immigration
    history.

45. One can readily understand the complaint made about that  part  of  her
    decision. However, I am  satisfied  that  that  paragraph  as  a  whole
    represents a sustainable proportionality assessment. I say that because
    Judge Watson also said in the  same  paragraph  that  the  decision  to
    refuse leave was proportionate in all the  circumstances  Judge  Watson
    evidently recognised that the assessment of proportionality had  to  be
    undertaken in the round. I am satisfied that  that  is  what  she  did,
    taking into account the appellant's adverse immigration history.

46. In the circumstances, I am not satisfied that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point of  law.   The
    decision to dismiss the appeal therefore stands.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a  point  of  law.  Its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.










Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            1/10/18


