
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18953/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 May 2021                       |On 27 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                              FRED JONES-LARTEY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brown
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a male citizen of Ghana who was born on  19  September
    1980. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Oxlade)  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 11 November 2019 refusing  his
    application to remain on human rights grounds following the making of a
    deportation order. The First-tier Tribunal, in a  decision  promulgated
    on 2 November 2020, dismissed the appeal. The  appellant  now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant has  a  long  history  of  criminal  offending  the  full
    particulars of which are set out in the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
    at [4-10]. The most serious and the index offence to the making of  the
    deportation order was conspiracy to supply crack cocaine for which  the
    appellant was sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment on 27 March 2015.

 3. The judge found that the appellant had  been  lawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom since his arrival [86] and that he was socially and  culturally
    integrated here [87]. The judge went on to find consider whether  there
    exist very significant obstacles to the appellant's  re-integration  in
    Ghana, whether the consequences for the appellant's deportation on  his
    British children (now aged 11 and 10 years) and his British wife  would
    be  unduly  harsh,  and  whether  there  exist  any   very   compelling
    circumstances which would render his deportation  disproportionate.  In
    each case, the judge found against  the  appellant  and  dismissed  the
    appeal.

 4. There are three grounds of appeal. First, the appellant challenges  the
    judge's application  of  Section  117C(4)(c)  of  the  2002  Act  (very
    significant obstacles to integration). The appellant left Ghana when he
    was 1 year old and has been in the United Kingdom since he was 8  years
    old. The support which the appellant could receive from his father  had
    been significantly reduced by the fact that the father had to care  for
    the appellant's mother following a stroke in March 2020. The  appellant
    asserts that there was no evidential basis for the judge's finding that
    he is a 'fixer' with 'a lot of inner drive' [91].

 5. I find that the judge, in  a  careful  and  thorough  analysis  of  the
    evidence, has reached findings available to him on that  evidence.  Not
    only was the judge well aware of the  appellant's  lack  of  experience
    living in Ghana, it is clear that he started his analysis at [89]  from
    an assumption that, having not lived in Ghana since he was  an  infant,
    it  'might  be  expected'  that  the  appellant  would  now  face  very
    significant obstacles on return. However, the judge goes on  to  detail
    his reasons for finding that the test of very significant obstacles was
    not met on the evidence. The  judge's  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    character ('a fixer') was drawn from all the  evidence  concerning  the
    appellant (there was no need for there to have been  specific  evidence
    of  such  characteristics)  and  the  grounds  indicate  no  reason  to
    challenge that assessment beyond reiterating that the appellant had not
    lived in Ghana for 38 years (not  relevant  to  an  evaluation  of  his
    capability to thrive in the country) and that the  appellant's  attempt
    to set up a business in Ghana had been unsuccessful. That the appellant
    should have even attempted  to  establish  his  own  business  is  more
    obviously evidence of his drive and capability than  a  lack  of  those
    qualities that he does not consider himself as alienated from  Ghanaian
    society as he now claims. The judge was aware that  the  appellant  has
    family members living in Ghana.

 6. Moreover, the judge plainly took into account the appellant's  father's
    reduced ability to assist the appellant because he refers explicitly to
    it at [91] noting that the father  may  not  be  able  to  visit  Ghana
    himself to help the appellant on account of his need to  care  for  his
    wife. It was open to the judge, having taken the  wife's  illness  into
    account, to find that the 'faultlessly supportive' father would provide
    assistance to the appellant and  the  grounds  offer  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with that valid finding.

 7. Ground 2 raises two challenges to  the  judge's  analysis.  First,  the
    appellant asserts that the judge wrongly took account of  the  risk  of
    the appellant re-offending when assessing whether the  consequences  of
    the appellant's deportation for the children would be unduly harsh and,
    secondly, that the judge gave inadequate  weight  to  the  evidence  of
    independent social workers. The OASYS report indicated that there is  a
    medium risk of the appellant reoffending. The appellant argues that the
    judge's departed from a child-focused consideration of the consequences
    of deportation, thereby departing from  the  guidance  provided  in  KO
    (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 and HA (Iraq) [2020] EWCA Civ 1176 and that he
    had not referred expressly to expert independent social worker evidence
    that the deportation of the appellant would have a 'devastating' impact
    on the children which would be 'detrimental emotionally'.

 8. In my opinion, the judge had not fallen into error.  The  judge  raises
    the prospect of the appellant reoffending  in  his  assessment  of  the
    social workers' evidence. He notes that the social workers  have  taken
    account of the effect of the appellant re-offending on  the  children's
    welfare (the grounds do not argue that they should not  have  done  so)
    but he considers that they have not attached sufficient weight to  that
    risk  making  entirely  legitimate  reference  to  the  OASYS  report's
    conclusion. He has not, as the grounds appear  to  suggest,  determined
    whether the effect of deportation  would  be  unduly  harsh  by  direct
    reference to the  appellant's  offending.  The  judge  has  taken  into
    account the  likelihood  that  the  children  will  encounter  problems
    because the appellant may reoffend and will be absent from their  lives
    in any event whilst, significantly, the judge has given cogent  reasons
    for finding that the ability of the children's mother to care well  for
    the children in the absence of the  appellant  had  been  wrongly  been
    accorded inadequate weight in the expert evidence.

 9. Ground 3 also lacks merit. The appellant argues that, in his discussion
    of very compelling circumstances, the judge has  not  given  sufficient
    weight to the importance of the appellant in the life  of  his  sister,
    Ursula who has learning difficulties.  At  [107]  the  judge  concluded
    that, whilst acknowledging that the appellant and Ursula have a  strong
    relationship, he is not the 'lynchpin'  in  the  lives  of  either  his
    mother or Ursula.  The grounds  at  [19]  offer  nothing  more  than  a
    disagreement with the judge's assessment  regarding  Ursula  whilst  at
    [20] is simply asserted that for the judge to find  that  the  mother's
    stroke  did   not   establish   very   compelling   circumstances   was
    'demonstrably irrational' without referring to any part of the evidence
    which might support such a claim.

10. The grounds also argue that the judge had  failed  to  apply  Strasburg
    jurisprudence, in particular Maslov v Austria [2008} ECHR and that  the
    judge failed to give proper weight to the appellant's  'model'  conduct
    whilst in prison. However, the judge did refer to Maslov [66] and there
    is no reason at all to suppose that the principles of that judgment and
    other relevant case law were not considered by the judge (see  also  my
    comments at (5) above). Importantly, by reference to Maslov, the  judge
    accepted that the appellant was integrated  into  the  society  of  the
    United Kingdom. Indeed, the grounds offer no  reasons  to  support  the
    argument that the judge ignored Maslov other than repeating the  length
    of the appellant's residence in the United Kingdom and  his  degree  of
    integration here, both factors which I am  satisfied  were  taken  into
    account throughout the judge's decision.  As  regards  the  appellant's
    conduct in prison, I am also  satisfied  that  the  judge's  has  taken
    appropriate account. He sets out in detail the  evidence  of  witnesses
    who gave evidence as to conduct [49] and assesses that evidence at [108-
    109] finding that the projects with which the appellant became involved
    in prison were 'somewhat vague and  aspirational'  and,  significantly,
    that the appellant could continue  his  involvement  from  abroad.  The
    judge properly related the positive evidence of the appellant's conduct
    to his assessment of the likelihood of reoffending and was entitled  to
    find that the level of risk stated in the OASYS report remained  valid.
    The grounds again offer nothing more than disagreement with the judge's
    findings.

11. I agree with Ms Cunha, who appeared for the Secretary of State  at  the
    Upper Tribunal initial  hearing,  who  submitted  that  the  judge  has
    carried out a holistic evaluation of the evidence. The  judge  has  not
    ignored irrelevant evidence and has given  appropriate  weight  to  the
    items of relevant evidence  before  him.  The  grounds  put  forward  a
    different evaluation of that evidence  but,  in  my  opinion,  fail  to
    expose any material error of law. In the circumstances, I  dismiss  the
    appeal.

     Notice of Decision

     The appeal is dismissed.



         Signed                              Date 15 May 2021
        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane













