
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18460/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 September 2018                          |On 8 January 2019             |
|Prepared 21 September 2018                    |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    [s m]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Allison, Counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller
                    LLP (Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant a national  of  Zimbabwe,  date  of  birth  8  May  2001,
    applied for entry clearance for settlement under paragraph 297  of  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended) (the Rules).  The ECO, on 23 June
    2016, rejected that application on the basis that the Appellant did not
    satisfy paragraph 297 of the Rules in relation to  requirements  to  be
    met by a person seeking indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom as
    a child of a relative present and settled in the United Kingdom.

2.   The ECO refused the application with reference to  paragraph  297(i)(a)
    to (e) of the Rules but did not specifically address  297(i)(f)  albeit
    in his concluding remarks said "I am not satisfied  there  are  serious
    and compelling circumstances that make your exclusion from  the  United
    Kingdom undesirable".  I take that to refer to sub-paragraph (f) of the
    Rule.  The appeal came before FtTJ Pacey (the Judge) who on 21 November
    2017 dismissed the human rights appeal.

3.   Permission to appeal was given by FtTJ Pooler on 17 May 2018.

4.   Much of the argument upon which the case was put to the  Judge  clearly
    referred to paragraph 297(i)(f) of the Rules.   The  skeleton  argument
    provided by Mr Pipe of counsel clearly addressed the issue and asserted
    amongst other things that the Appellant met the  requirements  of  that
    sub-paragraph of the Rules.  Reliance had also been placed by  Mr  Pipe
    quite correctly on the case of Mostafa  [2015]  UKUT  112.   The  Judge
    addressed the case law that had been provided.  It is fair  to  say  he
    did not explicitly address sub-paragraph (f) but rather as Mr  Bramble,
    it seemed to me, correctly pointed out did address the relevant factors
    that were being put forward as the reasons why the appeal could succeed
    on sub-paragraph (f) grounds.  It was not it  seemed  to  me  seriously
    argued that the  Appellant  succeeded  under  other  sub-paragraphs  of
    297(i).

5.   It therefore was correct to say that  on  the  evidence  that  was  put
    forward, which was fairly recited by the Judge earlier in the decision,
    particularly made reference to the sponsorship statement,  the  updated
    sponsorship statement and the correspondence from the  Appellant  about
    her circumstances: All contained  in  the  Appellant's  bundle.   Those
    matters were fairly set out earlier in the Judge's decision. It  seemed
    to me quite unexceptional that  the  Judge  should  then  have  reached
    conclusions particularly matters expressed in paragraphs 26  to  33  of
    the decision.  Accordingly, I conclude the Judge  had  made  sufficient
    findings in addressing that issue and more particularly  had  concluded
    that the case did not demonstrate the sound and compelling  reasons  to
    succeed under sub-paragraph (f).

6.   The case of TZ [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 makes a well understood  point  but
    in this case the Judge had concluded that the Appellant did not succeed
    with reference to the Rules and accordingly it was not the  case  where
    it  inevitably  drove  the  conclusion  that  the  ECO's  decision  was
    disproportionate.

7.   Mr Bramble accepted, as indeed he must,  that  the  Judge  having  made
    passing reference [D25] to the issue of Section 55 of  the  UK  Borders
    Act 2009 but never provided any considered analysis of  the  wishes  of
    the Appellant or, I suppose, the best interests of the Appellant in any
    specific analysis.  The Judge did refer to the wishes of the Appellant,
    her discomfort in her accommodation during the school holidays and  how
    she claimed some relatives or persons, she had stayed with, had treated
    her: Not in an abusive sense but to a degree  using  her  for  domestic
    chores within the household where she was staying.

8.   Those matters were taken into account by  the  Judge  and  I  concluded
    that any  other  Tribunal  properly  addressing  the  matter  would  be
    unlikely to have reached any different decision.

9.   I therefore find that the Judge's  error  in  failing  to  specifically
    make findings, as is well understood should be done, was  an  error  of
    law.  The question was whether it is material since the Judge  did  the
    best she could with the material she had.  This seemed to me an unhappy
    case where through no criticism  whatsoever  of  counsel  who  appeared
    below or of Mr Allison the evidence was as has become evident  somewhat
    lacking and would have been better prepared to address  those  matters;
    which perhaps could have been more persuasive on the  issues  of  'best
    interests' and 'proportionality'.  The Judge did what  she  could  with
    the material she had.  To that extent therefore  I  conclude  that  the
    failure to analyse best interests was a error of law but  the  evidence
    upon which any analysis could only have been reached  if  evidence  was
    contained within the Appellant's bundle.

10.  It was not suggested that there was additional oral evidence that  made
    a material contribution to that issue so the decision  would  not  have
    been substantively different from that arrived at.  Whilst I accept the
    error of law I do not regard it as a material error in the  outcome  of
    the appeal.  The further criticisms made by Mr Allison are directed  at
    a failure to take into  account  the  aspirations  of  the  Appellant's
    Sponsor.  However I thought the  Judge  did  have  them  in  mind  when
    reciting the evidence particularly the  explanation  of  the  Sponsor's
    involvement in the life of  the  Appellant,  her  husband's  supportive
    position and their joint wish that the Appellant should  come  to  live
    with them.

11.  I considered therefore  that  those  matters  were  in  play  and  were
    considered by the Judge.  To that extent therefore the absence of  them
    from the analysis specifically did not seem to me to be likely to  have
    made or would have made a material difference to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

12.  The final two criticisms relate to what are claimed  to  be  irrational
    and inadequate findings made by the Judge.   Irrationality  is  a  high
    threshold to establish and rather the adequacy and sufficiency  of  the
    reasoning for  the  findings  was  potentially  the  better  challenge.
    However, it is not for me to substitute a different view to that of the
    Judge even if I might not have reached the same view.

13.  To that end I therefore have considered the  points  raised  about  the
    adequacies of the Judge's findings.  I concluded  that  the  criticisms
    have an aspect of 'the counsel of perfection'.  I find decisions should
    not be taken apart and analysed in such a narrow  way.   To  do  so  is
    easily done but in fairness to the Judge, she did the best  that  could
    be done on the material before her.

14.  I conclude that the criticisms do not go to show a  material  error  of
    law in the adequacy or sufficiency of the reasons.

15.  The Appellant is still under the  age  of  18  and  is  not  apparently
    living an independent life.  There were no other issues taken it  seems
    with the balance of paragraph 297(2), (3), (4) and (5) of the Rules and
    the Appellant did not fall under the general grounds for refusal.

16.  On one view the outcome of the appeal is most unfortunate but  if  this
    matter is to be pursued, fuller  thought  needs  to  be  given  to  the
    presentation of the evidence to support a further application.

17.  For these reasons, the Original Tribunal  made  no  material  error  of
    law.  The Original Tribunal's decision stands.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

ANONYMITY DIRECTION

No anonymity direction was apparently sought before the  Judge  nor  is  one
required.

Signed                                  Date 13 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed and therefore no fee award is appropriate.

Signed                                  Date 13 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

