
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18199/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st December 2017                   |On 10th January 2018                 |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                            MR YEBOAH OPOKU MANU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Mustafa (instructed by Jade Law Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Ahmad (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Entry Clearance Officer,
    with permission, in relation to a Decision and Reasons of Judge  Dhanji
    following  a  hearing  at  Harmondsworth  on  2nd  August  2017.    The
    determination was promulgated on 11th August 2017 and it referred to an
    application by a minor to join his father in  the  United  Kingdom,  he
    having made an application  under  paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Entry Clearance Officer refused it finding the entirety  of
    the  application  lacking  credibility  in  terms  of  the  Appellant's
    relationship with his Sponsor, the claimed family life between them and
    the claim that his mother had abdicated responsibility.

 2. By the time it came before Judge Dhanji the single issue, in  terms  of
    the Immigration Rules at least, was whether or not the father had  been
    exercising sole responsibility for his son.   Unfortunately  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer was not represented before the judge and it is always
    difficult for a judge when faced with that sort of situation. Before me
    Ms Ahmad referred to various authorities  Pavandeel  Virk  &  Others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  652,  MK
    (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641 and Budhathoki (reasons
    for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341.  It is Ms Ahmad's argument  that  the
    Decision contains an  inadequacy  of  reasoning  and  she  referred  me
    particularly to a clear discrepancy which the judge did not deal  with.



 3. At paragraph 5.4 of the Decision and Reasons the judge writes that  the
    Sponsor says that he visited the Appellant in Ghana in 2010,  2012  and
    2015.  He stayed with his mother  but  the  Appellant  and  his  mother
    stayed in the same town and he says the purpose of these visits was  to
    see the Appellant.   The  problem  then  arises  because  in  the  next
    paragraph 5.5 the judge says:

         "In 2009 the  Appellant's  mother  got  married.   A  copy  of  her
         marriage certificate has been  submitted.   Her  husband  was  from
         another town, some 400 miles away.  She moved to join him in  2013.
         He says that since the Appellant's mother moved away  she  has  not
         seen the Appellant."

 4. The problem is that is clearly in conflict with the previous  paragraph
    where the Appellant apparently was staying with his mother in the  same
    town as his grandmother with whom the Sponsor was staying in 2015.  The
    judge does refer earlier in the Decision to having taken  into  account
    all of the documents and oral evidence before him.  However, in finding
    the Sponsor to be credible  and  the  Sponsor  to  have  sole  parental
    responsibility he is relying on the fact that his mother moved away  in
    2013 and has not seen the Appellant since.  He also to be  fair  relies
    on some evidence going back quite some time of  financial  remittances.
    However, he does not resolve that important discrepancy as to  how  the
    Appellant can be staying with his mother whilst also saying he had  not
    seen her for the  previous  two  years.   That  failure  to  critically
    analyse that discrepancy and indeed critically  analyse  generally  the
    evidence is an error of law.  She was not helped by the  absence  of  a
    Presenting Officer.  That does not mean that the  evidence  has  to  be
    accepted without criticism.

 5.  The  judge  has  further  erred  in  allowing  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  The judge goes as far as saying at 7.5 that  having
    found the Appellant met the requirements of paragraph 297  it  was  not
    necessary for her to  consider  Article  8.   That  was  plainly  wrong
    because there is no right of appeal against the refusal under paragraph
    297.  There is only a right of appeal against the refusal  of  a  human
    rights Decision.  This plainly was and therefore the judge should  have
    started and finished with consideration of  Article  8  looking  at  it
    through the lens of the Rules.  It is appropriate to make a finding  on
    whether or not the Appellant meets the requirements of  the  Rules  but
    then it should not have been allowed under the Rules,  it  should  have
    been allowed, if it was to be allowed, on Article 8 grounds.   However,
    because of the flawed findings and failure to  critically  analyse  the
    evidence I find the determination is to be set aside  in  its  entirety
    and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.   It  was
    originally heard at Harmondsworth.  The Sponsor resides at  Enfield  in
    Middlesex so I will leave it to Hatton  Cross  to  determine  where  it
    should be reheard.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Decision
and Reasons is set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  full
rehearing on all issues.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 8th January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
