

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/18425/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 7 June 2017                      |On 8 June  2017                       |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SE
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:      Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:     Mr Nyamayaro, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


       1. The appellant appeals against a decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge Holt dated 3 November 2016 in which the respondent's  appeal
          against a decision to make a deportation  order  was  allowed.   I
          shall refer to the appellant as the SSHD and the respondent as  SE
          for the remainder of this decision.





Procedural history


       2. In a decision dated 13 April 2017, Designated First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge Peart granted permission to appeal on the basis that it  was
          arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  approach  to  "unduly
          harsh" failed to apply the guidance in MM (Uganda) v  SSHD  [2016]
          EWCA Civ 450.


       3. In  a  rule  24  notice  and  skeleton  argument  SE's  solicitors
          submitted that the First-tier Tribunal decision  did  not  contain
          an error of law.  No effort was made to address MM (Uganda).

       4. The matter now comes before me to  decide  whether  the  decision
          contains an error of law.

Hearing

       5. At the beginning of the hearing I outlined a provisional view  to
          the representatives and invited them to make  submissions.   That
          provisional view is summarised as follows:


                    i) The First-tier  Tribunal  clearly  erred  in  law  in
                       failing to direct itself to or apply the guidance  in
                       MM  (Uganda):  when  considering   whether   or   not
                       deportation would be unduly harsh on children for the
                       purposes  of  section  117C(5)  of  the  Nationality,
                       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended ('the 2002
                       Act')  and  para  399(a)(ii)(b)  of  the  Immigration
                       Rules, the decision-maker is required to have  regard
                       to  all  the  circumstances  including  criminal  and
                       immigration history, and not just the impact upon the
                       children.


                       When the decision is read as a whole, the  First-tier
                       Tribunal  focussed  entirely  on  the  unduly   harsh
                       effects  upon  the  children  and  in   making   that
                       assessment, failed to take  into  account  the  wider
                       circumstances including SE's criminal offending.


                   ii) However, the First-tier Tribunal made clear  findings
                       of fact to support the conclusion that SE would  face
                       very significant obstacles integrating into  Jamaican
                       society and therefore met the requirements of section
                       117C(4)  of  the  2002  Act  and  para  399A  of  the
                       Immigration Rules.


                       The First-tier Tribunal was  entitled  to  allow  the
                       appeal on this alternative basis, and in the premises
                       the error of law identified in (i) is not a  material
                       one - the First-tier Tribunal  was  entitled  to  the
                       conclusion  reached  for  the  reasons  she  gave  in
                       relation to section 117C(4).


       6. Ms Aboni agreed with my analysis of (i) above.   In  relation  to
          (ii) she acknowledged that the grounds  of  appeal  relied  upon,
          focus their criticism on findings of fact.  I invited Ms Aboni to
          set out in what way these factual findings constitute  errors  of
          law.  She submitted that  the  finding  that  there  is  no  care
          available to address SE's mental health in Jamaica is irrational.


       7. I specifically invited Ms  Aboni  to  make  submissions,  and  if
          necessary take instructions, on the correct approach  to  section
          117C(4) in law, in particular whether there is any requirement to
          take into  account  the  wider  circumstances  such  as  criminal
          offending, in a similar manner to that found in  MM  (Uganda)  in
          relation to undue harshness for the purposes of section  117C(5).
          Ms Aboni made it clear that she only relied upon the guidance  in
          MM (Uganda) for the purposes of (i) above, and not in relation to
          (ii) above.  She submitted that the error of law in  relation  to
          (ii) was predicated entirely upon irrational  findings  regarding
          SE's mental health.  Ms Aboni accepted that in finding  there  to
          be  very  significant  obstacles  for  the  purposes  of  section
          117C(4), there was no requirement to include in  the  assessment,
          SE's criminal offending history.

       8. Mr Nyamayaro invited me to find that  the  SSHD's  criticisms  in
          relation to (ii) simply disagreed with the First-tier  Tribunal's
          factual findings, which were  entirely  open  to  the  First-tier
          Tribunal on the material available.  That was sufficient for  the
          First-tier Tribunal to find in SE's favour.  In the premises, any
          error of approach regarding (i) is  immaterial,  and  the  SSHD's
          appeal should be dismissed.

       9. I invited Ms Aboni to respond to this but she maintained reliance
          solely  upon  the  grounds  of  appeal  criticising  the  factual
          findings on the  mental  health  treatment  available  to  SE  in
          Jamaica.  After hearing from both  representatives,  I  indicated
          that the SSHD's appeal would be dismissed.  I now give my written
          reasons for this.

Discussion

     i) Undue harshness


      10. I accept that the First-tier  Tribunal  directed  itself  to  SE's
          criminal offending [3-4, 28]  and  correctly  directed  itself  to
          section  117C(1)  at  [16].   However,  the  First-tier   Tribunal
          clearly erred in law in failing to direct itself to or  apply  the
          guidance in MM (Uganda) and excluded SE's criminal offending  from
          its assessment of undue harshness  for  the  purposes  of  section
          117C(5).


      11. At [21] the First-tier Tribunal  based  its  conclusion  on  undue
          harshness entirely upon four factors,  none  of  which  took  into
          account SE's criminal offending.  That approach  is  repeated  for
          the purposes of para 399(a)(ii)(b) at [26-27].  The  reference  to
          SE's offending behaviour at [28] is separate from and follows  the
          conclusion at [27] that it would be unduly harsh for the  children
          to remain in the UK when their father is deported to Jamaica.

    ii) Very significant obstacles

      12. In my judgment, the First-tier Tribunal  made  clear  findings  of
          fact to support the conclusion that the  requirements  of  section
          117C(4) are met.


      13. Ms Aboni did not dispute that section  117C(a)  is  met.   SE  has
          been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his life -  as  noted
          by the First-tier Tribunal at [1] he came to the UK  when  he  was
          15 and was granted indefinite leave to remain  in  line  with  his
          mother.  He was 37 at the date of the hearing  before  the  First-
          tier Tribunal and therefore spent 60% (22 years) or  most  of  his
          life in the UK during  which  time  he  had  indefinite  leave  to
          remain.

      14. Ms Aboni also did not dispute that section 117C(b) is met -  there
          has been no challenge to the finding at [22] that SE  is  socially
          and culturally integrated in the UK.


      15. Ms Aboni criticised the First-tier Tribunal's approach to  section
          117C(c)  to  which  I  now  turn.    The   First-tier   Tribunal's
          conclusion that there would be very significant  obstacles  to  SE
          integrating into Jamaica is reasoned at [23-24  and  29-30].   The
          First-tier Tribunal noted that SE had spent very limited  time  in
          Jamaica since arriving in the UK at 15 and had little in  the  way
          of family contacts there.  The First-tier Tribunal  accepted  that
          SE has "very serious mental health problems" and that  the  source
          of these was the abuse he suffered in  Jamaica,  when  his  mother
          left him  there  with  relatives  [23  and  29].   The  First-tier
          Tribunal was entitled to  regard  this  as  an  additional  factor
          underlining the difficulty in SE integrating to Jamaica.

      16. The First-tier Tribunal was also entitled to find at [24] that  SE
          had  only  been  referred  for  specialist  psychiatric  treatment
          recently and "having finally got to a position where treatment  in
          the United Kingdom is likely to start to  address  the  source  of
          [SE's] mental health problems, deporting SE is bound to  interfere
          and disrupt that process and it is not possible to  say  when,  or
          indeed if, [SE] would ever be in a position  to  find  alternative
          specialist psychiatric  treatment  in  Jamaica."   The  First-tier
          Tribunal's overall reasoning demonstrates that it mattered  little
          that there was no evidence regarding psychiatric  health  services
          in Jamaica.  The point being made by the First-tier  Tribunal  was
          a valid one - even if it was available, there would be  delay  and
          disruption in accessing it (partly caused by being in a  different
          country as well as not having the effective family support he  was
          dependent upon), when SE has been assessed as requiring  treatment
          immediately.

      17. The First-tier Tribunal did not base the finding  that  there  are
          very significant obstacles solely upon an absence  of  psychiatric
          treatment for SE in Jamaica or any disparity  in  treatment.   The
          findings are more nuanced than this.  The points made  at  para  2
          of the grounds of appeal fail to acknowledge that  the  First-tier
          Tribunal found on the particular facts  of  this  case  that  SE's
          mental health would worsen in Jamaica, not so much  because  of  a
          disparity in treatment between the UK and Jamaica but  because  of
          a combination of the three reasons  summarised  at  [24]:  (i)  he
          would be returned to the place and to contact with the people  who
          had abused him as a child and teenager - the  First-tier  Tribunal
          expressly noted at [29] that there  was  cogent  medical  evidence
          that SE was chronically abused and neglected as  a  child  at  the
          hands of his grandmother and uncle  in  Jamaica  when  his  mother
          left him there at the age of 9; (ii) there would be an  inevitable
          delay and uncertainty in accessing psychiatric  treatment  without
          the support of his family in Jamaica, in contrast  to  psychiatric
          treatment in the UK being imminent after a delay  of  many  years;
          (iii) the rupturing of SE's very close family life with  his  wife
          and children would lead to an exacerbation of  his  mental  health
          problems.  These are all rational factual  findings  open  to  the
          First-tier Tribunal.

      18. The First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  that  the  increase  in  SE's
          mental health difficulties would lead to significant  difficulties
          to integration, in the  particular  circumstances  of  this  case.
          When the decision is read as a whole,  these  can  summarised  as:
          the significant length of time he has been in the UK and not  been
          to  Jamaica,  his  lack  of  any  effective   social   or   family
          connections  to  Jamaica,  the  source  of   his   mental   health
          difficulties is attributable to the abuse he suffered  in  Jamaica
          over the course of  many  years,  the  uncertainty  regarding  the
          provision available to meet his particular needs in Jamaica.

      19. The submission at para 1h) of  the  grounds  that  the  First-tier
          Tribunal applied the  "incorrect  threshold  to  very  significant
          obstacles" merely disagrees with the findings of fact.  The First-
          tier Tribunal was well-aware of and expressly  took  into  account
          SE's family members in Jamaica but noted that his grandmother  was
          the perpetrator of serious abuse upon him in the  past.  The  fact
          that treatment might be available in Jamaica does not obviate  the
          finding that it would be difficult for SE to access it, given  his
          history and his dependence on his family members.

      20. The grounds of appeal relied upon by Ms Aboni do  not  demonstrate
          any error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  approach  to  the
          alternative  finding  that  there  would   be   very   significant
          obstacles to SE's integration into Jamaica.

No material error of law

      21. The First-tier  Tribunal  was  therefore  entitled  to  allow  the
          appeal on this alternative basis, and in the  premises  the  error
          of law identified in (i) above is not a material one - the  First-
          tier Tribunal was entitled  to  the  conclusion  reached  for  the
          reasons given in relation to section 117C(4).

Decision

      22. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  a
          material error of law and I do not set it aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
7 June 2017
