
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18156/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC (via Microsoft teams)     |Decision promulgated     |
|On 12 August 2021                                 |On 14 September 2021     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                             SULEMAN ABDI HIRSI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brown instructed by Knightbridge Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 25 January 2021 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Gould  dismissed  the
        appellant's  appeal,  said  by  the  Judge  to   be   against   the
        respondent's  decision  of  02  October  2019   at   [2]   of   the
        determination, which refused his application for leave to enter the
        United Kingdom on the basis of his family life with his mother.




Background

     2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on 1 February 2005.
     3. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [16] of the decision under
        challenge which can be summarised in the following terms:



        i. That the Sponsor, who has been granted  refugee  status  in  the
           United Kingdom, is the Appellant's mother [17(a)].


       ii. The Judge could not be satisfied the appellant is under the  age
           of 18, for the reasons set out  at  [17(c)],  although  was  not
           satisfied the appellant  could  meet  the  requirements  of  the
           Immigration Rules in any event.


      iii. The appellant  has  had  no  meaningful  relationship  with  the
           sponsor since the age of two. The sponsor's explanation for  the
           delay in applying for the appellant  to  join  the  sponsor  was
           found to be inconsistent with her  own  evidence  that  she  had
           successfully applied  for  her  daughter  to  join  her  on  the
           resettlement scheme. The delay is consistent  with  the  overall
           chronology that the appellant has lived and continues to live an
           independent  life.  The  sponsors  UNHCR  bio  data  information
           referred to in the refusal letter fails to record the  appellant
           as one of the sponsors  children.  The  inference  is  that  the
           sponsor regarded her son as the responsibility of others and was
           content not to interfere with his care [17(d)].


       iv. The Judge was not satisfied money sent by the sponsor  was  sent
           for the benefit of the appellant or the use to which such monies
           were put. Evidence of money transfers are  limited  in  duration
           and amount and are not consistent with the  claim  of  continual
           support from 2018 [17(e)].


        v. Taking the appellant's case at its highest and applying  section
           55 Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009,  the  Judge
           noted the appellant had spent almost 16 years living  in  either
           Somalia or Kenya, he has no relationship with his siblings,  has
           not seen his mother for  approximately  13  years.  Evidence  of
           contact is extremely limited. The appellant has long established
           ties to Somalia and Kenya. The respondent's  decision  does  not
           amount to unlawful interference with  the  rights  protected  by
           article 8, any such interference being proportionate and  lawful
           [17(f)].


       vi. Having considered the Razgar questions, the  appellant  had  not
           shown the respondent's decision  was  an  unlawful  interference
           with a protected right [18].


      vii. Having considered the public interest set out in section  117  B
           Nationality, Immigration, Asylum Act 2002  Judge  was  persuaded
           that  the  decision  is  consistent  with  the  public  interest
           considerations and proportionate in all the circumstances [19].



     4. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-tier Tribunal, the operative part of the
        grant being in the following terms:

        3.   The grounds asserts that the judge has erred  in  law  as  the
             appellant (sic) had erroneously concluded  that  the  appellant
             was over the age of 18 and in his finding  that  the  appellant
             was leading an independent life; and  he  had  failed  to  give
             clear reasons for rejecting the sponsors oral evidence and  the
             documentary evidence.


        4.   At [17 (a)] the judge accepted that the appellant was the  son
             of the UK sponsor and that she had been granted refugee  status
             in the UK.


        5.   At [17 (b)] he rejected the respondent's  assertion  that  the
             appellant looked significantly older than his claimed  date  of
             birth in a photograph as this was no more than an invitation to
             speculate.  However,  at  [17  (c)]  the  judge  rejected   the
             documentary evidence of the birth certificate  as  it  was  not
             contemporaneous and dental records, whilst they were consistent
             with the appellant's claimed age, there  were  also  consistent
             with the appellant being significantly older than  his  claimed
             age. No further reasons were given for these findings.


        6.   The judge found at [17 (d)] that the appellant had been  cared
             for so long by members of his family  in  Kenya  and  that  the
             sponsor had accepted that the appellant was the  responsibility
             of others and that he was leading an independent life.


        7.   It is considered that the judge has arguably taken  irrelevant
             matters into account and has overall failed  to  give  adequate
             reasons for rejecting the birth certificate and dental  records
             and had failed to give sufficient reasons for finding that  the
             appellant was leading an independent life.


        8.   Permission is granted.


Error of law

     5. Mr Brown brought to the Tribunal's attention the fact  that  within
        the Secretary of State's bundle there appeared to be two  decisions
        made by the ECO, the first  dated  2  October  2019  and  a  second
        decision dated 22 October 2019.
     6. Both decisions refer to the application for entry clearance made on
        2 August 2019, but an important  aspect  of  the  22  October  2019
        decision is reference to a birth certificate having been submitted,
        registered three years after the appellant's  birth.  There  is  no
        copy of this certificate in the papers submitted to the Judge.
     7. The appeal submitted by the appellant on 1 November  2019  referred
        to the date of the ECO decision as 22 October 2019.  It  cannot  be
        established that the  reference  in  the  determination  to  the  2
        October 2019 is a typographical error, with the other 2 having been
        omitted, as the date of the decision being considered by the  Judge
        is specifically written as being 02 October 2019.
     8. It appears on the face of it, therefore, that the Judge  determined
        an appeal against the earlier decision which was never appealed and
        is not referred to in the notice of appeal, rather then the  appeal
        against the decision of the 22 October  2019.  In  that  case,  the
        appeal against the decision of 22 October 2019 technically  remains
        outstanding even though there is an overlap in some of the text  of
        both decisions.
     9. It was agreed the appropriate way forward is for  the  decision  of
        the Judge to be set aside and for the case to be  remitted  to  the
        First-tier Tribunal sitting at Manchester to be heard afresh  by  a
        judge other than Judge Gould who can determine the  merits  of  the
        appeal against the decision of 22 October 2019.
    10. As there is a dispute in relation to the age of the  appellant  the
        birth certificate referred to by the ECO in the later decision  may
        be of some importance. Mr Brown indicated  that  those  instructing
        him will do all they can to obtain a  copy  of  that  document  and
        serve it for the purposes of the next appeal hearing.

Decision

    11. The Judge materially erred in law. I set the decision  aside.  This
        appeal shall be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
        Manchester to be heard afresh by a judge other than Judge Gould.

   Anonymity.

    12. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 12 August 2021












