
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18678/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14 September 2021             |              On 23 September    |
|                                 |2021                             |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                             muhammad awais shah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance or representation
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a Pakistani national who was born  on  9  April  1982.
    His appeal against the respondent's refusal of his human  rights  claim
    was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Moore)  on  25  April
    2019.  At a hearing which took place on 4  September  2019,  the  FtT's
    decision was found by Upper Tribunal Judge Craig to have  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


 2. Judge Craig held that the FtT had given adequate  reasons  for  finding
    that the appellant had used a  proxy  in  his  English  language  test.
    Judge Craig considered the FtT to have fallen into error,  however,  in
    that it failed to consider whether the appellant could properly be said
    to have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his teenage
    step-children.  Judge Craig directed that the decision  on  the  appeal
    would be remade in the Upper Tribunal and that the sole issue would  be
    whether  the  appellant  had  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
    relationship with those children, so  as  potentially  to  attract  the
    protection of s117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002.


 3. Judge Craig retired before the  resumed  hearing  was  listed.   On  18
    August 2020, the Principal Resident Judge issued a  Transfer  Order  so
    that the appeal could be heard by a differently constituted Tribunal.

 4. The appeal came promptly before Judge Pickup on 20 October 2020, for  a
    resumed hearing.  The appellant appeared in person.  The appellant  was
    represented then, as she is now,  by  Ms  Cunha,  a  Senior  Presenting
    Officer.  The appellant applied for an adjournment, stating that he had
    not been given proper notice of the hearing.  Judge Pickup charted  the
    history of delay in the case before agreeing to adjourn on that  basis.
    He expressed disquiet at  the  appellant's  failure  to  prosecute  the
    appeal efficiently and even raised the possibility of making  an  order
    for wasted costs against the appellant personally.

 5. There was then a listing before me, remotely, on 9 February 2021.   The
    appellant joined that hearing and he was  represented  by  counsel,  Mr
    Mavrantonis.  The hearing  was  adjourned  as  a  result  of  technical
    problems and I issued further directions to  the  parties  in  which  I
    wrote this:


         [4] It seems that  the  shot  which  Judge  Pickup  quite  properly
         sounded across the appellant's boughs has gone unheeded.  When  the
         matter was called on before me today, the appellant was represented
         by  Mr  Mavrantonis  of  counsel,  instructed  by   Farani   Taylor
         Solicitors.  Mr Mavrantonis told me that the appellant had only re-
         instructed Farani Taylor last Thursday, and that counsel had  spent
         a considerable time providing  advice  regarding  steps  which  the
         appellant had failed to take and was not able to undertake  in  the
         limited time available.  A witness statement had been produced  but
         it remained the case - nearly eighteen months after the decision of
         the FtT was set aside - that there was no evidence to show that the
         appellant has a relationship with these two children, let  alone  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.


         [5] Mr Mavrantonis was extremely frank  about  the  situation.   He
         stated that the appellant had moved from one firm of solicitors  to
         another in exactly the way which had previously been noted by Judge
         Pickup, and that he had even been  moving  from  one  solicitor  to
         another within the same firm.  He stated candidly that he had  told
         the appellant that the time had come for him to stay with one  firm
         of representatives and to prepare for this appeal.


         [6] I indicated to Mr Mavrantonis that I would have had no sympathy
         with the appellant, who seems to  me  to  have  failed  to  heed  a
         perfectly fair and  proper  warning  from  another  judge  of  this
         Tribunal.  The fair and just course, in circumstances  in  which  a
         party fails entirely to co-operate with the Tribunal, is to proceed
         with the appeal on the basis of the evidence adduced.  The  outcome
         of the appeal, had I been able to take that course, would have been
         absolutely clear.


         [7] Fortunately for the appellant, the hearing by Skype proved  not
         to be viable.  Ms Cunha and I experienced  extensive  and  repeated
         connectivity problems  of  a  kind  which  I  have  not  previously
         encountered.  However many times the connection was dropped and re-
         established, it was simply not  possible  to  retain  a  consistent
         visual and audio link between all participants.  I was left with no
         option, in the circumstances, but to speak to Mr Mavrantonis and Ms
         Cunha by telephone so as to manage the future progress of the case,
         which could obviously not be completed substantively in that way.


         [8] Mr Mavrantonis sought a 28 day period  in  which  to  file  and
         serve the evidence upon which the appellant is to rely.   Ms  Cunha
         did not object.  I indicated that I would accede to  that  request.
         I hereby direct, therefore, that any further  evidence  upon  which
         the appellant seeks to rely MUST be filed and served within 28 days
         of today's date.


         [9] The appeal will be listed before me for a face to face  resumed
         hearing, no sooner than 16 March  2021.   In  the  event  that  the
         appellant does not have representation or fails to file evidence in
         compliance with the direction  above,  my  intention  is  that  the
         hearing will proceed.


         [10]  The  appellant  must  understand,  as  I  explained   to   Mr
         Mavrantonis, that the obligation to gather and file evidence is his
         own  obligation,  and  the  fact   that   he   wishes   to   change
         representatives does not relieve  him  of  that  obligation.   This
         appeal has been pending in the Upper Tribunal for  nearly  eighteen
         months and  the  only  outstanding  issue  is  one  of  fact.   The
         appellant must, if he is to  succeed,  show  only  that  he  has  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship with these  two  children.   He
         does not need solicitors to gather that evidence for him or even to
         advise upon it, and it is highly unlikely that I  will  afford  him
         any further time to prove that single point.

 6. The appeal was due to return before me remotely on 20  July  2021.   At
    1258 on 19 July 2021, his then solicitors  wrote  to  the  Tribunal  to
    state that the appellant was experiencing Covid-19 symptoms and that he
    would be  unable  to  attend  a  hearing  physically  or  remotely.   I
    adjourned the appeal for a third time.


 7. It was in these circumstances that the  appeal  was  listed  before  me
    again today, for a face-to-face hearing.  Notice of hearing was sent to
    the appellant and to his solicitors (Messrs Farani Taylor) by post  and
    email respectively on 16 August 2021.  On  10  September  2021,  Farani
    Taylor sent a letter to  the  Tribunal,  by  email,  stating  that  the
    appellant had not cooperated with them and had  failed  to  respond  to
    attempts to provide the evidence required for the resumed hearing.   In
    the circumstances, they withdrew their representation.

 8. Mr Mavrantonis of counsel also wrote to the Tribunal, on the same date,
    to explain that he and his solicitors would no longer be acting for the
    appellant due to his 'non-compliance and non-cooperation'.

 9. I stated at the hearing that I was satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
    been given proper notice of the hearing at the  address  given  to  the
    Tribunal for correspondence.  There had been  no  written  notification
    that  a  different  address  should  be  used  for  correspondence   in
    compliance with rule 13(5) of  the  Procedure  Rules.   Notice  of  the
    hearing was also provided to the solicitors who  were  acting  for  the
    appellant at that time.  I stated at the hearing that I  was  satisfied
    that there was no reasonable explanation for the  appellant's  absence.
    I considered it to be in accordance with the over-riding  objective  to
    proceed with the hearing in the appellant's absence, and I did so.

Submissions

10. Ms Cunha submitted that the appellant had not discharged the burden  of
    proving that he has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
    his two step-children.  There were statements from  the  appellant  and
    his ex-wife but neither had attended  to  speak  to  those  statements.
    There were some cards and other such documents but  they  were  of  low
    evidential  value.   The  absence  of   relevant   evidence   including
    photographs of the appellant with the children, was notable.  Ms  Cunha
    submitted that the appeal be dismissed.

11. I announced at the end of Ms Cunha's submissions that the appeal  would
    be dismissed and that my reasons for  that  decision  would  follow  in
    writing.

Subsequent Events

12. At 1214 on 15 September 2021, I received an email from a member of  the
    Upper Tribunal's staff, forwarding to me an email which  the  appellant
    had sent to the general Immigration and Asylum Chamber Customer Service
    email address (customer.service@justice.gov.uk) at 1655 on 13 September
    2021.  It was  entitled  'Appeal  Adjourwithdrawl  [sic]  request'  and
    stated as follows:


         Dear Sirs,


         My appeal is scheduled for a hearing on the 14th September 2021.  I
         have received an email at the last minute on last Friday  the  10th
         September, from my lawyer's firm that they are not going to act for
         me in my appeal scheduled for  tomorrow,  given  their  unjustified
         reasons and leaving me with no time to seek  further  legal  advice
         and representation. I would  therefore  humbly  request  to  kindly
         either adjourn my hearing for  a  next  date  or  if  that  is  not
         possible or the judge doesn't allow it, I will have no other choice
         but to request you to withdraw my appeal as I don't have  my  legal
         representation  at  this  moment.  Please  advise  whether  it   is
         adjourned or withdrawn, so that I can sort my legal representation?


         I can simply apologise for this last minute change of circumstances
         as it has been beyond my control and  due  to  very  unprofessional
         behaviour of my previous lawyer.


         Should you require me of any further information, please feel  free
         to contact me directly.


         Kindest regards,


         Muhammad Awais Shah

13. It seems that this email was not brought to  my  attention  before  the
    hearing because it was sent to the general IAC email address.   It  was
    forwarded from that email address to the  address  for  Upper  Tribunal
    correspondence (fieldhousecorrespondence@justice.gov.uk) at 0942 on  15
    September and was conveyed to me reasonably promptly thereafter.


14. I have considered whether to take any action in light of this email.  I
    have considered, specifically, whether to set aside the decision  which
    I announced at the hearing.  I have considered whether, had I known  of
    the appellant's email at the hearing, I would have adjourned the appeal
    or would have consented to it being withdrawn.

15. I would not have taken either of those courses.  The  history  of  this
    appeal speaks for itself.   The  appellant  has  failed  repeatedly  to
    cooperate with his representatives.  He was under  no  illusions  about
    the need to cooperate with them after the last hearing.  I am  entirely
    satisfied that this was underlined to him by Mr Mavrantonis of  counsel
    and, in any event, it was made clear to the appellant in the directions
    I sent out after the hearing.  I do not accept that the  appellant  has
    been let down by his solicitors, or  that  they  have  displayed  'very
    unprofessional behaviour'.  The reality, as Mr Mavrantonis explained in
    his courteous letter to the Tribunal, is that it is the  appellant  who
    has failed to cooperate, just as he has done on previous occasions.


16. There is a further point. As I explained to the appellant earlier  this
    year, and as I then explained in the final paragraph of the  directions
    I sent to the parties, it is the appellant who bears responsibility for
    the progression of this case.  He is not (and has never been)  required
    to undertake any difficult exercises in evidence-gathering.  There need
    be no expert evidence in a case such as this.  All that  he  needed  to
    establish was that he has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with
    his step-children.  The  appellant  has  failed  to  gather  very  much
    evidence of that despite the amount of time that this appeal  has  been
    pending before the Upper Tribunal.  He has failed to cooperate with the
    Tribunal just as he has failed to cooperate with his solicitors and  it
    would not have been in the interests of justice, had  I  known  of  his
    application to adjourn, to accede to that application.

17. It was presumably in anticipation of that outcome  that  the  appellant
    asked to withdraw his appeal in  the  event  that  an  adjournment  was
    refused.  Had I known of that application, I would not  have  given  my
    consent to the withdrawal of the appellant's case under rule  17(2)  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Given the  history
    of the matter, and given the appellant's lack of cooperation  with  his
    solicitors and the Tribunal,  the  interests  of  justice  militate  in
    favour of there being a concluded judicial decision on the  matters  in
    issue.

18. It is for these reasons that I have decided to determine the appeal  on
    its merits and have refused to take  any  action  in  response  to  the
    alternative requests made in the appellant's email.


Analysis


19. The respondent's decision in this case focussed  on  the  allegation  -
    since accepted by the FtT - that the appellant  used  a  proxy  in  his
    English language test.  Consideration was also given to the appellant's
    relationship with his wife and her children, however.   The  respondent
    did not accept that there was a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    between the appellant  and  his  wife.   In  relation  to  the  claimed
    relationship between the appellant and his  step-children,  the  letter
    said this:


         Consideration has been given to the fact that your claimed  partner
         Asia Kamaly has 2 British citizen  children  residing  in  the  UK.
         However,  you  have  failed  to  provide  any  evidence  with  your
         application to demonstrate that you  have  parental  responsibility
         with the children on [sic] that there is an  exceptional  level  of
         dependency between you and the children.   Notwithstanding,  if  it
         was accepted you have a parental relationship with the children  it
         is stated in your previous appeal  papers  IA/26374/2015  that  the
         children reside with their biological father in the week and all of
         their needs are met by him.  The children are thought to see  their
         mother Asia Kamaly only at weekends.  You have provided no evidence
         to suggest the impact of returning to Pakistan in order for you  to
         apply for entry clearance lawfully will  have  any  adverse  impact
         upon the children.   There  is  no  reason  why  contact  with  the
         children cannot be maintained from abroad.   Many  people  maintain
         contact with family and friends from abroad through modern means of
         communication and visits.  You have  provided  no  reason  why  you
         cannot be expected to do the same.  The children  would  also  have
         the option to visit you in Pakistan.

20. Before the FtT, the appellant made a witness statement which ran  to  8
    pages.  All that was said about the children was that  the  refusal  of
    his application was 'going to effect  [sic]  our  life  and  my  wife's
    children whom I have much attached to.'  The remainder of the unindexed
    and unpaginated bundle made  no  reference  to  the  appellant's  step-
    children and there was no evidence of  his  claimed  relationship  with
    them.


21. It seems that this absence of evidence was identified by  counsel  when
    the matter came  before  the  FtT,  since  the  file  also  contains  a
    manuscript statement from the appellant's wife, which was signed on the
    day of that hearing (11 April 2019).  In that statement, she says  that
    her two children live 'with both my ex-husband and myself as  we  share
    equal custody of the children'.  She states that the children are  very
    attached to the appellant and that he is not allowed to work due to his
    immigration status, with the result that she is the  sole  breadwinner.
    Whilst the judge in the FtT recorded the contents of this statement  in
    his [14], he failed to come to a reasoned conclusion  on  the  question
    posed by statute,  of  whether  the  appellant  enjoys  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with the children

22. Additional statements have been made by the appellant during  the  life
    of the appeal in the Upper Tribunal.  Amongst other things,  he  stated
    in those statements that he was 'broken' by the FtT's decision and that
    he has a strong bond with the children.  He goes so far as to state  in
    one of those statements that he is the  children's  primary  carer  and
    that they spend most of their time with him, since his wife  works  and
    her ex-husband has them for only 2 or 3 days per week.

23. In one of the more recent statements, the appellant  confirms  that  he
    and his wife have separated.  He claims that the children wanted him to
    stay at home and to live  with  them.   He  claims  that  he  finds  it
    difficult to express in words the feelings he has for the two children,
    and he gives examples of the activities he has  undertaken  with  them,
    including going to the park, cooking with them,  and  playing  computer
    games.  He states that the older of the two  children  is  particularly
    attached to him.

24. There is also a more recent statement  from  the  appellant's  ex-wife.
    She states that her children are 17 and 14 (at today's date)  and  that
    they really 'got along with' the appellant.  She states  that  he  took
    them to school and became like a father figure to them.  She  does  not
    disclose the reasons why the appellant and she separated but she states
    that a divorce was applied for in July 2020.   Her  sons  were  against
    this, she states, and they remained  in  contact  with  the  appellant.
    During the pandemic he had been unable to come to the house but he  was
    'still performing all his responsibilities' towards the  children.   He
    had been in contact with them and had helped them with their  homework.
    When the restrictions had eased, he had been to the house and had spent
    time with the boys.  The appellant's ex-wife says that  this  made  her
    happy because the appellant's relationship with the  children  had  not
    come to an end.  She states that it would tear the family apart if  the
    appellant were to be removed from the UK  and  that  the  children  had
    taken a keen interest in the appellant's immigration case.

25. Appended to the appellant's most recent statements  are  some  birthday
    cards from the appellant to the children.  There is no further evidence
    of the claimed relationship.  There is not a single photograph  in  the
    file of the appellant with the children.  Despite the  claim  that  the
    appellant is in regular contact with the children now  that  he  is  no
    longer living with them, there is no evidence of contact  by  telephone
    or other forms  of  communication  (email,  Whatsapp  etc).   There  is
    nothing from the school(s) to show that the appellant has  ever  played
    any role in the lives of the children.  Given the ages of the children,
    who are said to be exercised by the ongoing doubt over the  appellant's
    immigration status, it is odd that there are no witness statements from
    them.  There is, in summary, a complete dearth of the evidence I  would
    expect to see in a case of this nature.

26. In respect of the witness statements made by the appellant and his  ex-
    wife, I decline to attach weight to them  since  they  have  failed  to
    attend the Tribunal  to  be  cross-examined  on  those  statements  and
    because the assertions therein are  wholly  unsupported  by  any  other
    evidence of a genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

27. In the circumstances, I come to the clear conclusion that the appellant
    has failed to demonstrate that he has any ongoing relationship with his
    ex-wife's two sons.  He does not satisfy the relationship condition  in
    s117B(6) of the 2002 Act and it is unnecessary, in those circumstances,
    to consider whether the children can reasonably be  expected  to  leave
    the UK.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT having been set aside, I remake the decision on  the
appeal by dismissing it on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.

                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                                                           21 September 2021






