

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18429/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Bradford                                         Decision &
Reasons Promulgated
On 19 September 2018                                 On 25 September 2018


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              ALI ABDUL MAJEED
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Ahmed instructed by B Assured Law.
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnycz - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Caswell promulgated on  the  13  September  2017  in
        which the Judge dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, was born on 13 December 1980.
        The Judge notes the applicant's immigration history  including  the
        application to join his wife in the United Kingdom  refused  by  an
        Entry Clearance Officer on 16 June 2016.
     3. The Judge considered the evidence before setting  out  findings  of
        fact from [14] in the following terms:


             14.  I have seen the SA302, and the sponsor explained that  it
                  had been submitted twice to the Respondent, once with  the
                  application and once with the appeal. The sponsor gave her
                  evidence very clearly and openly, and her  employment  and
                  self-employment were supported with numerous documents.  I
                  am satisfied that she earns over  all  in  excess  of  the
                  financial requirement,  from  both  employment  and  self-
                  employment, and that she submitted the correct documents.


             15.  The sponsor also explained that  she  and  the  Appellant
                  were  in  love.  In  view  of  the  Appellant's  appalling
                  immigration history, her faith  in  his  intentions  could
                  well be  argued  to  be  misplaced,  but  she  is  clearly
                  genuine,  and  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  I   am
                  satisfied that there is family life between them.  I  take
                  into account the time they have  lived  together  and  the
                  visits made  by  the  sponsor  to  see  the  Appellant  in
                  Pakistan.


             16.  However, I fully endorse the Respondent's case that  this
                  application is  tainted  by  the  Appellant's  immigration
                  history in the UK, which has contrived  in  a  significant
                  way to frustrate the intentions of  the  Rules.  I  reject
                  outright his attempt to explain this by putting  blame  on
                  solicitors who have been given no  chance  to  answer  the
                  criticisms made.  This  is  not  a  mandatory  ground  for
                  refusal,  and  there  is  a   discretion,   but   in   the
                  circumstances  of  the  appeal,  the  Appellant's  adverse
                  conduct in the past must carry significant weight, and  in
                  my judgement justified the decision made.


             17.  I note that the doctor's letter from the  sponsor  states
                  that she has  been  attending  counselling  regularly  for
                  depression, and that this is due to end soon.  However,  I
                  note she  is  able  to  carry  out  employment  and  self-
                  employment on a full-time basis, and this  indicates  that
                  she is managing normal life. Her evidence  before  me  did
                  not at any point give signs of greater than  usual  nerves
                  or emotional issues.


             18.  Applying at Lord Bingham's five stage test, I accept that
                  the Appellant has shown there is family life  between  him
                  and the sponsor. However, I do not find he has shown  that
                  this  would  be  interfered  with  if  the  refusal   were
                  maintained. The  sponsor  has  twice  been  to  visit  her
                  husband in Pakistan. Despite her account that  her  mother
                  in law and sister in law were unkind to her in the UK  and
                  looked down on her as  a  divorcee,  she  made  these  two
                  visits, and  there  is  no  particular  evidence  of  ill-
                  treatment. In addition, the Appellant is a man in apparent
                  good health who could reasonably be expected to  work  and
                  set up home with the sponsor independently in Pakistan, in
                  a similar way as they appear  to  have  done  in  the  UK.
                  Therefore, there has not been  shown  to  be  interference
                  with family life caused by the refusal of entry clearance.
                  Even if there were  such  interference  (which  I  do  not
                  find), the Respondent has shown  the  interference  to  be
                  lawful, to promote the legitimate aim of  the  maintenance
                  of effective immigration control, and proportionate.  This
                  is especially the case  given  the  appalling  immigration
                  history of the Appellant.


     4. The appellant sought permission to appeal asserting the Judge erred
        in her approach to paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration  Rules.  It
        is asserted there is no reference to the decision in PS  (paragraph
        320(11) discretion care needed) (India) [2010] UKUT 440  making  it
        unclear whether the Judge followed the guidance  provided  in  that
        case. The grounds assert the Judge failed to set her  mind  to  the
        relevant question which was whether in the  circumstances  of  this
        case the appellants breach of UK immigration law  was  sufficiently
        aggravating so as to justify the refusal. The  grounds  assert  the
        Judge failed to properly take into account that the appellant  left
        the UK voluntarily with a  view  to  regularising  his  immigration
        status. The  appellant  also  asserts  the  Judge  failed  to  give
        detailed  and  anxious  consideration  to  the  situation  of   the
        appellant's British spouse and whether it will  be  reasonable  and
        proportionate to ask the appellant's spouse to relocate to Pakistan
        to continue family life with the  appellant,  thus  erring  in  her
        approach to article 8 ECHR.
     5. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-Tier
        Tribunal 7 March 2018.



Error of law


     6. The Judge was clearly aware of the appellant's immigration  history
        and endorsed the respondent's findings in relation to the  question
        of whether the appellant had contrived  in  a  significant  way  to
        frustrate the intentions of the Rules. The Judge finds  at  [1]  of
        the decision under challenge the following:


             1. The Appellant was  born  on  13  December  1980  and  is  a
                Pakistani national. He claims to have arrived in the UK  in
                1996. On the 10 January 2015 he applied for  naturalisation
                in the UK and provided in support  of  this  application  a
                forged document saying  he  had  ILR.  The  Appellant  then
                applied on the 9 September 2014 for leave to remain as  the
                partner of his wife  Miriam  Ashraf.  The  application  was
                rejected as  he  did  not  pay  the  application  fee.  The
                Appellant renewed his application on the 29 September 2014,
                and the application  was  refused  on  11  March  2015.  He
                applied for leave outside the Rules on 29  June  2015.  The
                Appellant  was  encountered  by  the  Home  Office  on   an
                enforcement visit to his home in the UK on 4 July 2015.  He
                was  detained  by  the  Home  Office  subject  to   removal
                directions. He lodged a  pre-action  protocol  and  further
                representations on 5 July 2015. The Pre-Action Protocol was
                addressed by the Home Office on 10  July  2015.  The  leave
                outside the Rules application and  further  representations
                were refused no right of appeal on  31  July  2015.  On  18
                August 2015 the Appellant was notified that he was  subject
                to an enforcement removal on an Emergency Travel  Document,
                to take place on the 27 August 2015. On the 20 August  2015
                the Appellants Representative requested that the  Appellant
                to be allowed to leave voluntarily  and  pay  for  his  own
                flight. This was accepted. He left the UK on the 25  August
                2015. The appellant then applied to join his wife in the UK
                and was refused by the Respondent the 16 June 2016.


     7. The respondent's case is that 320(11) is satisfied as the appellant
        entered the UK illegally, used a forged document in an  attempt  to
        gain British citizenship, remained in the UK for a further 10 years
        in the knowledge  he  had  no  valid  leave  to  be  here,  created
        frivolous barriers to his removal, and was detained for 47 days  at
        the public expense and only volunteered to pay for his  own  flight
        at the last minute, in the knowledge his removal was imminent.
     8. The Tribunal  in  PS  (India)  found  that  a  decision-maker  must
        exercise great care in assessing the aggravating features  said  to
        justify refusal and must have regard  to  the  public  interest  in
        encouraging those unlawfully in the  UK  to  leave  and  regularise
        their status by entry clearance. The Tribunal also found  that  all
        cases must be considered on their merits and are,  therefore,  fact
        sensitive.
     9. Although the Judge does not specifically mention PS (India)  it  is
        clear from a reading of the decision that the Judge considered  the
        evidence with the required degree of  anxious  scrutiny,  including
        noting both the reasons why it was said the appellant had contrived
        in a significant way to frustrate the intentions of the immigration
        rules and also the circumstances in which the  appellant  left  the
        United Kingdom voluntarily. The finding of the Judge  is  that  the
        appellant leaving voluntarily, even at cost  to  himself,  did  not
        warrant the appeal being  allowed.  Mr  Ahmed  in  his  submissions
        submitted that the Judge should have given greater  weight  to  the
        fact the appellant left in the public interest, as recognised in PS
        (India), and less  weight  to  the  appellant's  conduct  in  other
        regards.
    10. As the Judge considered the evidence with the  required  degree  of
        anxious scrutiny and has given adequate reasons in support  of  the
        findings made the weight to be given to the evidence was  a  matter
        for the Judge. It is not made out the Judge failed to  factor  into
        the assessment that the appellant had agreed to  leave  voluntarily
        but noted this was a last-minute  decision  in  the  knowledge  his
        removal was imminent and on the advice of a  legal  representative.
        There is nothing in the case law that says a person who does  leave
        is entitled to have past conduct disregarded for, as  the  Tribunal
        found in PS, this is a fact sensitive issue. The use  of  a  forged
        document in an attempt to gain British citizenship and therefore  a
        right to remain in the United Kingdom and gain access  to  all  the
        services to which a British citizen  which  is  lawfully  entitled,
        when the appellant knew he had no such right and sought to  mislead
        the respondent by the use of a forged document  together  with  the
        other aspects recorded at [13] of the decision, support the finding
        that paragraph 320(11) is engaged in relation to this appeal. It is
        not made out the weight given to the competing aspects by the Judge
        or the conclusion by the Judge that  320(11)  is  engage  has  been
        shown to be a finding that is either irrational,  contrary  to  the
        evidence, or not reasonably open to the Judge.
    11. The second ground challenging  the  article  8  assessment  has  no
        arguable merit. The only evidence before the Judge was the  witness
        statement of the appellant's spouse indicating that she  wished  to
        remain in the United Kingdom where she has a business and  employed
        income and that she does not  wish  to  live  in  Pakistan.  It  is
        accepted the appellant's  wife  wishes  to  remain  in  the  United
        Kingdom, but this is not the required test. Indeed,  there  appears
        to have been nothing before the Judge that properly  identified  or
        discussed the  correct  test  or  establish  that  there  were  any
        insurmountable obstacles, so far as that term  is  understood  from
        existing case law, to family life continuing in Pakistan. The Judge
        clearly considered the information that was made available with the
        required degree of anxious scrutiny; but nothing  was  provided  to
        support a finding that it would be unreasonable or disproportionate
        to expect the sponsor to leave  the  United  Kingdom  and  continue
        family life with her husband in Pakistan. The  conclusion  to  this
        effect at [18] has not been shown to be infected by arguable  legal
        error. As family life can continue  there  will  be  no  breach  of
        article 8 ECHR in relation to this aspect.
    12. The Judge goes further however in concluding that even if there  is
        interference with family life the  respondent  has  discharged  the
        burden of proof upon him to the  required  standard  to  show  such
        interference is proportionate. The Judge recognises in light of the
        appellant's appalling immigration history that this is an  arguably
        sustainable conclusion. It has not been shown that the dismissal of
        the claim on human rights grounds is  infected  by  arguable  legal
        error.
    13. As the appellant fails to establish  any  arguable  basis  for  the
        Upper  Tribunal  interfering  in  this  decision,  the  appeal   is
        dismissed.


Decision

    14. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    15. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 20 September 2018












