
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/18137/2016
     HU/18138/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3 July 2017                             |On 7 July 2017                   |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     s s
                                     p s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Worthington, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellants (as they appeared respectively before the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellants, S S and P S are mother  and  daughter;  the
    second appellant was born in 2015.  The  first  appellant  has  another
    child (K) with whom she does not live but with whom she has contact  in
    the United Kingdom who is also a British citizen.  The first  appellant
    has a long history of  offending  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  full
    particulars of that offending are set out at [11]  of  Judge  Hindson's
    decision which was promulgated on 6  December  2016  and  by  which  he
    allowed the appeal of both appellants on human rights grounds  (Article
    8 ECHR).  It against that decision the Secretary of State now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal largely concern the apparent failure of the judge
    to make reference to  either  the  Immigration  Rules  (in  particular,
    paragraph 399(a)) and also the statutory provisions under  Section  117
    of the 2002 Act (as amended).  The grounds also assert that  the  judge
    elevated the best interests  of  the  children  in  this  appeal  to  a
    paramount consideration rather  than  one  of  primary  interest.   The
    grounds assert that the judge failed to apply MM (Uganda)  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 450 and did not consider insufficient  detail  or  give  sufficient
    weight to the appellant's criminal and immigration history.

 3. In his submissions to the  Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  Worthington,  for  the
    appellants, submitted that the judge had not been required to refer  in
    terms to any particular item of case law or to statutory provisions  or
    the Immigration Rules.  However, the important issue was whether or not
    he had considered all the relevant evidence and also  had  applied  any
    relevant legal provision to the facts as he found them.

 4. It is true that the judge does not refer in terms to the "unduly harsh"
    test which is set out in paragraph  399(a)  of  HC  395  (as  amended).
    Likewise the judge did not refer that in terms to any part  of  Section
    117 of the 2002 Act.  I  agree  with  the  principle  submitted  by  Mr
    Worthington that it is not necessarily an error of law for the Tribunal
    to fail to refer to particular legal provisions; what is  important  is
    that the judge applies the law correctly.

 5. In the present instance, I am satisfied that he has  done  so.   I  say
    that for the following reasons.   First,  the  judge  has  conducted  a
    proper analysis of  all  the  evidence  which  was  before  him,  which
    included evidence which had not been before previous  Tribunals  (whose
    decisions had been reversed on appeal).  It was open to  the  judge  to
    find, on the  evidence,  that  K's  best  interests  require  that  she
    continue to have a relationship with her mother, the  first  appellant.
    At [48], the judge wrote, "I am satisfied that removing  the  appellant
    to Jamaica will fragment the family in a way that would be damaging  to
    the children."  It was correct for the judge to  take  account  of  the
    inter-relationship between the two children  of  the  first  appellant,
    namely K and the second appellant.  Secondly, I am satisfied  that  the
    judge, although he did not refer to it in terms, did address  his  mind
    to the correct test (that of "undue harshness") and further that it was
    possible, on the evidence, for the judge to reach the finding  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for  the  second  appellant  to  go  to  live  in
    Jamaica.  The judge took account of  the  fact  that  K  is  a  British
    citizen who would not be required, even by the respondent's own  policy
    guidelines, to leave the European Union.

 6. Thirdly, I am satisfied the judge has paid proper regard to the  public
    interests in this appeal.  He has left no doubt that he has  considered
    the appellant's lengthy and  appalling  criminal  history  and  he  has
    provided reasons (albeit brief) for finding that,  notwithstanding  the
    public interest concerned with the appellant's removal, she  should  be
    allowed to stay on human rights grounds.  Fourthly, I am not satisfied,
    as the grounds assert, that the judge has elevated the  best  interests
    of the children to the status of paramountcy.  He  has  dealt  with  it
    first as he was required to do so (ZH (Tanzania) [2011] 2 AC 166)

 7. Ultimately, the  judge  has  reached  a  conclusion  based  upon  sound
    findings of fact which were,  in  turn,  achieved  following  a  proper
    analysis of all the relevant  evidence.   In  such  circumstances,  the
    Tribunal should hesitate before interfering with the conclusions  of  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I am aware that, by reference to  the  same
    facts, a different Tribunal  may  have  reached  a  different  outcome;
    however, that is not the point.   I  should  only  interfere  with  the
    conclusion of Judge Hindson if I am satisfied that he  has  perpetrated
    an error in law and, for the reasons I have given above, I find that he
    has not done so.

Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 5 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane









