
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18997/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 September 2019                  |On 12 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                   SECRETARY OF STATE FOR HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SARSHAR AHMED
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:              Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr Richard Singer, Counsel instructed by
M&K Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  appeals  from  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Thomas sitting at Birmingham
    on 9 April 2019) allowing the claimant's human  rights  appeal  on  the
    ground that there were exceptional circumstances in his particular case
    which lessened the public interest in immigration control  to  a  point
    where it was outweighed by his protected right to private life.



The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 31 July 2019 Judge Pooler granted the Secretary of State  permission
    to appeal for the following reasons: "It is arguable that although  the
    [claimant's] former representatives did not give him good advice,  they
    did not blatantly fail to follow his  instructions  and  so  the  Judge
    misapplied the decision  in  Mansur  (Immigration  Adviser's  failings:
    Article 8) Banlgadesh [2018] UKUT 00274 (IAC); and that she  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for explaining why this was one of the rare cases
    in which the representative's failings constituted  reason  to  qualify
    the public interest in immigration control."

Relevant Background

 3. The claimant entered the UK on  24  September  2003  with  valid  entry
    clearance as a student, and he thereafter had continuous  lawful  leave
    until 22 August 2013, when his appeal rights were exhausted in  respect
    of an in-time application for leave to remain as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    student migrant made on 18 February 2013, which was refused on 25 March
    2013, and dismissed on appeal on 11 August 2013.

 4. On 28 February 2014 the claimant applied for indefinite leave to remain
    in the UK on the basis of having accrued 10 years' lawful residence  in
    the UK.  The application was refused on 1 July 2014  with  a  right  of
    appeal.

 5. In the decision promulgated on 12 November  2014,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Stott allowed the claimant's appeal as he accepted  the  argument
    of his legal representative that the effect of  the  decision  made  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot on  11  August  2013  (dismissing  the
    appeal against the refusal of further leave to remain as a student) was
    that there had been no final  determination  of  the  application,  and
    consequently the claimant's leave had been extended to 28 February 2014
    under section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971.  While Judge  Talbot  had
    dismissed the appeal under the Rules on account  of  the  claimant  not
    having a valid CAS at the date of application and not having passed the
    English language test stipulated in the conditional offer, Judge Talbot
    had ruled that the concomitant removal decision under  section  47  was
    not in accordance with the law, and had remitted the application to the
    respondent for further consideration under the  Immigration  Rules  "in
    the light of my above findings."

 6. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal. In a  decision
    promulgated on 5 May 2015, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Harris set aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as being erroneous in law.   He
    held that Judge Talbot's direction did not have the effect of extending
    the claimant's leave under section 3C.  The removal decision was not  a
    variation of leave,  and  therefore  the  claimant's  appeal  had  been
    finally determined on 11 August 2013.

 7. The claimant sought permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal. In the
    meantime, on 18 August 2015 he obtained an adjudication  from  a  Legal
    Ombudsman ("LO") that his previous  representatives  had  provided  him
    with poor service, for which she awarded him compensation in the sum of
    �900.

 8. Permission to appeal was refused by the Upper Tribunal and by the Court
    of Appeal on paper. A renewed  oral  application  for  permission  came
    before Lord Justice Vos sitting at the Royal Courts of  Justice  on  19
    May 2016.  Mr Singh, instructed on a direct access basis,  appeared  on
    behalf of the claimant.  One of the arguments advanced by Mr Singh  was
    that the Secretary of State ought to have exercised her  discretion  to
    allow a late application for indefinite leave to remain beyond  the  28
    days from 22 August 2013, when his appeal rights were exhausted,  "when
    there were good reasons for the delay, particularly that  he  had  been
    badly advised and that it was through no fault of his own that  he  was
    placed in the invidious position of making a series of wrong, misguided
    applications."  Mr Singh relied upon the LO's decision.

 9. In his judgment, Vos LJ said at [18] that the alleged negligence of the
    solicitors was a matter of grave concern.  But it was very hard to  say
    that the fact  that  the  claimant  had  received  bad  advice  from  a
    solicitor and had thereby failed to comply with the Rules,  made  it  a
    reason  why  the  claimant  should  be  regarded  as  having  made   an
    application in exceptional circumstances.

10. He observed at [19] that the claimant had a  problem  in  that  his  10
    years did not expire until 23 September 2013.  So, had he been properly
    advised, he might have appealed the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  in
    time, and then withdrawn that appeal and made a further application  on
    24 September 2013: "Had that been the  scenario,  he  might  have  been
    alright."

11. At [22], he said that it would have required "some quite canny  advice"
    for the claimant to be in a better position for certain.  The question,
    however, was not whether the claimant could have been so  advised  that
    he could have succeeded  under  the  Rules  in  getting  permission  to
    remain.  The question was rather  whether  the  argument  that  he  was
    unfairly treated gave rise  to  an  important  point  of  principle  or
    practice (the second appeal test).  At [23], he answered this  question
    in the negative.  Exceptional circumstances were  rarely  applied,  for
    good reasons, and it would not be possible for the Secretary  of  State
    to know when bad advice had been given in  order  to  find  exceptional
    circumstances or  where  it  had  not  been  given.   He  continued  in
    paragraph [24]: "It was also clear that the guidance to which Mr  Singh
    referred, relating as it does to exceptional circumstances like the ill-
    health of the appellant or the situation that the appellant may be in a
    coma, is not comparable to the [claimant's]  situation,  where  he  was
    able to make what applications he wanted and made them on the advice of
    solicitors he instructed."

12. Vos LJ went on to  ask  himself  whether  the  decisions  made  by  the
    Secretary of State were unfair.   At paragraph [25], he said that  they
    could not described as legally unfair.  Nor could it be said  that  the
    Secretary of State had, even arguably, fallen below the standards  that
    she set herself in her guidance.

13. The claimant applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds  on  1
    November 2016, relying on the findings of the LO issued  on  18  August
    2015.  On 5 September  2018  the  Department  gave  their  reasons  for
    refusing the application.  On the topic of  exceptional  circumstances,
    at no point in the report from the ombudsman was any  blame  placed  on
    the Home Office, and therefore the  Home  Office  was  not  obliged  to
    deviate from considering his application in accordance with  the  Rules
    currently in place.  Due  to  his  representative's  poor  service,  he
    failed to be able to meet 10 years' lawful residence in the UK, and  he
    had remained in the UK without lawful leave.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

14. At the hearing of Judge Thomas, both parties were legally  represented.
    In her subsequent decision, the Judge found at [20] that  the  claimant
    was let down by his previous representatives in that,  had  they  given
    good advice, it was likely that he would have been able to make a valid
    application for ILR soon after 24 September 2013.

15. At [21], the Judge set out the guidance given by Lane J in Mansur as to
    the general rule and the circumstances  in  which  the  Tribunal  could
    depart from the general rule. At paragraph [30] of Mansur Lane J held:

         "Once the issue is analysed in this way, it can readily be seen why
         it will be only rarely that an adviser's failings  will  constitute
         such a reason [to qualify the public interest in firm and effective
         immigration control].  As a general matter, poor legal advice  from
         an immigration field will have no  correlation  with  the  relevant
         public interest. The weight that would otherwise need to  be  given
         to the maintenance of effective immigration controls is not  to  be
         reduced just because there happen to be  immigration  advisers  who
         offer poor advice and other services.  Consequently, a  person  who
         takes advice to do X when  doing  Y  might  have  produced  a  more
         favourable  outcome  normally  would  have   to   live   with   the
         consequences."

16. At [22] the Judge said:

         "Unlike in the case of Mansur, the LO in the [claimant's] case does
         not find the claimant's representatives blatantly failed to  follow
         his instructions, but rather that they gave bad advice  and  indeed
         failed to advise him  of  options  as  his  circumstances  changed.
         The [claimant's] situation does not fall within the  type  referred
         to by Lane J at paragraph 30.  It is relevant that  the  {Secretary
         of  State]  accepts  the  decision,   due   to   the   [claimant's]
         representative's poor service, that the [claimant] failed  to  meet
         the 10 years' lawful residency, and subsequently remained in the UK
         without lawful  leave.   In  this  case,  there  is  a  finding  of
         culpability by a relevant professional regulator, which in my view,
         applying fairness, cannot count for  nothing,  and  therefore  must
         affect the weight given  to  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
         effective immigration control."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

17. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Jones submitted that the Judge had misapplied Mansur and/or had
    failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  why  the   claimant's   case   was
    distinguishable from the generality of cases in which poor legal advice
    in the immigration field had no correlation with  the  relevant  public
    interest.  On behalf of the claimant, Mr Singer developed his  Rule  24
    response  opposing  the  appeal.   He  submitted  that  the  Judge  had
    mistakenly referred to the wrong paragraph of Lane J's judgment in  her
    discussion at paragraph [22].

18. Having heard from both representatives, I ruled that an  error  of  law
    was  made  out,  for  reasons  which  I  gave  in  short   form.    The
    representatives were in agreement that I could and  should  remake  the
    decision without hearing any further evidence.  Mr Singer invited me to
    remake the decision in the claimant's favour on  the  ground  that,  on
    analysis, the negligence of his previous representatives was  so  gross
    that their conduct was akin  to  a  blatant  failure  to  follow  their
    client's instructions.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

19. As I explored with Mr Singer in oral argument, the  scenario  described
    by the Judge at the beginning of paragraph [22] fell full square within
    the type of situation described by Lane J at paragraph  30  of  Mansur.
    The claimant had been the  recipient  of  poor  advice.   He  had  been
    advised to do X while doing Y might have  produced  a  more  favourable
    outcome. So it was, on the face of it, oxymoronic for the Judge to find
    that his situation did not fall within the type described  at  [30]  of
    Mansur, and hence within the general rule that this was  a  case  where
    the adviser's failings did not qualify the public interest in firm  and
    effective controls.

20. It is true that there had been a finding of culpability by the relevant
    professional regulator.  But this did not of itself take the claimant's
    situation outside the scope of  the  type  of  situation  described  in
    Mansur at [30].

21. The Judge held that a finding of culpability by the LO could not  count
    for  nothing,  "applying  fairness".   However,  as  rehearsed  in  the
    judgment of Vos LJ, to which the Judge had earlier  made  reference  in
    paragraph [19], this was not a case where the common law  principle  of
    fairness was engaged, as there had been no unfairness on  the  part  of
    the Home Office.

22. Accordingly, Ground 2 is  also  made  out.   The  Judge  did  not  give
    adequate reasons for finding that this was  one  of  those  rare  cases
    where the poor advice that the  claimant  had  received  constituted  a
    reason to qualify the weight to be placed on  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining firm and effective immigration controls.

The Remaking of the Decision

23. The only  issue  in  this  appeal  is  whether  there  are  exceptional
    circumstances which outweigh the  public  interest  in  the  claimant's
    removal in circumstances where he does not meet the requirements of the
    Rules for the grant  of  further  leave  to  remain.   The  exceptional
    circumstances relied on by the claimant are  that,  but  for  the  poor
    advice which he  received  from  his  representatives,  he  would  have
    accrued 10 years'  lawful  leave  as  of  23  September  2013,  thereby
    qualifying for settlement.   Conversely,  the  effect  of  the  refusal
    decision is to leave him without a right to settlement  and  liable  to
    removal.

24. In the case of Mansur, the key  feature  was  that  the  OISC  decision
    showed that IWP did not give the appellant poor advice,  but  that  the
    organisation "blatantly  failed  to  follow  the  appellant's  specific
    instructions regarding the timing of the withdrawal of the  application
    for permission to appeal."  Lane J found that this failure was the sole
    reason why his application for leave fell to be treated as invalid. The
    misfeasance of OISC was then aggravated by the Home Office  negligently
    misinforming the appellant that his application was valid, when in fact
    it was invalid as the Home Office should  have  known:  see  Mansur  at
    [22]. Conversely, in the present  case  there  is  no  failure  by  the
    representatives to follow instructions given by  the  claimant.   I  am
    also  not  persuaded  that  the  conduct  of  the  claimant's  previous
    representatives is equivalent to the misfeasance found in Mansur.

25. The claimant's situation in  the  period  leading  up  to  the  10-year
    anniversary on 23 September 2013 was far from straightforward.  This is
    apparent from the decision of Judge  Talbot  on  11  August  2013.  The
    application for further leave to remain as a student made  in  February
    2013 (the first application) was doomed to fail under the Rules, as  he
    did not have a valid CAS at the date of application and he  was  simply
    relying on a conditional offer under  which  he  also  had  to  pass  a
    relevant English Language test.  In order to ensure the  continuity  of
    his lawful residence, the appellant needed to make the application when
    he did, but  this  did  not  change  the  fact  that  this  was  not  a
    meritorious application under the Rules, and he also  did  not  have  a
    meritorious appeal under the Rules.

26. The LO found that the firm advising the claimant had  acted  reasonably
    up until the  end  of  July  2013,  and  in  assessing  the  amount  of
    compensation  she  took  into  account  that  they  had  followed   his
    instructions in making the first application "even though  he  knew  he
    did not meet the criteria at that time".

27.  The  firm  followed  his  instructions  in  making  a  second  Tier  4
    application on 23 July 2013 while his unmeritorious appeal against  the
    refusal of the first application was pending. The LO held that by  this
    time the clamant met the criteria of the Rules. Accordingly, if he  had
    waited until  he  met  the  criteria  of  the  Rules  before  making  a
    meritorious application for leave to remain,  he  would  have  been  an
    overstayer from 19 February 2013.

28. In the covering letter, the firm sought to withdraw the pending appeal,
    which was the necessary prerequisite for the second  application  being
    valid as opposed to being void under section 3C(4) of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971. However, the Home Office  did  not  accept  that  the  letter
    constituted sufficient notice of withdrawal. The LO found that the firm
    had provided poor service in not taking positive steps to  clarify  the
    position and to  ensure  that  the  appeal  was  withdrawn,  once  they
    realised that the Home Office did not accept their attempt to  withdraw
    it.

29. Following the dismissal of the appeal against the refusal of the  first
    application, the claimant could have extended his leave  under  section
    3C by applying for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. But  the
    failure by the firm to advise him of  this  option  does  not  disclose
    misfeasance for two reasons. Firstly, an application for permission  to
    appeal would have been wholly without merit. Secondly, as Judge  Talbot
    indicated that the effect of his decision was to extend the  claimant's
    leave, and his legal error in this regard - subsequently replicated  by
    Judge Stott in November 2014  -  was  only  cleared  up  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal long after the event, the argument that the firm was seriously
    at fault in not giving advice at the time which anticipated the  ruling
    of the Upper Tribunal is unsustainable. Similarly, it is only with  the
    benefit of hindsight that the firm can be criticised for  not  advising
    the claimant in the alternative to make a third application  for  leave
    to remain immediately after his appeal against  the  first  application
    had been finally determined.

30. The knock-on effect of the firm's poor service in not ensuring that the
    appeal was treated as withdrawn when making the second application  was
    that the  second  application  was  rightly  rejected  as  void  on  30
    September 2013. The LO found that the firm had provided poor service in
    not discussing with the claimant  at  this  time  -  after  the  second
    application had been rejected - the option of applying for ILR "at this
    point". The LO did not find that the firm was negligent in not advising
    the claimant after 11 August 2013 of the option of pursuing  an  onward
    appeal or of making a third application for leave to remain as soon  as
    possible so as to prevent him from  becoming  an  overstayer  after  22
    August 2013.

31. At paragraph [23] of Mansur, Lane J held  that  the  importance  to  be
    given to immigration control fell  to  be  reduced  by  reason  of  the
    respondent's failure to tell the appellant  that  his  application  for
    leave was not valid - and instead lulled him  into  a  false  sense  of
    security by expressly representing the opposite.  Thus, the decision on
    proportionality was fortified by a finding that the appellant had  been
    the victim of common law  unfairness  perpetrated  by  the  respondent,
    which feature is absent from this case.

32. The claimant has not shown that he has established a private life of  a
    special and compelling character such as to justify  a  departure  from
    the general rule that little weight can be  attached  to  private  life
    which is built up here while a person's status is  precarious.  He  has
    also not shown that there are exceptional  circumstances  in  his  case
    which outweigh the public interest  in  the  maintenance  of  firm  and
    effective immigration controls.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly I set the decision aside and substitute the following decision:

The claimant's appeal is dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 6 September 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed this appeal, there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 6 September 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson


