
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: HU/18020/2019 (P)

                                                           HU/18021/2019 (P)

                                                           HU/18018/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2020                  |On 7 September 2020                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             ISMAIL IBRAHIM NOOR

                           HASINA ISMAIL NOOR NOOR

                             JAVED IBRAHIM NOOR

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER not MADE)

                                                                 Respondents



For the appellant: Mr C Howells, Senior Presenting Officer

For the Respondents: Mr J Byrne, instructed by Visa Inn Ltd



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


 1. Whilst the Secretary of State has brought this appeal, I have  referred
    to the parties below as they were before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    order to avoid confusion.

 2. The appellants are all citizens of India, comprising husband, wife, and
    their adult son, now 43 years of age. With the benefit of a multi-visit
    visa, the appellants have regularly visited the UK and last entered  in
    April 2019.

 3. The Secretary  of  State  has  appealed  with  permission  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  22.4.20,  allowing  on
    human  rights  grounds  the  appellants'  linked  appeals  against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 28.10.19 to refuse their  applications
    made on 10.7.19 for leave to remain in the UK  on  private  and  family
    life grounds. The appellants relied  on  article  8  ECHR  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of the submissions made to me and the grounds of  application
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  At the outset  of  the
    hearing Mr Byrne forwarded me his late-served skeleton argument  and  I
    confirm that I have read and taken it into account.

 5. For the reasons set out below, I find such error of law in  the  making
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to require it to  be  set
    aside and remade de novo.

 6. The  grounds  assert  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
    conducting an inadequate article 8 proportionality balancing  exercise,
    and that her conclusions on the availability  of  care  for  the  third
    appellant in India were flawed. At the hearing Mr Howells  concentrated
    his oral submissions on the alleged error  as  to  the  NHS  surcharge,
    which he argued was relevant to the proportionality balancing exercise.
    He submitted that the  key  issue  was  who  would  provide  the  third
    appellant's unchallenged personal care needs but argued that the  judge
    had confused the availability of care with delivery of care, suggesting
    that the judge had reversed the burden of proof.

 7. In his submissions, Mr Byrne relied on his  helpful  skeleton  argument
    and responded to Mr Howells' oral submissions. He also sought  and  was
    granted a further opportunity to make submissions  in  response  to  Mr
    Howells' reply.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on  2.6.20,
    considering it arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in the
    proportionality balancing exercise, particularly in assuming  that  the
    health surcharge had been paid for the treatment received by the  third
    appellant. In addition, it was considered arguable that the judge erred
    in giving no consideration to the possibility of  the  third  appellant
    remaining in the UK and his parents returning to India, and erred as to
    whether the level of care required by  the  third  appellant  would  be
    available to him in India. At [74] of the decision the  judge  observed
    that there was no evidence either way as to the  availability  of  care
    but arguably ignored the fact that the burden of proof rested with  the
    appellants. It was also considered arguable that  the  judge  "confused
    the availability of care with the practicalities of  delivering  it  to
    the third Appellant, who clearly preferred to be cared for by his close
    family members."

 9. The appellants' case at the First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  the  third
    appellant required daily personal care in  all  aspects  of  his  life.
    Until recently, this had been provided  by  his  mother,  but  she  has
    become too frail to continue to do so, so that  since  April  2019  his
    care has been provided by his cousins  in  the  UK,  with  the  limited
    assistance of his parents where physically possible.  It  was  asserted
    that there was no one else in India who could provide the personal care
    the third appellant needs,  because  he  would  not  accept  care  from
    strangers and because no one in his village would be willing to provide
    it.

10. The unchallenged care needs were evidenced by the medical report of  Dr
    John Jestico, consultant neurologist,  who  confirmed  that  the  third
    appellant has  a  severe  global  higher  function  deficit,  a  static
    condition unlikely to respond  to  treatment,  probably  arising  as  a
    result of trauma at birth or neurological or  encephalitic  illness  in
    early infancy. He is able to walk independently but can use  few  words
    and is largely incapable of understanding. He also  exhibits  irritable
    and aggressive behaviour from time to time. At [46]  and  [47]  of  the
    decision the judge noted the evidence of the parents that they strongly
    believed that the third appellant would  not  tolerate  care  given  by
    anyone outside the family. Mr Byrne also pointed to evidence  that  the
    third appellant had been uncooperative during medical examinations.

11. The second appellant mother is suffering from osteoarthritis  and  will
    likely require left  knee  replacement  surgery.  The  first  appellant
    father  suffers  from  age-related  conditions  of  hypertension,  high
    cholesterol, and diabetes, as well as claiming  back  problems  to  the
    extent that he cannot walk more than a few steps without  becoming  out
    of breath. It was submitted that these conditions prevented the parents
    from providing the necessary care and support to their adult son.

12. At [96] of the decision, the judge concluded that although, "the scales
    are finely balanced, I find that they ultimately tip in the Appellants'
    favour due to the Third Appellant's very significant and lifelong  care
    needs, the fact that those needs could only be met by a paid  carer  in
    India with great difficulty, if at all, and  the  exceptionally  strong
    and  dedicated  family  life  between  the  various  members   of   the
    Appellants' extended family in the United Kingdom."

13. Whether or not this was a  finely  balanced  proportionality  exercise,
    which I question, I am satisfied that there were clear  errors  without
    which the scales could well have have tipped in favour of removing  the
    appellants from the UK. I cannot say  that  without  these  errors  the
    outcome of the appeal would have been the same.

14. I do not accept the submission in the grounds that  the  judge  ignored
    section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  in
    relation to financial independence, as this was set  out  at  [17]  and
    addressed at [91] of the decision, where the judge found the appellants
    were economically independent and met the maintenance and accommodation
    requirements  of  the  ADR  Rules.  However,  in  the   proportionality
    balancing exercise the judge appears  to  have  ignored  the  statutory
    requirement that little weight  is  to  be  accorded  to  private  life
    developed in the UK whilst immigration status was precarious.

15. Contrary to Mr Byrne's skeleton argument, the application made  to  the
    Home Office was not for leave to remain as  adult  dependent  relatives
    (ADR). The application forms state clearly  that  reliance  was  placed
    only on private life. It is clear that the appellants  could  not  meet
    the requirements of the Rules and relied on article 8 ECHR outside  the
    Rules. However, I accept Mr Byrne's submission that the extent to which
    the  Rules  may  have  been  able  to  be  met  is  relevant   to   the
    proportionality exercise. The judge was not wrong to consider  the  ADR
    requirements from [22] of the decision. However, in relying on BritCits
    v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 368 and the  Court  of  Appeal's  definition  of
    'reasonably' in considering  whether  the  care  required  by  the  ADR
    applicant can be reasonably provided, the judge may have lost sight  of
    the correct issue. In relying on the Court  of  Appeal's  finding  that
    'reasonably' required that provision of care must  be  reasonable  both
    from the perspective of the provider and the applicant, the  judge  may
    have  lost  sight  of  the  correct  considerations  in  an  article  8
    proportionality balancing exercise.

16. The correct question the judge should have asked in  relation  to  care
    was  whether  the  appellants  had  demonstrated  on  the  balance   of
    probabilities that the unchallenged care needs of the  third  appellant
    could not be met in India and could only be provided in the UK.

17. In relation to the availability of care, the judge  made  a  number  of
    important findings against the appellants. For example, the judge found
    at [68] of the decision that the family had not made any serious effort
    to look into the possibility of personal care for the  third  appellant
    in India. The only  evidence  was  the  appellants'  witness  statement
    assertions, which could carry  but  little  weight  without  supporting
    evidence. I pause here to note that in respect of  an  ADR  application
    requires the specified independent evidence of care needs  set  out  in
    Appendix FM-SE. It is obvious  that  the  evidence  relied  on  by  the
    appellants was woefully inadequate to meet those requirements.

18. I also find that between [71] and [76] of the decision, the judge  lost
    sight of the fact that the burden of proving no care would be available
    in India rested with the appellants, stating that she placed no  weight
    on the respondent's unevidenced assumptions that care must be available
    in India. The judge also relied on the alleged fact that the respondent
    had not put her mind to this issue at all in the refusal decision. I am
    satisfied that there was a confusion over the burden  of  proof,  which
    led the judge into the conclusion at [72] of  the  decision,  that  "on
    balance, I find that paid personal care would not be provided by anyone
    in the village where the appellants live." As the judge had noted there
    was no credible evidence to that effect. The judge went on at  [73]  of
    the decision to point out that  the  appellants  had  done  nothing  to
    explore  whether  care  might  be  hired  from  further  afield  or   a
    professional agency. At [74] the  judge  concluded  that  she  was  not
    satisfied that paid personal care would be unavailable  in  India.  The
    judge then stated, "I cannot find, however, that it would be available.
    There is simply no evidence  either  way  on  this  broader  question."
    Again, whilst this may be factually correct, the judge has  lost  sight
    of the fact that the burden of proof rests with the appellants and  she
    has asked the wrong question. The  correct  question  was  not  whether
    necessary care was shown to  be  available  but  whether  the  evidence
    demonstrated that it was not available.

19.  The error is exacerbated by the statement at [76] of the decision that
    although the judge found that paid personal care may  be  available  in
    India, "it would be exceptionally difficult to find, and once found, to
    retain. "The conclusion is unsustainable as it  is  without  evidential
    support. I take into account in this regard Mr  Byrne's  argument  that
    the judge  had  accepted  the  unchallenged  evidence  that  the  third
    appellant was reluctant to accept  care  from  anyone  outside  of  the
    family, which was supported by evidence of his lack of  cooperation  at
    medical examinations. His submission was that  it  is  irrelevant  that
    care from a stranger may be available as the third appellant would  not
    accept it. However, [76] goes much further than that  limited  evidence
    justifies, to conclude that even if care could be found, it  could  not
    be retained. Without cogent evidence in  support  that  finding  cannot
    stand. Further, the judge did not consider whether  with  the  parents'
    continued if limited care of the  parents  in  India  some  third-party
    privately funded or other professional or non-professional carer  could
    be introduced to the third  appellant  gradually  so  as  to  gain  the
    cooperation that might be refused to a stranger.

20. In this regard, Mr  Howells  also  argued  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider whether the third appellant could obtain the necessary care by
    remaining with his cousins in the  UK  and  his  parents  returning  to
    India. Alternatively, the third appellant could have applied from India
    for entry clearance as a ADR under the Immigration  Rules.  However,  I
    note the findings at [96] and elsewhere that there was an exceptionally
    strong and dedicated family life between  the  parents  and  the  third
    appellant, so that it would follow that their separation from him would
    be a disproportionate interference with their article 8 ECHR  right  to
    respect for family life. I also note that whilst the large part of  his
    care is provided by his cousins, his parents retain an important  role.
    In reality, this is a case where all three appellants  either  stay  or
    leave together.

21. There are  other  errors  in  the  impugned  decision.  The  judge  was
    incorrect to conclude at [88] of the decision that the  appellants  had
    paid the NHS surcharge, which discharged the public interest that those
    in the UK pay for their care. I accept Mr Howells' submission that this
    was a relevant factor in the proportionality balancing exercise and the
    error tended to undermine the reliability of a finding that the balance
    fell in the appellants' favour, especially when  the  judge  considered
    the matter finely balanced. Mr Byrne pointed to the evidence  that  the
    appellants had paid privately for medical  consultations  and  asserted
    that they would  pay  privately  for  any  knee  operation,  which  the
    consultant considered likely to be required. However, I  cannot  ignore
    that the appellants have no independent  financial  resources  and  are
    entirely dependent on the limited means of  their  sponsors.  They  are
    each in a greater or lesser degree of ill-health. Whilst, as the  judge
    pointed out at [87] the third appellant is physically fit and well  and
    his needs are for care not medical treatment, it is inevitable that the
    appellants will access NHS treatment in the UK. The relevance  is  that
    the public interest is not addressed by the NHS surcharge, as  this  is
    not payable by those entering on visit visas. Whilst it is not a  major
    factor, it is relevant to what the judge  considered  to  be  a  finely
    balanced proportionality exercise.

22. Mr Howells and the written grounds argued that  although  the  evidence
    strongly pointed to the appellants having decided to settle  in  rather
    than visit the UK in order to access NHS care, the  judge  misconstrued
    and gave little weight to  the  evidence  that  they  had  deliberately
    attempted  to  circumvent  immigration  controls  when  conducting  the
    proportionality  balancing  exercise.  At  [49]  the  judge  noted  the
    evidence that the second appellant and her daughter  stated  that  they
    always expected that the third appellant would  be  cared  for  by  his
    relatives in the UK, when the time came that his parents were no longer
    able to care for him. At [68] the judge noted their evidence that  that
    day had come sooner than they had  expected.  At  [89]  the  judge  was
    minded to find that their plan for the  third  appellant  to  join  his
    relatives in the UK when they became too frail to care for  him  should
    weigh against them in the proportionality assessment. However, she  was
    dissuaded by Mr Byrne's argument that the ADR  rules  expressly  accept
    that it may be in the public interest  for  dependent  adults  to  join
    relatives in the UK.

23. The judge has again asked the wrong question.  The  evidence  suggested
    that rather than an innocuous future or eventual  plan  for  the  third
    appellant to obtain entry clearance as a ADR, the  appellants  returned
    to the UK from Turkey on yet another visit visa in order for care to be
    provided by UK relatives. Mr Byrne argued that the appellants' case was
    that there was no intention to seek to  remain  in  the  UK  when  they
    entered but rather that their hand was forced by the  deterioration  in
    the health of the first and second appellant, particularly  the  injury
    sustained by the second appellant during a  trip  to  Turkey.  However,
    there cannot have been such a deterioration in health  during  a  visit
    visa stay; the medical evidence  does  not  support  such  a  scenario.
    Whilst the judge accepted at [90] that there was no pre-conceived  plan
    to enter on a visit visa, the finding appears na�ve. It rather  appears
    from the evidence that the accident in  Turkey  was  the  precipitating
    factor.  To  enter  the  UK  in  those  circumstances  and  then   make
    application  for  leave  to  remain  must  be,  if  not  a   deliberate
    circumvention  of  immigration  control,   highly   relevant   to   the
    proportionality balancing exercise and should properly have been  taken
    into consideration. The ADR rules for entry clearance are irrelevant to
    this consideration.

24. Taking all these factors together, including that the appellants  could
    not meet the Rules and that under s117B little weight is to be given to
    private life developed in the UK, it is very difficult to see  how  the
    judge could have reached a reasoned and balanced  conclusion  that  the
    scales tipped in the favour of all three  appellants.  Nothing  in  the
    evidence or circumstances sufficiently demonstrated that requiring  the
    appellants to return together to India would be unjustifiably harsh  so
    that the respondent's decision would be disproportionate.

25. In the circumstances and for the reasons set out above, I find multiple
    material errors of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  such
    that it must be set aside to be remade in its entirety with no findings
    preserved.

26. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge vitiates all other findings of fact and the  conclusions
    from those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of
    the issues in the appeal.

27. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.

Decision

    The appeal of the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade de novo.



    I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    2 September 2020


