
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18611/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At: Civil Justice Centre (remote     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|hearing)                             |                                     |
|Heard on: 10th September 2020        |On 14 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                           Dipendra Bahadur Thapa
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer, Sheffield
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Jesuram, Counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nepal.   His father was a Gurkha who was
    eventually  permitted  to  settle  in  the  United  Kingdom  after  the
    government's  recognition  of  the  historical  injustice   perpetrated
    against members of that regiment.  The Appellant seeks  leave  to  join
    his father here.

 2. The operative law in respect of such applications is summarised by  the
    Court of Appeal in its decision  in  Jitendra  Rai  v  Entry  Clearance
    Officer [2017] EWCA Civ 320.   It is with the principles in Rai in mind
    that that I assess the decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. In this Article 8 appeal the first question that had to be decided  was
    whether there was between the Sponsor and the adult Appellant a  family
    life capable of engaging the Convention.  In Rai the  Court  of  Appeal
    set out the authorities relevant to this matter:

          1.  In Kugathas   v   Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home
             Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31, Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph
             17 of his judgment)  that  "if  dependency  is  read  down  as
             meaning "support", in the personal sense,  and  if  one  adds,
             echoing the Strasbourg jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or
             "effective" to the word "support", then it represents ...  the
             irreducible minimum of what family life implies".  Arden  L.J.
             said (in paragraph 24 of  her  judgment)  that  the  "relevant
             factors ... include identifying who are the near relatives  of
             the appellant, the nature of the links between  them  and  the
             appellant, the age of the appellant, where and  with  whom  he
             has resided in the past, and  the  forms  of  contact  he  has
             maintained with the other members of the family with  whom  he
             claims to have a family life". She acknowledged (at  paragraph
             25) that "there is no presumption of  family  life".  Thus  "a
             family life is not established between an adult child and  his
             surviving parent  or  other  siblings  unless  something  more
             exists than normal emotional ties".  She  added  that  "[such]
             ties might exist if the appellant were dependent on his family
             or vice versa", but it was "not ... essential that the members
             of the family should be in the same  country".  In Patel  and
             others v Entry Clearance Officer, Mumbai [2010] EWCA Civ  17,
             Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 14 of his judgment, with  which
             Longmore and Aikens L.JJ. agreed) that "what may constitute an
             extant family  life  falls  well  short  of  what  constitutes
             dependency, and a good many adult children ... may still  have
             a family life with parents who are now  settled  here  not  by
             leave or by force of circumstance but by long-delayed right".

          1. In Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) the  Upper
             Tribunal accepted (in paragraph 56 of its determination)  that
             the  judgments  in Kugathas had  been   "interpreted   too
             restrictively in the past and ought to be read in the light of
             subsequent decisions of the domestic and  Strasbourg  courts",
             and (in paragraph 60) that "some of the  [Strasbourg]  Court's
             decisions indicate that family life between adult children and
             parents will readily be found, without evidence of exceptional
             dependence". It went on to say (in paragraph 61):

                  "61. Recently, the [European Court of  Human  Rights]  has
                      reviewed the case law, in [AA v United Kingdom [2012]
                      Imm. A.R.1], finding that a significant  factor  will
                      be whether or not  the  adult  child  has  founded  a
                      family of his own. If he is still single  and  living
                      with his parents, he is likely to enjoy  family  life
                      with them. ...".

             The Upper Tribunal set out the relevant passage in the court's
             judgment in AA v United Kingdom (in paragraphs  46  to  49),
             which ended with this (in paragraph 49):

                  "49. An examination of the Court's case-law would tend  to
                      suggest that the applicant, a young adult of 24 years
                      old, who resides with his  mother  and  has  not  yet
                      founded a family of  his  own,  can  be  regarded  as
                      having "family life"."

          1. Ultimately, as Lord Dyson  M.R.  emphasized  when  giving  the
             judgment of the  court  in Gurung (at  paragraph  45),  "the
             question whether an individual enjoys family life  is  one  of
             fact and  depends  on  a  careful  consideration  of  all  the
             relevant facts of the particular case". In some instances  "an
             adult child (particularly if he does not  have  a  partner  or
             children of his own) may establish that he has a  family  life
             with his parents". As Lord Dyson M.R. said, "[it] all  depends
             on the facts". The court expressly endorsed (at paragraph 46),
             as "useful" and as indicating  "the  correct  approach  to  be
             adopted",  the  Upper  Tribunal's  review  of   the   relevant
             jurisprudence in paragraphs 50  to  62  of  its  determination
             in Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy),  including
             its  observation  (at  paragraph  62)  that  "[the]  different
             outcomes  in  cases  with   superficially   similar   features
             emphasises to us that the issue under Article 8(1)  is  highly
             fact-sensitive".

          1. To similar effect  were  these  observations  of  Sir  Stanley
             Burnton  in Singh  v  Secretary  of  State  for   the   Home
             Department [2015] EWCA  Civ  630 (in  paragraph  24  of  his
             judgment):

                  "24. I do not think that the judgments  to  which  I  have
                      referred lead to any difficulty  in  determining  the
                      correct approach to  Article  8  in  cases  involving
                      adult children. In the case of adults, in the context
                      of immigration control, there is no legal or  factual
                      presumption as to the existence or absence of  family
                      life for the purposes of Article 8. I point out  that
                      the approach of the  European  Commission  for  Human
                      Rights cited approvingly in Kugathas did not include
                      any requirement of exceptionality. It all depends  on
                      the facts. The love and affection  between  an  adult
                      and his  parents  or  siblings  will  not  of  itself
                      justify a finding of a family life. There has  to  be
                      something more. A young adult living with his parents
                      or siblings will normally have a family  life  to  be
                      respected under Article 8. A child enjoying a  family
                      life with his parents does not suddenly cease to have
                      a family life at midnight as he  turns  18  years  of
                      age.  On  the  other  hand,  a  young  adult   living
                      independently of his parents  may  well  not  have  a
                      family life for the purposes of Article 8."

 4. From theses authorities the Court drew two conclusions relevant  to  my
    enquiry. That Kugathas has been restrictively read and  in  fact  there
    exists no requirement of 'exceptionality' when considering  the  family
    life shared between adult children and their parents. Second  that  the
    language of 'dependency' is unnecessary. What matters  is  whether  the
    adult child derives real,  committed  or  effective  support  from  his
    parents. This could be in the form of financial, or emotional support.

 5. In the instant case the First-tier Tribunal does  not  appear  to  have
    been satisfied that a family life existed between the Appellant and his
    father.  I say this because although no actual conclusion is reached on
    that primary question, the reasoning set out at paragraphs 6 & 7 of the
    decision is as follows. The Appellant might be financially supported by
    monthly remittances from his father but the  Respondent  was  right  to
    characterise  this  as  a  dependency  of  choice.  The  Appellant  had
    previously left the family home and worked in  Saudi  Arabia  and  this
    suggests that he was not dependent upon  his  parents.   There  was  no
    reason why he couldn't work to support himself.   He was  not  disabled
    and had worked in the past.  He had chosen not to apply to come to  the
    United Kingdom at the same time as his parents  and  this  suggested  a
    lack of dependency.

 6. I agree with Mr Jesuram that this reasoning is  wholly  inadequate  and
    contrary to the guidance in  Rai.    The  Appellant  did  not  need  to
    establish a dependency of necessity in order  to  demonstrate  that  he
    continued to share a family life with his parents. As a matter of fact,
    financial support was, and had for many years been, given.   There  was
    powerful evidence before the Tribunal - not addressed in the decision -
    of the strong emotional bond between parents and son which,  consistent
    with Nepalese culture, persisted despite the Appellant being an  adult.
    The reference to a lack of disability is highly suggestive of the  test
    of exceptionality, held in  Rai  to  be  erroneous.  The  reference  to
    'choices' made  by  the  parties  overlooked  the  extremely  difficult
    financial circumstances faced by Gurkha families like this one.  On the
    facts - as I understand it uncontested by the HOPO on the day, and  not
    put in issue by Mr Diwnycz - the relationship between the Appellant and
    his parents was certainly capable of meeting the tests in Rai.  He  had
    lived in the family home at the date that his parents  left  Nepal  and
    continues to do so today. He is supported  financially  by  his  father
    with regular remittances being sent. He and his parents maintain  their
    strong emotional bond by daily communication via telephone  and  social
    media, and on at least one occasions, his father returning home to  see
    him.    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore flawed  in
    its approach to whether Article 8 is engaged.

 7. The only real argument against the Appellant  being  recognised  as  an
    integral part of this family is that for  a  period  in  his  youth  he
    travelled away from home to try and earn money in  Saudi  Arabia  as  a
    migrant worker. It was his uncontested evidence that this attempt ended
    in failure when the agent who arranged his travel  'recouped'  all  his
    'travel expenses' and he returned to Nepal penniless where  he  resumed
    living with his parents.  It was further his evidence that this  period
    away from his family was emotionally  difficult  for  all  of  them,  a
    situation which persists today: it was his mother's evidence  that  she
    cries herself to sleep at night worrying about her sons.

 8. On the facts before me I am therefore satisfied that the relatively low
    threshold for engagement of Article 8 is met.  Applying  Rai  there  is
    certainly a family life in this case and having regard  to  the  family
    history I am satisfied that the continued  lack  of  respect  for  that
    family life  amounts  is  of  sufficient  significance  to  engage  the
    Article. As Mr Diwnycz accepted on behalf of the Respondent,  the  only
    realistic outcome from there is for the appeal to be allowed, given the
    very substantial  weight  that  is  to  be  attached  to  the  historic
    injustices perpetrated against the Gurkhas.   As Mr Jesuram points  out
    in his customarily eloquent grounds, the simple  consequence  for  this
    family of that injustice is that the Appellant and  his  siblings  were
    not born British, as  they  would  have  been  had  their  father  been
    permitted to settle here upon his discharge:

         "The appeal, ultimately, does not  concern  whether  the  Appellant
         ought to be entitled to join  his  parents  (it  must  be  accepted
         nothing untoward will befall him if he does not).

         It concerns whether a man who served the Crown in conflict and  had
         to wait decades for the settlement he  was  owed  should  have  the
         continued support and company of the son he had to leave behind. It
         is about  whether  the  consequences  of  an  injustice  should  be
         rectified".




    Decision and Directions

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed for material error of
    law and it is set aside.

10. The decision in the appeal is remade as follows: the appeal is  allowed
    on human rights grounds.

11. There is no order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         10th September 2020
