
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18803/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd September 2019                |On 12th September 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               mr Harjit singh
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms I. Hussain (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H. Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Broe, promulgated on  13th  May  2019,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 5th April 2019.  In the determination, the judge  allowed
    the appeal of the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Respondent  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of  India,  and  was  born  on  17th
    February 1987.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 30th March 2015 refusing his application for leave to  remain  in
    the  UK  on  the  basis  that  he  had  submitted  a  fraudulent  TOEIC
    certificate.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that  there  was  no  evidence  to  prove  the
    Respondent's case  that  he  had  engaged  in  fraudulent  activity  in
    procuring his TOEIC certificate.  He had always been a genuine student.
     The Respondent had checked all his applications.  He had come to  this
    country  to  follow  a  three  year  course  in  international  tourism
    hospitality.

 4. This required him to speak, write and read English.  Indeed, he had  in
    2011 decided to pursue a business studies  course  at  TCL  College  in
    London and in 2012 gained a level 5 advanced diploma.  He had no reason
    to cheat in the test.  He had never used a proxy.  On top of the  TOEIC
    certificate there was a photograph of him which was taken on the day of
    the test.  There was CCTV cameras outside  the  building  to  which  he
    went.  It was an old building.  He  believes  the  tests  were  on  the
    second floor.  (See paragraphs 8 to 9).

The Judge's Decision

 5. The judge set out the case law (at paragraph 20) which applied to cases
    of this kind where it was  alleged  that  a  proxy  had  been  used  to
    undertake a ETS test.  The judge explained that the burden of proof lay
    initially upon the Secretary of State so that the latter had simply  to
    put forward a prima facie case (paragraph  21).   This  had  been  done
    (paragraph 22).

 6. Thereafter the burden shifted to the Appellant, and the  Appellant  was
    able to put forward "a plausible innocent explanation" (paragraph  24).
    That being so, given that all that the Respondent was then reliant upon
    was the generic statements from Mr  Peter  Millington  and  Ms  Rebecca
    Collings, the Respondent had not been able to discharge the burden upon
    him that the Appellant had engaged in fraudulent contact.   The  appeal
    was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The Respondent's ground of application, however, alleged that the judge
    had failed to give proper reasons for the conclusion that the Appellant
    had offered a "innocent explanation" because all he had done was simply
    describe a process that was to be followed.  This  was  something  that
    was in the public domain and could  easily  have  been  learnt  by  the
    Appellant in this case.

 8. On 10th June 2019 permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.



Submissions

  . At the hearing before me on 2nd September 2019, Ms Aboni submitted that
    there were two strands to the Respondent Secretary of  State's  appeal.
    First, there was the issue of deception.  This raised the  question  as
    to whether the Appellant was guilty of fraud.  The judge failed to give
    adequate reasons for the conclusion that  the  Appellant  had  given  a
    "innocent explanation".  This was because the Appellant failed  to  say
    what occurred at the test centre.  Even if his photograph was  attached
    this did not discharge the burden of proof that was  upon  him  because
    the photograph could have been fraudulently attached by deception.

  . Second, if I was not with Ms Aboni on the first point, then the  second
    point was that the judge had materially erred in  allowing  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.  The Rules had no application  whatsoever.
    The application by the Appellant had been on the  basis  of  Article  8
    right to remain in the UK.  The judge gave no proper  consideration  to
    Article 8 and did not  undertake  a  balancing  exercise  in  terms  of
    proportionality under Article 8.  Therefore, this  was  an  error.   In
    fact, the judge's observation "at the hearing it was agreed that  if  I
    found the test to be genuine the appeal should be allowed.  If  not,  I
    should go on to consider  Article  8"  (paragraph  11),  could  not  be
    correct.  The appeal could not be allowed under the Immigration  Rules.
    If the judge was to consider Article 8 he had  to  consider  where  the
    balance of considerations fell.

 9. For her part, Ms Hussain submitted that she would have  to  agree  that
    the judge had failed to apply  Article  8  properly.   He  had  wrongly
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.  This  was  a  material
    error of law.  However, to the extent that the judge had found there to
    be no deception by the Appellant, these findings should be preserved in
    his favour, and the matter should be remitted back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to enable the judge to hear further evidence so as to come  to
    a clear conclusion as to where the balance of considerations fell.

10. In reply, Ms Aboni submitted  that  the  Appellant  had  no  family  or
    children in the UK.  He had made his applications purely on  the  basis
    of private life.  He had to demonstrate  that  there  were  exceptional
    circumstances and that there were  compassionate  circumstances.   This
    meant that the judge had to give proper consideration to matters  going
    beyond a mere finding as to whether the Appellant had  been  guilty  of
    deception or not.

Error of Law

11. Given that both parties agree that the judge erred in  law  in  stating
    that the appeal stood to be allowed under the Immigration Rules,  which
    could not have been the case, I have decided to make a  finding  of  an
    error of law and to remit this case back to the First-tier Tribunal  to
    be determined by a judge other than Judge Broe.  I had  put  it  to  Ms
    Hussain that although  this  is  a  case  where  the  judge  ended  his
    determination with the words that "on  the  totality  of  the  evidence
    before me, I find that the Appellant has discharged the burden of proof
    and the reasons given by the Respondent do not justify the refusal.

12. Therefore, the Respondent's decision is not in accordance with the  law
    and the applicable Immigration Rules" (paragraph  26),  that  this  was
    simply a formulaic recital  of  the  statement  at  the  end  of  every
    decision in times past, and that it was not a material error, such that
    the appeal should  be  preserved  intact.   Ms  Hussain,  however,  had
    submitted that it would be better to conclude that there was  an  error
    in the manner that the decision had been reached, without consideration
    of the Appellant's exceptional circumstances, so that the matter should
    be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal.

13. Whilst I do so, given that the two sides before me are in agreement,  I
    should make it clear that the judge was absolutely correct in coming to
    the conclusion that the Appellant had put forward a "plausible innocent
    explanation" (paragraph 24) and that the Respondent had not  been  able
    to discharge the burden of proof "to rebut the Appellant's explanation"
    (paragraph 25).  This is because the judge had come to  the  conclusion
    that the Appellant had been able to describe the way in which  he  took
    the test.  Not only was it the case that there was a photograph of  him
    which was taken on the day of the test, but the Appellant had explained
    that the photograph was taken in the same room where he  undertook  the
    test.

14. Moreover, he described the test by stating "the test each lasted  about
    an hour except for the speaking test which was shorter" (paragraph  9).
    Furthermore, the judge observed that "after taking the  TOEIC  test  he
    took a City & Guilds test which he passed" (paragraph 13).   The  judge
    was entitled  to  come  to  the  conclusion  that,  "I  note  that  his
    photograph is attached to the test certificate and I find  that  to  be
    persuasive.  I am satisfied that he has  discharged  the  second  stage
    burden of proof" (paragraph 24).

15. These findings, accordingly, are preserved intact.  It now  remains  to
    the  judge  upon  reconsideration,  to  decide  whether  the  Appellant
    succeeds on the basis of Article 8, given his Article 8 rights in  this
    country.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  I set aside the decision of the original judge.   I
    remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is  allowed  pursuant  to
    practice statement 7.2(a) of the Practice Direction.

17. No anonymity order is made.

18. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th September 2019

