
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/18027/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13 August 2018                       |On 28 September 2018                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Zeeshan [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     (For 13 August 2018) Ms R Pettersen, Senior
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Harris Solicitor of UK Immigration Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Pakistan, date of  birth  1  January  1989,
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision  to  refuse  further
    leave to remain on 11 July 2016.  The  appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge G R  J  Robson  (the  Judge)  who  on  15  January  2018
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules but allowed the appeal
    with reference to Article 8 ECHR.  The decision was challenged  by  the
    Secretary of State and permission to appeal was given in February 2018.

3.   On  20  March  2018  with  Mr  A  McVeety,  Senior  Presenting  Officer
    appearing for the Secretary of State and Mr R Harris appearing for  the
    Claimant I decided that the Original  Tribunal  decision  contained  an
    error of law in that the Judge had failed to properly address,  in  the
    light of the case law, the issue of the best interests of the  children
    and the significance of the fact that the  Appellant's  wife  Mrs  [T],
    their two children [Z] date of birth 13 March 2014  and  [A],  date  of
    birth 10 December 2015, were all British nationals.  The  Judge  failed
    therefore to consider the issue of the reasonableness of expecting  the
    children to leave and the failure to assess the best interests  of  the
    children as well as the issue of  the  impact  of  the  Claimant  being
    required to leave the United Kingdom to return to Pakistan and make  an
    out of country application for leave to enter.  Before  the  Judge  the
    Claimant had relied upon a statement by himself and his wife.

4.   The factual position had to a degree really not  changed  save  insofar
    as the Claimant's standing  in  the  UK  was  affected  by  an  adverse
    immigration decision raising the issue that  the  Claimant  had  relied
    upon an English language test certificate which had not been  genuinely
    obtained.  The Claimant  in  his  witness  statement  relied  upon  his
    relationship with his wife,  family  and  his  relationship  which  was
    subsisting between himself, his wife, and their two children.   It  was
    said that the  Claimant  had  developed  a  very  strong  bond  between
    himself, his son and daughter.  Equally the Claimant claimed to support
    his wife and help in bringing up the children.  The Claimant  indicated
    that he could not expect his wife and children to  return  to  Pakistan
    with him because his wife had health problems of a  significant  nature
    as did, it seemed, likely, the second child.  It was  said  to  be  too
    early to know exactly what  would  happen  in  relation  to  her.   The
    position has slightly moved on in that in respect of their daughter [A]
    medical examinations were in train, now that she was 2 years of age, to
    see what if anything could be done about the renal  problems  that  she
    faced:  Those have yet to be fully investigated.  Other arguments  were
    put in relation to why the  Claimant's  wife  and  children  could  not
    accompany him back to Pakistan.  The Claimant expressed  his  anxieties
    in terms of the health and wellbeing of his children and his wife on  a
    return to Pakistan.  The Claimant's son is settled in schooling in  the
    UK and it was said  that  they  were  waiting  for  a  further  medical
    investigation of the combination of kidney and asthma problems  of  the
    Claimant's daughter.

5.   There was no substantive  challenge  to  the  evidence  of  the  health
    including some additional information provided relating to the  medical
    background of the Claimant's wife and daughter.   The  Claimant's  wife
    gave similar evidence of her concerns as to the impact of the  family's
    removal to Pakistan and its impact on her bearing in mind that  she  is
    not of Pakistani origin and was not  part  of  life  in  Pakistan  with
    connections thereto.

6.   Ultimately Ms Pettersen did not  argue  that  the  Claimant's  wife  or
    children  who  are  all  British  nationals  should  go  to   Pakistan.
    Essentially she sought to argue that the Claimant could go and make  an
    out of country application  and  seek  to  return  on  that  basis.  Ms
    Pettersen did not argue that the best interests of the  children  would
    lie in removing with their parents to Pakistan.  Therefore applying the
    well-known case law of ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2011] UKSC 4  and  that  which  followed  there  was  clear
    evidence that the best interests of the children lay  in  remaining  in
    the UK with the family unit  as  a  whole.   The  children  as  British
    nationals in a subsisting parental relationship of mother and father it
    may be argued by the Secretary of State are not being required to leave
    the UK and therefore Section 117B(6) is not engaged.  Be that as it may
    if it is engaged then there is really no substantive argument  that  it
    would  be  reasonable  for  them  to  leave  the  UK.   It  cannot   be
    proportionate or in the public interest for them to leave.

7.   So far as proportionality is concerned  essentially  the  argument,  by
    reference to Chikwamba [2008] UKHL  40,  was  not  in  issue  that  the
    Claimant has had a family life with his wife and children and continued
    to do so.  It therefore seemed to me  clear  that  the  effect  of  the
    decision is an interference and arguably  it  is  lawful  and  properly
    served immigration purposes.  Of  itself  it  was  not  said  that  the
    Claimant's involvement in using an inappropriate test certificate was a
    factor of such strength and power as to weigh against him being allowed
    to remain to enter the UK and it was not said it  would  form  a  clear
    basis to refuse him if he made an out of country application.

8.   In Chikwamba the House of Lords was  having  particular  regard  to  an
    Asylum Policy Instruction in connection  with  Article  8  family  life
    claims and in particular to the issue of whether a person might be in a
    better position who is in the United Kingdom as opposed to someone  who
    was seeking entry clearance.  The House of Lords noted the  policy  and
    the question  of  proportionality  but  Chikwamba  was  cited  for  the
    proposition  as  to  whether  or  not  a  policy  was  legitimate   and
    proportionate.   In  assessing  that  issue  one  considered  what  the
    benefits of it really are and if it was necessary for  the  maintenance
    of and enforcement of immigration control; an  indisputable  legitimate
    aim.  In its own context the issue of requiring someone to make an  out
    of country application was often justified by the need to avoid sending
    out a message that people should not be allowed  to  exploit  and  gain
    advantage by illegal presence in the UK.  In this  case  the  Appellant
    was lawfully here but he engaged in the dishonest  practice  to  obtain
    his English language test certificate.

9.   It seemed to me  in  assessing  proportionality  there  was  plainly  a
    significant public interest in persons who abuse and misuse immigration
    controls should not be allowed to profit from it.  However this was not
    an entry clearance case nor was it deportation.  I find when there  was
    a genuine marriage, a genuine relationship between family members,  the
    best interests of the children are to remain as a family  unit  and  it
    was accepted they  cannot  be  removed,  it  is  not  proportionate  to
    interfere into that established family relationship simply  to  require
    an out of country  application.   I  do  not  see  an  interference  as
    justified.  There was no suggestion that an entry clearance application
    would be processed in under six months  and  nothing  to  indicate  the
    likelihood of it being refused.

10.  Accordingly I take the view that  this  was  a  case  where  there  are
    children who are affected by the issue of the Claimant's leave and that
    unlike  most  cases  this  was  one  where  the  public  interest   was
    outweighed.  There was no suggestion that the Claimant was a burden  on
    the tax payer and cannot, if he remains in the United Kingdom,  support
    his family.  I find  therefore  as  a  judgment  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State is not proportionate.  This  is  one  of  those  few
    cases where the public interest is outweighed by the best interests  of
    the children and the family unit being maintained in the UK.

ANONYMITY
No anonymity order was made nor is one required.


Signed                                  Dated 10 September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD
The appeal has succeeded but on the strength of much after arising  evidence
and  the  submissions  made  not  least  reflecting  the  realities  of  the
situation.   In  these  circumstances  I  do  not  find  a  fee   award   is
appropriate.


Signed                                  Dated 10 September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
