
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18299/2019 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th January 2021                  |On 9th March 2021                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            WILLIAM RUPERT BROWN
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms U Uwaezuoke, IAS Immigration Advice Service


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in the appeal before me is the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department ("SSHD") and the respondent to this appeal is Mr Brown.
     However, for ease of reference, in the course of this decision I adopt
    the parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I refer to Mr  Brown  as
    the appellant, and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


 2. The hearing before me was a Skype for Business video conference hearing
    held during the Covid-19 pandemic. Neither party objected to  a  remote
    hearing. I sat at the Birmingham Civil Justice Centre. I was  addressed
    by the representatives in exactly the same way as I would have been  if
    the parties had attended the hearing together.  The appellant  and  his
    partner joined the hearing remotely and were able to see  and  hear  me
    and the representatives throughout.  I was satisfied: that no party has
    been prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any restriction on
    a right or interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.  I
    was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in accordance
    with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote hearing  because
    of the present need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19,
    and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure
    the  matter  is  dealt  with  fairly  and  justly  in  a  way  that  is
    proportionate to the importance of the  case,  the  complexity  of  the
    issues that arise, and the  anticipated  costs  and  resources  of  the
    parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied that  both  parties
    had been able to participate fully in the proceedings.


 3. The respondent  appeals  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Hagan to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse his application for leave to remain in the UK on the
    basis of his family life with his partner Helen Wilson, for reasons set
    out in a decision promulgated on 16th January 2020.


 4. The respondent refers to paragraphs [26] and [27] of the  decision  and
    claims Judge O'Hagan  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds with  the  sole  determining  factor  being  the  disparity  of
    healthcare between the UK and New Zealand and the lack of  availability
    of medication that the appellant currently receives in the UK,  in  New
    Zealand.  The respondent refers to paragraph [111] of the  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in GS (India) & Others v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40
    and claims the appellant's medical treatment is the  only  factor  that
    Judge O'Hagan finds, in itself, gives rise to a breach of Article 8.


 5. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio on 15th  April
    2020.


 6. Mrs Aboni relied upon the written submissions made  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent dated 15th  July  2020.   The  respondent  submits  that  at
    paragraph [26] of his decision, Judge O'Hagan stated that  he  was  not
    persuaded by the evidence that there would be insurmountable  obstacles
    to the appellant, if viewed in isolation from  his  health,  continuing
    his life with his partner in New Zealand.  However, at paragraph  [27],
    Judge O'Hagan then directed himself that the matter hinges on the issue
    of the appellant's health, and whether the  difficulties  arising  from
    that, are such  as  to  give  rise  to  insurmountable  obstacles.  The
    respondent submits Judge O'Hagan  allowed  the  appeal  with  the  sole
    determining factor being the disparity of healthcare between the UK and
    New Zealand and the lack of availability of  the  medication  that  the
    appellant currently receives in the UK, in New Zealand.  The respondent
    submits the approach adopted  by  Judge  O'Hagan  is  contrary  to  the
    principles set out by the Court of Appeal in GS (India) & Others v SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 40 and SL (St Lucia) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1894.   The
    respondent submits the judge  materially  erred  in  finding  that  the
    exceptions to certain eligibility requirements for leave to remain as a
    partner, referred to in Section EX of Appendix FM are met, and allowing
    the appeal for the reasons set out.  Mrs Aboni  submits  that  although
    the respondent's published guidance to caseworkers - Family  Migration:
    Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life  (as  a  Partner  or  Parent)  and
    Private Life: 10 Year Routes - states (at page 55) that  "..independent
    medical evidence could establish that a physical or mental  disability,
    or a serious illness which requires ongoing  medical  treatment,  would
    lead to very serious hardship: for example, due to the lack of adequate
    health care in the country where the family would be required to  live.
    As such, in the absence of a third country alternative, it could amount
    to an insurmountable obstacle to  family  life  continuing  overseas.",
    that is a factor that is relevant, but cannot be determinative  or  the
    only factor where there are no  other  obstacles  to  the  family  life
    continuing abroad.


 7. In reply, Ms Uwaezuoke relied upon  the  appellant's  skeleton  further
    submissions  and submits the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  does
    not disclose any material misdirection in law and properly read,  Judge
    O'Hagan did not allow the appeal solely because  of  the  disparity  of
    healthcare  and  the  lack  of  availability  of  medication  that  the
    appellant currently receives in the UK, in New  Zealand.   She  submits
    Judge O'Hagan carefully considered the appellant's health  as  part  of
    the overall assessment of the Article 8 balancing exercise to determine
    whether  the  decision  to  refuse  leave  to  remain  amounts   to   a
    disproportionate interference to the Article 8 rights of the appellant.
     She submits Judge O'Hagan properly directed himself at paragraph  [16]
    that he was bound to consider the appeal solely on the basis of whether
    the decision breaches the appellant's human rights, and  more  broadly,
    the human rights of those others affected by the decision. Ms Uwaezuoke
    submits that at paragraphs [22] to [35] of his decision  Judge  O'Hagan
    properly  refers  to  the  relevant  legal  framework   and   carefully
    considered all the evidence  before  the  Tribunal  before  reaching  a
    decision that was plainly open to the Tribunal.


Discussion


 8. In my judgment,  the  respondent  has  failed  to  establish  that  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan is vitiated by a material
    error of law.


 9. As Judge O'Hagan set out at paragraph [16] of his  decision,  the  only
    ground of appeal available to the appellant is  that  the  respondent's
    decision is unlawful under s6 of the  Human  Rights  Act  1998.   Judge
    O'Hagan found the appellant has established a family life  in  the  UK.
    It was undoubtedly open to him to do  so.  He  found  the  decision  to
    refuse the appellant leave to remain is of  sufficient  gravity  as  to
    potentially engage the operation of  Article  8(1).   He  accepted  the
    interference is in accordance with the law, and that  the  interference
    is necessary to protect the legitimate aim of immigration control.  The
    issue  in  this  appeal,  as  is  often  the  case,  was  whether   the
    interference is proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be
    achieved.


10. Although the appellant's ability to satisfy the  immigration  rules  is
    not the question to be determined by the Tribunal, it  was  capable  of
    being a weighty factor,  when  deciding  whether  the  refusal  of  the
    application for leave to remain is proportionate to the legitimate  aim
    of enforcing immigration control.  As set out by the Court of Appeal in
    TZ (Pakistan) [2018] EWCA Civ 1109,  compliance  with  the  immigration
    rules would usually mean that there is  nothing  on  the  Secretary  of
    State's side of the scales to show that the refusal of the claim  could
    be justified. At paragraphs [32]  to  [34],  the  Senior  President  of
    Tribunals confirmed that where a person  meets  the  rules,  the  human
    rights appeal must succeed because 'considerable weight' must be  given
    to the respondent's policy as set out in the rules.


11. The appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of his
    family life with his partner.  It was common ground between the parties
    that the appellant is unable to meet the minimum income requirement set
    out in paragraph E-LTRP.3.1 of Appendix FM of the immigration rules. As
    that requirement could not be met the appellant was unable to meet  the
    requirements for limited leave to remain as a  partner  unless  Section
    EX.1 applies.  That is, the appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a partner who is in the UK and is a British  citizen,
    and there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
    continuing outside the UK.  At paragraph [23] of  his  decision,  Judge
    O'Hagan referred, quite properly, to Section EX. 2 of Appendix FM which
    states:


         "For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) 'insurmountable  obstacles'
         means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be  overcome  all  would  entail
         very serious hardship the applicant or their partner."


12. The specific question being addressed by Judge O'Hagan was whether  the
    appellant has established that there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life with his partner continuing outside the UK.   At  paragraph
    [24] of his decision Judge O'Hagan referred  to  the  decision  of  the
    Supreme Court in R (Agyarko) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11. Lord Reed confirmed
    the words 'insurmountable obstacles' mean not only obstacles which make
    it literally impossible for a family  to  live  together  in  the  non-
    national's country of origin but are to be understood  in  a  practical
    and realistic sense, as a stringent test.


13. First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Hagan heard evidence  from  the  appellant,
    his partner and his partner's mother.  In reaching his decision he also
    had regard to the medical  evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal relating to the health the appellant  and  in  particular  the
    treatment he has received.  At paragraphs [26] and [27] of his decision
    he said:


         "26. I am not  persuaded  by  the  evidence  that  there  would  be
         insurmountable obstacles to the appellant, if viewed  in  isolation
         from his health, continuing his life with Ms Wilson in New Zealand.
          He has not advanced any arguments that he could not do  so,  other
         than those arising from his health.


         27.  The matter hinges, then,  on  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
         health, and whether the difficulties arising from that are such  as
         to give rise to insurmountable obstacles..."


14. Judge O'Hagan referred to the diagnosis made and having considered  the
    clinical picture set out in the letters from  a  specialist  nurse  and
    consultant responsible for managing the  appellant's  condition,  Judge
    O'Hagan found that the condition suffered by the appellant  (i)  is  at
    the severe end of the spectrum, (ii)  has  been  subject  to  recurrent
    flareups, and (iii) has proved difficult to treat  in  the  appellant's
    case.  He noted the appellant had proved unresponsive to, or intolerant
    of, the conventional disease modifying drugs which were tried. He noted
    however that the appellant has responded well to a particular  form  of
    medication, and since  he  has  been  taking  that,  many  inflammatory
    aspects of the condition have been brought under a reasonable degree of
    control.   At paragraph [29] of his decision, Judge  O'Hagan  concluded
    that  he  did  not  consider  the  condition  and  resultant  level  of
    disability to be  such  that  it  would  preclude  the  appellant  from
    relocating if he were able to continue to  receive  treatment  once  he
    returned to New Zealand. However, on the evidence before  him,  he  was
    satisfied that the medication the appellant has responded  to,  is  not
    available in New Zealand. He found the likelihood therefore is that the
    appellant's condition would again deteriorate if he were to  return  to
    New Zealand.


15. Judge O'Hagan considered the  impact  that  the  deterioration  in  the
    mental and physical  health  of  the  appellant  would  have  upon  the
    appellant and his partner individually, and as a couple. He referred to
    the physical and mental health of the appellant previously, noting  the
    appellant  experienced  considerable  pain  and  incapacity  when   his
    condition was  uncontrolled  before  he  began  receiving  his  current
    medication.  At paragraph [33], he concluded that  it  is  likely  that
    were the appellant and his partner to  relocate  to  New  Zealand,  the
    appellant's physical and emotional health will  deteriorate,  and  that
    would lead to a deterioration, and quite possibly a cessation of  their
    relationship.  At paragraph [34] he found that there are  obstacles  to
    the appellant and his partner continuing their  lives  in  New  Zealand
    which could not be overcome or would entail very serious  hardship  for
    the parties, and so which are insurmountable.


16. Paragraph [111] of the judgement of Underhill LJ in GS (India)  v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 40 must be read in context.  It  is  founded  upon  the
    judgment of Moses LJ (with whom McFarlane LJ  and  the  Master  of  the
    Rolls agreed) in MM (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 279.  At paragraph  [23]
    Moses LJ said:


         "The only cases I can foresee where the absence of adequate medical
         treatment in the country to which a person is to be  deported  will
         be relevant to Article 8, is where it is an additional factor to be
         weighed in the balance, with  other  factors  which  by  themselves
         engage Article 8  .  Suppose,  in  this  case,  the  appellant  had
         established firm family ties in this country, then the availability
         of continuing medical treatment here, coupled with  his  dependence
         on the family here for support, together establish  'private  life'
         under Article 8. That conclusion would  not  involve  a  comparison
         between medical facilities here  and  those  in  Zimbabwe.  Such  a
         finding would not offend the principle  expressed  above  that  the
         United Kingdom is under no Convention obligation to provide medical
         treatment here when it is not available in the country to which the
         appellant is to be deported."


17. Having referred to paragraph [23] of the judgment of  Moses  LJ  in  MM
    (Zimbabwe), in GS (India) v SSHD, Laws LJ, said at [87]:


         "With great respect this seems to me to be entirely right. It means
         that a specific case has to be made under Article 8...."





     Underhill LJ added at [111]:


         "There  are  possibly  some  ambiguities  in  the  details  of  the
         reasoning in that passage,  but  I  think  it  is  clear  that  two
         essential points are being made. First the absence or inadequacy of
         medical treatment, even life preserving treatment, in  the  country
         of return, cannot be relied on at all as a fact engaging article 8:
         if that is all there is,  the  claim  must  fail.  Secondly,  where
         article 8 is engaged by other factors, the fact that  the  claimant
         is receiving medical treatment in this country which may or may not
         be available in the country of  return  may  be  a  factor  in  the
         proportionality exercise; but that factor cannot be treated  as  by
         itself giving rise to a breach since that would contravene  the  no
         obligation to treat principle."


18. In SL (Saint Lucia) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1894, the  Court  of  Appeal
    considered whether Paposhvili had any impact on the approach to Article
    8 claims but rejected that submission. At [27], Hickinbottom LJ said:


         "As I have indicated and as GS India emphasises, article  8  claims
         have a different  focus  and  are  based  upon  entirely  different
         criteria. In particular, article 8 is not article 3 with  merely  a
         lower threshold: it does not provide some sort of safety net  where
         a medical case fails to satisfy the article 3 criteria. An  absence
         of medical treatment in the country of return will  not  in  itself
         engage article 8. The only  relevance  to  article  8  of  such  an
         absence will be where that is an additional factor in  the  balance
         with other factors which themselves engage article 8."


19. The decisions relied upon by  the  respondent  do  not  establish  that
    Article 8 can never be engaged by the health  consequences  of  removal
    from the United Kingdom, albeit that  exceptional  circumstances  would
    have to established before a breach were established.  A fact  specific
    assessment is  required.   In  my  judgment,  Judge  O'Hagan  carefully
    considered the evidence before the Tribunal.  He was not persuaded that
    there would be insurmountable obstacles to the appellant, if viewed  in
    isolation from his health, continuing his life with his partner in  New
    Zealand. However having carefully considered the medical evidence  that
    was before the Tribunal and  more  importantly,  the  very  significant
    impact that any deterioration in the physical and mental health of  the
    appellant would have on the appellant and his partner individually  and
    cumulatively, he concluded that on the evidence, he was satisfied  that
    there are insurmountable obstacles to the appellant's family life  with
    his partner continuing outside the UK.  That is not, in  my  judgement,
    to say that the fact the appellant is receiving  treatment  in  the  UK
    that would not be available to him in New Zealand was treated by  Judge
    O'Hagan as the only  reason  for  allowing  the  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds. It was a decision reached upon the strength  of  the  evidence
    that was before the First-tier Tribunal regarding  the  health  of  the
    appellant and the likely  impact  upon  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his partner.  In my judgment, when the decision  is  read
    as a whole it was a factor that he considered in the overall assessment
    of proportionality.  It was a fact specific analysis.  It was a  factor
    that he balanced against the physical and  emotional  impact  upon  the
    appellant and his partner individually and jointly as a couple and  the
    likely deterioration, and possible cessation of the  relationship.   It
    is not in my judgement a decision that offends the  "no  obligation  to
    treat" principle.


20. The assessment of an Article 8 claim such as this and the consideration
    of whether removal is proportionate, is always a highly fact  sensitive
    task. The findings and conclusions reached by Judge O'Hagan were in  my
    judgment, neither irrational nor unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense,
    or findings  and  conclusions  that  were  wholly  unsupported  by  the
    evidence.   They were based on the particular facts and  circumstances
    of this appeal and the strength of the evidence  before  the  Tribunal,
    both written and oral. In my judgment, in reaching his decision,  Judge
    O'Hagan clearly applied the correct test.  It was open to him  to  find
    that the stringent test has been met and the appellant has  established
    that there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with his partner
    continuing outside the UK for the reasons  set  out  in  his  decision.
    Where a judge applies the correct test, and that results in an arguably
    generous conclusion, it does not mean that it was erroneous in law.


21. It follows that in my judgment, there is no material error  of  law  in
    the decision of Judge O'Hagan and I dismiss the appeal.


Decision


22. The appeal is dismissed.  The decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Hagan promulgated on 16th January 2020 shall stand.




Signed   V. Mandalia            Date:        1st March 2021

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



