
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/18468/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 April 2019                     |On 09 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr Masud Ahmed
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Waheed, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Freer
    which was promulgated on 22 February of 2009. The appeal is brought  by
    the Secretary of State.

2.    The  appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  a  national  of
    Bangladesh  who  brought  his  appeal  under  the  Immigration   Rules,
    paragraph 276ADE. For convenience I will identify him as the  appellant
    hereafter

3.   The appellant entered into a religious marriage  with  a  young  woman,
    Miss [A], who is an EU national. The judge made a number of findings in
    relation to that marriage and the family life but came to a  conclusion
    at  paragraph  67  that  the  appellant  "does  not  yet  satisfy   the
    Immigration Rules but it is quite possible that he may  do  so  in  the
    future".  There is no cross-appeal on this finding.

4.   The judge then went on to consider human rights considerations  outside
    the Immigration Rules, carrying out a  proportionality  exercise  under
    the well-known principles enunciated in Razgar.

5.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup, in  granting  permission  to  appeal,
    said this

         "It is arguable that the decision of  the  Tribunal  is  flawed  in
         several respects.  It reads as rushed if not  garbled  and  several
         sentences are left  incomplete.   The  reasoning  is  peculiar  and
         confused.  Weight is given to family life  with  a  large  extended
         family described as 'intense and vivid'.   I  fail  to  follow  the
         sense of paragraphs 73 and 74  of  the  decision,  discounting  the
         public interest because the appellant is married to an EEA national
         and that the judiciary are required to seek  to  uphold  subsisting
         and genuine marriages  that  they  examine.   The  judge  fails  to
         appreciate that the appellant is not legally married to his partner
         and that their relationship had existed for less  than  two  years.
         Some of  the  reasoning  is  contradictory  such  as  the  negative
         findings between 63 and 67 are relied on later in the  decision  in
         the  proportionality  assessment  as  factors  in  the  appellant's
         favour.  The conclusion at 78 that having performed  the  Razgar  v
         Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2004]  UKHL   27
         proportionality assessment the appellant  has  met  the  very  high
         threshold  of  very   substantial   difficulties   or   exceptional
         circumstances".

6.   The Secretary of State appeals on three  discrete  grounds.   Ground  1
    reads as follows

         "The respondent submits that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
         materially erred at paragraph 72 when he  finds  that  "the  family
         life includes daily dealings with a large extended family including
         his wife and his mother who all live together".  In fact as clearly
         recorded at paragraphs 12, 24  and  30  of  the  determination  the
         appellant and his wife do not live with his mother.   This  clearly
         affects the judge's findings that  the  family  lived  as  a  large
         extended family as clearly they do not.

7.   Ms Isherwood, for the Secretary  of  State,  submits  that  factor  was
    something on which the First-tier Tribunal Judge clearly  placed  great
    weight as evidenced at paragraph 75 where the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    finds the appellant's mother requires a male guardian in  the  form  of
    the appellant.

8.   Further at paragraph 74 the First-tier Tribunal Judge records that

         "the judiciary are required to seek to uphold  the  subsisting  and
         genuine marriages that they examine."

9.   At no point has  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  recognised  that  an
    Islamic marriage is not accepted in UK law and therefore the  appellant
    and Miss [A] are not in fact married as a matter of law.  At  the  date
    of the hearing, their relationship had not existed for  two  years  and
    therefore the appellant also did not qualify as an unmarried partner.

10.  Mr Waheed, for Mr Masud Ahmed, reminds me that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge in considering a permission hearing only  has  the  Secretary  of
    State's submissions to rely on and that in the Upper Tribunal one  must
    approach the matter afresh, which of course I  do.   He  concedes  that
    there is a factual error in the recitation of the evidence by the judge
    in recording that the appellant lives with his mother.

11.  Mr Waheed submits that notwithstanding this error, it is not one  which
    goes to the heart of the decision and is not one which was relied on by
    the judge in this particular instance.  He takes me to  the  manner  in
    which the judge determined this case and points  to  three  significant
    factors  which  it  is  said  push  this  case  into   the   compelling
    circumstance outlined in the Razgar decision.  He talks first of  there
    being a history of domestic violence involving the  appellant's  mother
    and her partner.  He talks of the appellant having witnessed  this  and
    there being a shared history and he relies on the appellant being  said
    to be the only the person who can comfort the appellant's mother in the
    circumstances.  These are factors, he says, took the matter beyond mere
    emotional anguish allowing the judge  to  allow  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.

12.  Mr Waheed's submission, which is forcefully made, is that there  is  no
    reliance in any of  those  three  factors  on  the  appellant's  mother
    residing with him and therefore the  human  rights  assessment  is  not
    predicated upon the misstatement or misunderstanding as to the domestic
    circumstances of the appellant.

13.  Despite the force with which Mr  Waheed  argued  the  point,  I  cannot
    accept it.  I am troubled by the content of this decision  overall  and
    particularly of the Razgar human rights assessment which seems to  take
    a view which is entirely at variance with the findings of fact to which
    the judge came when dealing  with  the  matter  under  the  Immigration
    Rules. The fact that so fundamental a piece of the  factual  matrix  is
    misstated gives rise to the clear indication that this is a case  which
    for whatever reason did not receive anxious scrutiny by the judge.

14.  I heard submissions from both Ms Isherwood and  Mr  Waheed  as  to  the
    extent to which any part of the decision  might  be  preserved  in  the
    light of my conclusion and they were each of the view (and  it  is  one
    which I share) that were I to be satisfied that that error of  law  was
    material, then it would not be appropriate to preserve any part of  the
    decision.

15.  There is a clear error of law.   It  is  undoubtedly  material  to  the
    decision which must in consequence be set aside. It is unnecessary  for
    me to deal with the other grounds. This  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of
    State must be allowed.

    Notice of Decision

    1) The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed and the  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal is set aside;

    2) The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for there to  be  a
       fresh hearing, not before Judge Freer;

    3) No findings of fact preserved.

    4) No anonymity direction is made.



IMPORTANT PROCEDURAL NOTE

    5) The Home Office reference in this appeal has been wrongly recoded  as
       that for the appellant's partner. The Upper Tribunal records need  to
       be amended as will those of the First-tier Tribunal,  to  ensure  the
       correct file  is  brought  to  the  re-hearing  by  the  Home  Office
       representative. The correct Home Office reference is A1925094.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date     7 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

