
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/19198/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre Tower, Birmingham           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4 December 2018                          |On 28 January 2019             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                               Mrs NURUN NAHAR
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Islam of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Hetherington  dated  17  August  2017,  dismissing  the
      appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 27  July  2016
      refusing  her  leave  to  remain  and  refusing   her   human   rights
      application.

2     The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, who arrived in  the  United
      Kingdom on 12 May 2010 in possession of entry clearance as a  visitor.
      She had applied for that entry clearance on 27 January  2010,  and  it
      was issued on 23March 2010, and was valid until 23 September 2010. The
      appellant was at one point married to a Mr Md Arif Hossain,  who  also
      applied on 27 January 2010 for entry clearance,  and  which  was  also
      granted on 22 March 2010. The circumstances of how that marriage ended
      were unclear to the judge.

3     The details of the appellant's further  immigration  history  are  set
      out in the respondent's decision  letter.  On  20  December  2013  she
      applied for leave to remain under family/private life  grounds,  which
      was refused with no right of appeal on 15 May 2014. It is not said  in
      the decision letter what family life  she  had  relied  upon  in  that
      application. On 28 January 2015, the appellant applied  for  leave  to
      remain under Article 8 ECHR. This was refused on  20  March  2015.  It
      would appear that the appellant was granted a right of appeal  against
      that decision, as there is reference in a later letter dated 15  March
      2016 from the appellant's then representatives, Kingswood  solicitors,
      that the appellant had an appeal which came before judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal Watson on 3 September 2015,  and  it  was  alleged  that
      certain findings were made within that decision, although  the  appeal
      was dismissed. Although no copy of that decision appears to have  been
      before the present judge, it seems apparent that the appellant was, in
      2015, relying on  her  marriage  to  a  Mr  Khaled  Ahmed,  a  British
      national.

4     In her March 2016 application for leave to remain in relation  to  her
      marriage to Mr Ahmed, the appellant argued that they had a genuine and
      subsisting relationship, Mr Ahmed suffered from various  disabilities,
      and there were very significant obstacles to  family  life  continuing
      outside of the United Kingdom.

5     In the decision letter of 27 July 2016, the respondent accepted  (page
      3 of 8) that the appellant had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
      with her British partner, but that the requirements of section EX.1(b)
      were not satisfied, on the basis that  there  were  no  insurmountable
      obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK.

6     The appellant's subsequent appeal came before the judge on  15  August
      2017. Copies of two entry  clearance  applications,  relating  to  the
      appellant and her former husband Mr Hossain, were filed. Although  Mrs
      Aboni stated that there was nothing in the Presenting Officer's  notes
      to confirm that it had  been  Mr  Hogg,  the  Presenting  Officer  who
      appeared before the judge, who  had  filed  that  evidence,  it  seems
      likely that it was.

7     It is apparent that there  was  cross  examination  of  the  appellant
      regarding her previous relationship with Mr Hossain, her  reasons  for
      coming to the United Kingdom, and the timing of and  circumstances  in
      which a relationship with Mr Ahmed came about. Her evidence  was  that
      her marriage to Mr Ahmed  was  arranged,  with  a  religious  ceremony
      taking place on 13 August 2010 (which the judge noted  was  just  over
      three months after her arrival in  the  UK  as  a  visitor)  and  they
      underwent a civil marriage on 22 August 2013.

8     The judge made findings which included the following:

      (i)   the appellant's visa application in 2010 was 'deceptive' [24];


      (ii)  the evidence of the appellant  and  Mr  Ahmed  was  inconsistent
           about where they had met [25];


      (iii)       the appellant should not be regarded  as  having  given  a
           truthful account; she was not credible, she  was  a  mountebank;
           she was an unimpressive and inherently unreliable witness  whose
           evidence was transparently and calculatingly dishonest [29];


      (iv)  the appellant was an economic migrant who entered the UK and  in
           an opportunistic manner, to bolster her decision  to  remain  in
           the UK,  cynically  looked  for  a  man  with  whom  to  form  a
           relationship,  and  found  Mr  Ahmed;   the   relationship   was
           contracted for reasons other than that of  relationship,  family
           or love; the appellant was Mr Ahmed's unpaid helper in  exchange
           for a roof over her head; the marriage was not genuine [29];


      (v)   'even if I am wrong' (although it is not  clear  precisely  what
           issue  the  judge  was  here  proposing  to  consider   in   the
           alternative), when considering whether there were insurmountable
           obstacles to a family life continuing outside of  the  UK  [32],
           neither the appellant nor Mr Ahmed spoke English; Mr Ahmed  knew
           the language and customs of Bangladesh; the judge  rejected  the
           appellant's assertion that she  had  no  family  in  Bangladesh,
           although the judge here appears to rely on his previous  adverse
           credibility finding in relation to her evidence,  and  therefore
           it  again  not  being  clear  on  what  basis   this   allegedly
           alternative consideration was being made);


      (vi)  (after taking into account considerations set out in  s.117B(2)-
           (5)  NIAA  2002  at  [34]-[37])   there   were   no   compelling
           circumstances to warrant a departure from the immigration  rules
           [39]; the  appellant's  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  was
           proportionate, as was a temporary separation to  enable  her  to
           make an application for entry clearance [40].

9     The appeal was dismissed.

10    The appellant applied for permission to  appeal  in  grounds  dated  1
      September 2017, arguing that the judge erred in law,  in  summary,  as
      follows:

      (i)   by proceeding unfairly,  the  genuineness  of  the  relationship
           between the appellant and Mr Ahmed  not  having  been  an  issue
           raised by the respondent in the decision letter;


      (ii)  failing to have adequate regard to the evidence in  relation  to
           Mr Ahmed's disabilities and his care requirements.

11    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First  tier  Tribunal
      Swaney on 31 January 2018 on the  grounds  that  the  judge  may  have
      proceeded unfairly in failing to put to the appellant at  the  hearing
      that the genuineness of her relationship was in dispute.

12    Before me it was conceded by Mrs  Aboni  after  a  short  deliberation
      that the judge proceeded unfairly. Irrespective of what may or may not
      be contained in the findings  made  by  Judge  Watson  in  the  unseen
      decision from 2015, the position adopted  by  the  respondent  in  the
      decision letter of 27 July 2016 was clearly that the appellant  had  a
      genuine and subsisting relationship with Mr Ahmed.

13    It is not entirely clear what submissions were made by Mr Hogg  before
      the judge; these are not recorded at [20].

14    I find it was an appropriate concession for Mrs Aboni to  make,  given
      the way in which the respondent's case was framed within the  decision
      letter, that the judge proceeded unfairly by  taking  issue  with  the
      proposition  that  the  appellant  had  a   genuine   and   subsisting
      relationship with her husband. Even if Mr Hogg had submitted copies of
      the entry clearance applications and asked some  questions  about  the
      reasons why the appellant first came to the  United  Kingdom,  is  not
      sufficiently clear to me that the appellant was firmly put  on  notice
      that the genuineness of her  relationship  with  Mr  Ahmed  was  being
      disputed, either by the respondent  or  by  the  judge  directly.  The
      appellant had prepared her case on  the  basis  of  the  matter  being
      accepted by the respondent in the decision letter.

15    Further,  the  judge's  purported  consideration  of  matters  in  the
      alternative  was  not  in  truth  to  take  matters  properly  in  the
      alternative, given that his adverse credibility findings  in  relation
      to the appellant's evidence affected his approach to  whether  or  not
      there were insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing  outside
      of the United Kingdom.

16    I therefore set aside the judge's decision.

17    Mr Islam suggested that the remaking of this appeal  may  be  retained
      within the Upper Tribunal. However, although Mrs  Aboni  had  accepted
      that the appellant had not  been  given  sufficient  notice  that  the
      genuineness of her relationship with Mr Ahmed was being challenged  in
      the First tier hearing  before  the  judge,  she  wished  that  it  be
      recorded that it was now the respondent's intention, when  the  appeal
      is reheard, to  dispute  that  the  appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship with Mr Ahmed. She stated  that  such  matters
      could properly be raised as a result of the information  derived  from
      the entry  clearance  applications,  and  the  apparent  existence  of
      children from the appellant's previous marriage,  mentioned  in  those
      applications.

18    Mr Islam did not argue that the respondent ought not be  permitted  to
      withdraw any concession contained within the decision  letter;  rather
      he simply indicated that upon the appeal being re-heard, the appellant
      would invite a  positive  finding  from  the  Tribunal  based  on  the
      evidence of the appellant's  relationship  with  Mr  Ahmed  from  2010
      onwards.

19    I find, in circumstances where  the  genuineness  of  the  appellant's
      relationship with Mr Ahmed is now being disputed  by  the  Respondent,
      that the degree of fact finding that will required in  the  re-hearing
      of the appeal is such that the matter is suitable for remittal to  the
      First tier Tribunal.

20    However, I am of the view that the respondent ought to be required  to
      set out its case in relation to the appellant's relationship  in  more
      detail.  To that end, I make the  following  decision,  and  give  the
      following directions.

      Decision

      The judge's decision involved the making of a material error of law.

      I set aside the judges decision.

      I remit the matter to the First tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

      Directions

      (i)   The respondent is directed to provide to the appellant within 28
           days of this decision being sent  to  the  parties,  a  position
           statement setting out the legal basis on which  the  appellant's
           application for leave to remain in the UK is now disputed,  with
           reasons.


      (ii)  The appeal shall be listed for hearing, not before 56 days after
           this decision is sent to the parties.


      (iii) The parties are to ensure that the  decision  of  Judge  of  the
           First tier Tribunal Watson in appeal reference IA/14007/2015  is
           before the Tribunal for the re-hearing of the appeal.



Signed:                                            Date: 21.1.19
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan


