
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/19327/2016
                                                               HU/19329/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 February 2019                            |On 27 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                     master valentine onyekachukwu mozie
                         miss oluchukwu vivian mozie
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr C Mupara of Counsel, instructed by Matthew James
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appeal of these two appellants comes back before me today  for  the
    remaking of their appeal against  the  respondent's  refusal  of  their
    applications for entry clearance to join their  mother  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  An error of law was  found  in  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hussain's decision promulgated on 14 December 2017 in  a
    decision from Upper Tribunal Judge Finch, which was itself  promulgated
    on 24 July 2018.  Judge Finch found a number of errors of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  who  failed  almost  entirely  to
    engage at all with the fact that this was a human rights appeal and did
    not make any assessment under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  There were also errors of law found for the reasons  set
    out in that decision further  to  the  assessment  as  to  whether  the
    appellants met  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  at  the
    relevant date of application or even at date of hearing, with errors of
    law found in almost every material respect.

 2. It is  accepted  by  both  parties  that  the  error  of  law  decision
    essentially found that the appellants both met the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules for entry clearance to join their mother, the date of
    application and the date of hearing, primarily on the basis that  their
    mother had sole responsibility for them and  that  there  was  adequate
    accommodation and maintenance available for them in the United Kingdom.
     No other issues have been taken by  the  respondent  in  the  original
    refusal decision or in the course of the appeal proceedings.   On  that
    basis, the appellants' appeals were allowed, the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal set aside and directions were given  for  the  a  further
    hearing to remake the appeal on  Article  8  grounds.   The  directions
    given by UTJ Finch included provision for a possible reconsideration of
    the decision by an Entry Clearance Officer and  also  consideration  by
    the parties if no further action  or  decision  was  taken  as  to  the
    situation under Article 8 given that both appellants  have  now  passed
    the age of 18 and are no longer minors.  The only relevance to this  is
    that they would not be able to  make  a  fresh  application  for  entry
    clearance because of their age.

 3. The parties are essentially agreed before me today that the passage  of
    time since the application meaning that the appellants are now over the
    age of 18 has no material bearing  on  whether  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed on Article 8 grounds.  There is no  dispute  that  family  life
    continues to exist between the parties and in circumstances as set  out
    by the Court of Appeal in TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1109, a  finding  that  a
    person meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules  would  normally
    lead to  the  positive  determination  of  a  claim  under  Article  8,
    essentially because there is no public interest in refusing  the  claim
    in circumstances where the Immigration Rules are met.   In  this  case,
    the passage of time is solely  down  to  the  duration  of  proceedings
    within the Tribunal system.  There is no finding that  there  has  been
    any change of circumstances since the date of  application  other  than
    the appellants getting older, but to the contrary, a finding  has  been
    made that the requirements of the Immigration Rules  were  met  by  the
    appellants when they were minors at the date of application and  as  at
    the date of both previous hearings.

 4. For these reasons Article 8 is clearly engaged.   The  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules are met such that there is no public interest  in
    the  refusal  and  the  interference  with   family   life   would   be
    disproportionate in this case.  The appeals are therefore both  allowed
    on Article 8 grounds.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remake  the  appeals
as follows:

    The appeals are allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]         Date         22nd February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

