
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: hu/19057/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Held at Field House via Skype for    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Business                             |                                     |
|On 1 March 2021                      |On 8 March 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                             SUE BROWN ZELENITZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. S Akinbolu, Counsel, instructed by Breytenbachs
                    Immigration Consultants
For the Respondent:    Ms. S Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Roots ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 17  March  2020  by
    which the appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent  to
    refuse her leave to remain on human  rights  (article  8)  grounds  was
    refused.

 2. Upper Tribunal Judge Coker granted the appellant permission  to  appeal
    on all grounds.

Hearing

 3. The hearing before me was a Skype for Business video conference hearing
    held during the Covid-19 pandemic. I was present in a hearing  room  at
    Field House. The hearing room and the building were open to the public.
    The hearing and its start time were listed in the  cause  list.  I  was
    addressed by the representatives in the same way as if we were together
    in the hearing room. I am satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in
    open court; that the open justice principle has been secured;  that  no
    party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar  as  there  has  been  any
    restriction on a right or interest, it is justified  as  necessary  and
    proportionate.

 4. The appellant did not attend the hearing.

Anonymity

 5.  The  Judge  did  not  issue  an  anonymity   direction   and   neither
    representative requested one before me.

Background

 6. The appellant is a national of the United States of  America  and  aged
    78. She worked in the United States until  1995,  and  then  worked  in
    Germany for her US based employer until 2002.

 7. She entered the United Kingdom on 15 March 2002  having  secured  entry
    clearance as a visitor. She enjoyed leave to enter until  15  September
    2002.

 8. On 12 June 2003  she  applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  an  overseas
    government employee, which was granted from 27 June 2003  to  30  April
    2004.

 9. On 24 March 2004 she applied for leave  to  remain  as  a  Work  Permit
    holder. This was granted from 3 April 2004 to 3  April  2009.  She  was
    employed in fostering teams by local authorities.

10. On 31 January 2006 she applied for leave to remain  as  a  Work  Permit
    holder. This was granted from 14 February 2006 to 14 February 2011. She
    continued her local authority work until returning to the United States
    in June 2010 following her initial retirement.

11. She was granted entry clearance as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant, arriving
    in this country on 3 November 2013. She enjoyed leave to  remain  until
    28 October 2016. She worked in a social  work  post  in  the  south  of
    England until returning to the United States in September 2014.

12. She was again granted entry clearance as a Tier  2  (General)  Migrant,
    arriving in this country on 25 December  2014.  She  enjoyed  leave  to
    remain until 12 January 2019. By a decision dated  2  August  2016  the
    respondent curtailed the appellant's leave,  to  expire  on  4  October
    2016.

13. After several applications  for  leave  to  remain  were  refused,  the
    applicant applied for leave to  remain  on  human  rights  (article  8)
    grounds on 13 August 2019. The respondent refused the application by  a
    decision dated 5 November 2019. The appellant enjoyed attendant  appeal
    rights.

First-tier Tribunal decision

14. The appellant's appeal came before the Judge sitting at Taylor House on
    10 March 2020.

15. The Judge's consideration of  the  article  8  appeal  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules ('the Rules') runs  to  9  paragraphs.  The  first  7
    paragraphs primarily recite relevant case law. The primary findings are
    at [51]-[52]:

         '51. For the  avoidance  of  any  doubt  I  have  also  taken  into
            consideration in relation to the appellant the provisions of the
            2014 Act, which change the 2002 Act, section 117. This is a case
            where, notwithstanding the operation of statute,  I  would  find
            that the  respondent's  lawful  aim  carries  very  considerable
            weight in the  balancing  exercise.  The  Secretary  of  State's
            decision pursues a legitimate aim,  namely  the  maintenance  of
            effective immigration control. The appellant had no  expectation
            that they would be permitted to remain here. She does  not  meet
            the Rules to stay here. She is returning to  the  USA  where,  I
            find, she is familiar with life. Any private life ties  she  has
            formed can be replicated in the USA.


         52. In conclusion I find that any  interference  with  any  private
            life would be wholly proportionate to the  lawful  aim  pursued;
            namely the need to maintain a  fair  and  effective  immigration
            control so as  to  safeguard  the  economic  well-being  of  the
            country. The application of article  8  principles  outside  the
            Rules would inevitably lead to the same results given  that  the
            public interest in  removal  is  likely  to  prevail  given  the
            limited  weight  to  private  life  established  will  leave  is
            precarious. I dismiss the appeal on article 8 grounds.'

Grounds of appeal

16. The appellant relies upon two grounds of appeal:

          i) In assessing the evidence before him, the Judge failed to make
             any assessment  of  the  elements  of,  and  quality  of,  the
             appellant's current private life.


         ii) The Judge overlooked,  without  adequate  reason,  the  recent
             medical evidence produced on behalf the appellant.


17. In granting permission to appeal UTJ Coker succinctly reasoned:

         '3.   Although the outcome of this appeal may not be  different  to
             the decision reached by the first-tier tribunal  judge,  it  is
             arguable that it is not clear that the judge had regard to  all
             of the medical evidence that was before him and this  may  have
             impacted upon the  final  conclusions  reached  by  him  as  to
             reintegration and proportionality.'


Decision on error of law

18. By means of Ground 2, the appellant observes that a  key  part  of  her
    claim is that she suffers from  a  range  of  medical  complaints  that
    render her particularly dependent on her network  of  support  in  this
    country and given the difficulties she has  previously  experienced  on
    return to the United States, separation from  her  network  of  support
    would have a grave impact upon her ability to reintegrate or settle  if
    she were now to return to her country of nationality.

19. This ground focuses on para. 30 of the Judge's decision:

         '30. I accept that  she  has  some  medical  conditions  which  are
            evidenced in the papers. They are summarised in  the  letter  at
            page 174 from her GP, although this is some  16  months  old.  I
            accept that she has the conditions set out there. She  does  not
            have any diagnosed mental health conditions.'

20. The grounds detail  that  neither  statement  made  by  the  Judge  was
    correct, namely as to the medical evidence relied upon being  at  least
    16 months old and  that  there  was  no  medical  evidence  as  to  any
    diagnosed mental health condition. Consequently, it is  said  that  the
    Judge's assessment of both the nature of the appellant's  private  life
    in this country and the impact  separation  from  her  support  network
    would have upon her were flawed.

21. I observe  the  mental  health  diagnosis  of  Dr  Stevens,  consultant
    psychotherapist, which was before the Judge.

22. At the  outset  of  the  hearing  before  me  Ms.  Cunha  appropriately
    confirmed the respondent's position to be that the error identified  by
    the appellant in respect of ground 2 was a material error  of  law.  In
    the circumstances the respondent accepted  that  the  decision  of  the
    Judge was fatally flawed and should properly be set aside.

Remaking the decision

23. Ms Cunha requested on behalf of the  respondent  that  the  appellant's
    appeal be allowed on article  8  grounds  outside  of  the  Rules.  She
    confirmed that the respondent accepted  upon  considering  the  medical
    evidence provided in this appeal, coupled with the appellant's age, her
    accepted difficulties in accessing appropriate medical care upon return
    to the United States and noting her private life rights as  established
    during lengthy periods of lawful residence in this  country,  that  her
    removal would be a disproportionate interference  with  her  article  8
    rights.

24. Ms. Akinbolu was understandably in agreement with the position  adopted
    by the respondent.

25. Upon considering the evidence filed in this matter I am satisfied  that
    the respondent adopted the correct  approach  in  requesting  that  the
    appeal be allowed.

26. The appeal is therefore allowed on article 8  grounds  outside  of  the
    Rules.

27. I am grateful to Ms. Cunha for the careful and thoughtful approach  she
    adopted in this matter.

Notice of Decision

28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, dated 17 March 2020,  involved
    the making of a material error on a point of law and is set aside.

29. The decision is remade by the Upper Tribunal and the appeal is  allowed
    on human rights (article 8) grounds, outside of the Immigration Rules.



Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 1 March 2021


