

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/19815/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18th November 2019                      |On 22nd November 2019           |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     WA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     -
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born in 1991.  The Secretary of
    State seeks to deport him on the grounds that he is a foreign criminal.


 2. This appeal comes before me for remaking pursuant to a  transfer  order
    signed by Principle Resident Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor on the  16th
    September 2019.   That Order followed the decision  of  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Plimmer of the 6th August 2019 to set the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Williams) aside.

 3. The issues before me are:

              i)  Whether  the  Appellant  is  indeed  liable  to  automatic
                 deportation pursuant to s32 of the United  Kingdom  Borders
                 Act 2007;


             ii) Whether he can demonstrate  that  he  is  exempt  from  the
                 automatic deportation procedure on grounds:

                      a) Of his Article 8 family life in the United Kingdom
                         with his wife and son; and/or


                      b) Of his Article 8 private life in  accordance  with
                         paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules.

            iii) Further and in the alternative, whether he can  demonstrate
                 that there are other exceptional reasons why he should  not
                 be deported.

 4. The Appellant did not attend the hearing before me. I heard submissions
    from Mr Bates and considered the file before concluding that  it  would
    be appropriate to proceed in his absence. I was  reluctant  to  proceed
    without  hearing  from  the  Appellant  but  concluded  that   in   the
    circumstances the appeal could be justly determined. I  had  regard  to
    the fact that the Appellant has attended both his appeals before  Judge
    Williams and Judge Plimmer, and that he had,  at  least  in  the  past,
    instructed  representatives.   I  also  had  regard  to  the  following
    matters;


              i) The Appellant  should  have  been  aware  of  the  hearing,
                 Notices of Hearing having  been  sent  to  his  last  known
                 address;


             ii) The Respondent's records demonstrate that the Appellant has
                 breached his bail conditions, having failed to report to an
                 immigration officer on the 9th July 2019 and thereafter;

            iii)  His  last  known  representatives,  Highfield  Solicitors,
                 informed the Home Office that the Appellant  was  aware  of
                 the directions given by Judge Plimmer in July of this year,
                 but they were left without instructions.


    There being no explanation for his non-attendance, and  the  fact  that
    (i)-(iii) above indicate a  pattern  of  non-engagement,  I  cannot  be
    satisfied that  there  is  any  realistic  prospect  of  the  Appellant
    attending at a later date.










 5. I heard brief submissions from Mr Bates and I reserved my decision.  My
    findings are as follows.




    Automatic Deportation


 6. Section s32 of the Borders Act 2007 reads:



         32 Automatic deportation:

         (1) In this section "foreign criminal" means a person-

         (a) who is not a British citizen,

         (b) who is convicted in the United Kingdom of an offence, and

         (c) to whom Condition 1 or 2 applies.

         (2)  Condition 1 is that the person is sentenced to a period of
         imprisonment of at least 12 months.



 7. The Appellant is not a British citizen. He has been  convicted  in  the
    United Kingdom of an offence: between 2014  and  2017  he  received  10
    convictions for 13 offences. Condition 1 applies in that at  least  one
    of  the  convictions  led  to  a  sentence  of  at  least  12   months'
    imprisonment: on  the  6th  March  2017  at  Preston  Crown  Court  the
    Appellant was convicted of possession of a Class A drug  (heroin)  with
    intent to supply and sentenced to 42 months.  I am satisfied  that  the
    Appellant is a 'foreign criminal' to  whom  the  automatic  deportation
    provisions apply.




    The Exceptions


 8. Section 33 of the Borders Act 2007 reads (insofar as  is  relevant)  as
    follows:



         33 Exceptions

         (1) ...

          (2) Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign criminal in
         pursuance of the deportation order would breach-

         (a) a person's Convention rights, or

         (b) ....









    Here 'Convention rights' is to be read as a reference to  those  rights
    protected by the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).


 9. Where  an  appellant  claims  that  his  removal  would  breach  rights
    protected by Article 8, decision makers must look to  Part  5A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014):



         117C Article 8: additional considerations in cases involving
         foreign criminals


         (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

         (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
         public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4) Exception 1 applies where-

         (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
         C's life,

         (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
         and

         (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration
         into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

         (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the effect of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public interest
         requires deportation unless there are very compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and
         2.

         (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.










    Exception 1: Private Life

10. The first  exception  concerns  private  life.  The  question  for  the
    Tribunal is whether the Appellant has a  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and whether the interference that would be caused to it by his
    removal would be disproportionate.  Section 117C (and  the  Immigration
    Rule which mirrors it - paragraph 399A) aims to strike the  balance  by
    reference to a three-part test.


11. The first part is whether the Appellant has been lawfully  resident  in
    this country for most of his life. It is accepted by the  Secretary  of
    State that this test is met. The Appellant is currently 28  years  old.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom in 2003 when he was 12 years  old  and
    continuously held leave to enter or remain from  that  time  until  his
    deportation order was signed on the 10th  September  2018.  This  means
    that he spent more than half of his life living here with leave.

12. The second question is whether the Appellant is socially and culturally
    integrated in the United Kingdom.  This  matter  was  resolved  in  his
    favour by Judge Williams and that finding was upheld by Judge Plimmer.

13. The final question is whether the Appellant can demonstrate that  there
    are very significant obstacles to his  integration  in  Pakistan.    On
    this matter the First-tier Tribunal noted that both the  Appellant  and
    his wife had left Pakistan when they were about 12 years old,  although
    both have returned there for visits, including the  occasion  of  their
    own marriage.  It found as fact that the  Appellant  has  only  distant
    relatives in Pakistan.   Given the limited nature of  these  ties,  the
    First-tier Tribunal was satisfied that the third part of the  test  was
    made out. Judge Plimmer  overturned  that  element  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision in the following terms:

         "Simply concluding that these obstacles  are  very  significant  is
         insufficient, in my judgment, in a case such  as  this,  where  the
         relevant individual is healthy, physically robust and an adult  who
         has shown himself to be resilient".


14. I respectfully  adopt  Judge  Plimmer's  reasoning.    The  test  is  a
    "stringent" one: see Bossade (ss.117A-D-interrelationship  with  Rules)
    [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC).  Applying it in the case of a  foreign  criminal
    who had lived in the UK since he was four years  old,  the  panel  said
    this:


         "57. But the paragraph 399A(c) test is more stringent:  it  is  not
         met simply by showing that a person has no close family ties in the
         country to which it is proposed he is deported; it  requires  "very
         significant  obstacles  to...integration"  to  be  shown.  In   our
         judgement the  obstacles  the  claimant  faces  do  not  meet  this
         demanding standard. In relation to his command of  language  spoken
         in the DRC, it was his own  mother's  evidence  that  he  had  been
         brought up in a household where French was spoken.  The  DRC  is  a
         Francophone country. In any event, it  was  not  suggested  on  his
         behalf that there would be  any  reasons  related  to  physical  or
         mental inability preventing him from learning the local language or
         dialect. As regards his lack of knowledge of the culture, whilst it
         was his evidence that he identified with British  culture,  it  was
         not suggested he had specifically rejected or no longer  understood
         his cultural origins. Furthermore, as regards lack of family  ties,
         he is now a young adult and the  skills  he  has  acquired  through
         attending classes in prison will assist him in being able to earn a
         living without the need to be a dependant. Further, we  agree  with
         Mr Jarvis that it is reasonable to infer  that  his  mother  and/or
         other relatives here will seek to help him  financially,  at  least
         until he has had time to find his own feet. We agree with Mr Jarvis
         that it has not been shown that he would be prevented by reason  of
         any physical or mental ability from developing social and  cultural
         ties in the DRC. He is young, able-bodied and of an adaptable age".


         (my emphasis)


15. The point that the Tribunal here make  is  derived  from  long-standing
    Strasbourg jurisprudence. The  term  'private  life'  encompasses  "the
    physical and  moral  integrity  of  the  person"  which  must  include,
    fundamentally, the right to establish and  develop  relationships  with
    other human beings: see for instance McFeeley  v  United  Kingdom[1]  ,
    Pretty v  United  Kingdom[2]   or  the  opinion  of  Judge  Martens  in
    Beldjoudi v France[3]. It is that irreducible core of what it means  to
    have a private life that the rule is concerned with. As in Bossade, the
    Appellant has not demonstrated that he would  be  unable  to  make  new
    friends and new relationships in Pakistan, nor that he would  face  any
    obstacles at all in doing so.   It could also be said that the rule  is
    concerned with more practical aspects of life - the ability  to  clothe
    and feed oneself etc. Again, none  of  the  evidence  produced  by  the
    Appellant comes close  to  establishing  that  he  would  face  such  a
    difficulty: his own statement does not address the matter at  all.    I
    appreciate that his life is in this country,  and  that  he  wishes  to
    remain here, but the third  limb  of  the  'private  life'  test  is  a
    stringent one which he has not met.












    Exception 2: Family Life

16. Judge Williams had been satisfied that it would be unduly harsh for the
    Appellant's son if he were to  be  deported.   Judge  Plimmer  was  not
    satisfied that this had been a  decision  open  to  him  on  the  scant
    evidence before him. That evidence, consisting of statements  from  the
    Appellant, his wife and other members of the family, indicates that the
    Appellant and his son are close, that they love each  other  very  much
    and that it would be in the child's best interests if his  father  were
    to remain in the United Kingdom. At  its  very  highest  the  evidence,
    given in the statement of the Appellant's wife, indicates  that  whilst
    his father was in prison the child behaved poorly and  that  after  his
    release it "completely changed for the better".


17. The Appellant has had some three months since Judge Plimmer's  decision
    to adduce further evidence about his relationship with  his  son.  None
    has been forthcoming. Whilst I see  no  reason  to  doubt  the  written
    evidence that the Appellant has a meaningful parental relationship with
    his little boy, there is  simply  no  evidence  before  me  that  comes
    anywhere close to establishing that it would be "unduly harsh" for this
    child if his father were to be  deported.    The  adverse  consequences
    that the child will suffer are the same as those suffered by any  child
    who faces a parent's deportation. They  are  commonplace,  and  do  not
    demonstrate that the impact on this particular child would  be  "bleak"
    or "severe".

18. The second exception is not engaged.



    Exceptional Reasons

19. It appears to have been argued before Judge Williams and Judge  Plimmer
    that it would not be in the public interest  to  deport  the  Appellant
    because he contributes to the care of his younger brother, who  appears
    from the medical reports before me to be desperately  unwell.  He  has,
    amongst other conditions, what appears to be  severe  Downs'  Syndrome:
    the child is non-verbal, confined to a wheelchair and requires 24 hours
    a day care.


20. I do not doubt the evidence that the Appellant helps to look after  his
    brother, and that he has been a source of support to his mother who  is
    the main carer. I am however unable to find that  the  Appellant  plays
    anything other than a supporting role in this endeavour, since the only
    independent evidence that I have on the point indicates that  the  main
    carers are the Appellant's mother, sister and wife: see the 'Assessment
    of Complex Medical Needs' by Lancashire Care NHS Trust  dated  November
    2018.   As such neither the child, nor the  women  who  care  for  him,
    would be  particularly  adversely  affected  should  the  Appellant  be
    removed to Pakistan.




21. Although I have not heard submissions from the Appellant, nor  evidence
    on the point, I think it appropriate to mark the evidence given by  his
    sister, Z, who writes in her statement in moving terms about the  "hard
    and tortuous childhood" endured by the Appellant. Z writes  that  their
    father subjected both of them, but  the  Appellant  in  particular,  to
    extreme violence including being doused with petrol and  exposed  to  a
    naked flame, and being threatened with knives. She states that  he  was
    regularly beaten throughout his childhood:  "I  understand  this  badly
    affected his childhood and does not  justify  his  actions,  but  I  do
    believe it has impacted him severely".  I have given Z's evidence  what
    weight I can. Her statement was not tested, and her opinion unsupported
    by any independent psychological assessment of the Appellant. Had  such
    evidence been available my decision may well have been  other  than  it
    is:  taken  with   the   Appellant's   long   residence   and   claimed
    rehabilitation, this may have established a case  of  'very  compelling
    circumstances' such that deportation  action  should  not  be  pursued.
    However, on its own I  am  unable  to  find  Z's  statement  to  be  of
    sufficient weight to discharge the burden of proof.




    Decision

22. The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.


23. Having regard to the fact this  claim  involves  children  I  make  the
    following direction for anonymity, pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  the  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders.


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This direction applies both to the Appellants and  to  the
        Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
        contempt of court proceedings".







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            18th November
                                    2019
                           -----------------------
[1] No 8317/78, 20 DR 44 at 91
[2] (2002) 35 EHRR 1
[3] App 234-A (1992)

