
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19759/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th January 2020                         |On 20th April 2020            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     TE
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr V Madanhi; CB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety; Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. An anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal.
      However, it is appropriate to make an anonymity direction because the
      case involves minor children. Unless and until a Tribunal or Court
      directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No report of
      these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any
      other member of her family. This direction applies both to the
      appellant and to the respondent.


Application for an adjournment


   2. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Madanhi renewed the application that
      had been made on behalf of the appellant on 20th January 2020 for an
      adjournment.  The application was refused by the Upper Tribunal Lawyer
      on 21st January 2020, because there was insufficient information about
      the health of the appellant to support the application.  Mr Madanhi
      submitted the appellant is currently detained and his representatives
      have been unable to take instructions from her. They last spoke to her
      on 17th January 202 by telephone.  She indicated that she is not well
      and has been receiving treatment from the Mental Health Team.  Her
      representatives have been unable to get any further medical evidence
      from the appellant or those that are treating her, in support of the
      application.  The application for an adjournment was opposed by Mr
      McVeety.  I refused the application.  There is no medical evidence
      before me to establish the appellant has been unable to provide
      instructions to her representatives. The overriding objective is to
      enable the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly, and
      that includes inter alia, ensuring, so far as practicable, that the
      parties are able to participate fully in the proceedings.  The
      underlying decision of the FtT that is the subject of the appeal
      before me was promulgated as far back as 14th February 2019 and
      permission to appeal was granted on 13th March 2019.  As Mr Madanhi
      confirmed, the appellant's current representatives, CB Solicitors,
      made the application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,
      and settled the grounds of appeal.  They no doubt did so upon
      instructions and identified with their client, the grounds upon which
      the appellant contends the FtT decision is vitiated by an error of
      law. The notice of the hearing before me, was sent to the parties on
      20th November 2019.  The appellant and her representatives have had
      ample opportunity to consider and discuss the appeal and there is no
      reason in my judgement, why I should not determine whether the
      decision of the FtT is tainted by a material error of law. The
      appellant is represented at the hearing before me and some progress
      can be made. In the event that I find there is a material error of law
      in the decision of the FtT, I will consider whether it is necessary to
      hear from the appellant before I remake the decision.


The background


   3. The appellant is a national of Jamaica.  She was previously deported
      to Jamaica on 31st March 2009, following a conviction for drug
      offences in November 2008 for which she was sentenced to a 3-year term
      of imprisonment.  In March 2010 she attempted to enter the UK using a
      false passport. On 9th April 2010 she was convicted at Lewes Crown
      Court of being in possession of a false or improperly obtained ID
      document and was sentenced to 15 months imprisonment.  She
      subsequently made an application to revoke the deportation order. The
      application was refused by the respondent but following a successful
      appeal before the Upper Tribunal on human rights grounds, the
      applicant was granted discretionary leave to remain until 12th June
      2012.


   4. On 24th July 2012, the appellant was convicted at Southwark Crown
      Court of supplying a Class A drug, namely heroin, and on 14th
      September 2012, she was sentenced to 5 years imprisonment. That
      sentence was reduced on appeal, on 3rd November 2013, to a 3-year
      sentence of imprisonment.  As a consequence, on 11th December 2015,
      the respondent made a deportation order in respect of the appellant.
      The appellant made a human rights claim, contending that her
      deportation would be contrary to Article 8 of the ECHR as the parent
      of a child that is a British Citizen.  That claim was refused by the
      respondent on 11th December 2015, and an appeal against that decision
      was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bell for reasons set out in
      a decision promulgated 26th September 2016.


   5. On 1st August 2017, the appellant's representatives made further
      submissions to the respondent, claiming that the deportation of the
      appellant would be contrary to Article 8 ECHR.  The respondent was
      invited to revoke the deportation order.  The respondent refused the
      human rights claim and refused to revoke the deportation order for
      reasons set out in a decision dated 20th September 2018. The
      appellant's appeal against that decision was dismissed by First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Birk for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on
      14th February 2019.  It is the decision of FtT Judge Birk that is the
      subject of the appeal before me.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


   6. The background to the appeal is set out at paragraphs [2] to [7] of
      the decision and I do not repeat it here. The claim made by the
      appellant is summarised at paragraph [8] of the decision:


         "...she has a relationship with her two British children who are
         under the age of 18, namely [E] and [T].  She states that her
         relationship with [E]'s father has broken down and he has changed
         his intentions about providing care for [E] if the appellant was
         removed from the UK. She claims that [E] is undergoing speech
         therapy which will be unavailable or disrupted if he moves from her
         care. There is a psychological report relating to the two children
         which she would wish to have taken into account. She also has a
         relationship with her adult daughter [S]. She has a British
         grandchild in the UK. As for her private life she has been residing
         in the UK since 2000."


   7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard evidence from the appellant as set
      out at paragraphs [12] to [16] of the decision. The judge noted at
      paragraph [30] of her decision that the conviction that gave rise to
      the deportation order, was the conviction in September 2012 for
      supplying a Class A drug, for which the appellant received a three-
      year sentence of imprisonment. The judge properly noted the Article 8
      claim is therefore to be considered by reference to paragraph 398(b)
      of the Immigration Rules and s117C(3) Nationality, Immigration and
      Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").  The judge's findings and
      conclusions are set out at paragraphs [31] to [66] of the decision.


   8. The Judge found for the reasons set out at paragraph [31], the
      appellant cannot benefit from Exception 1 of the 2002 Act because
      quite apart from anything else, the appellant has not been lawfully
      resident in the United Kingdom for most of her life.


   9. The judge accepted, as had the respondent, the appellant has a genuine
      and subsisting relationship with both her minor children, [E] and [T].
       Insofar as the appellant relied upon her relationship with her adult
      daughter and grandchild, the judge referred to the appellant's own
      evidence that she now has little contact with her eldest daughter and
      the relationship is strained.


  10. The issue in the appeal was whether the effect of the appellant's
      deportation on her two youngest children would be unduly harsh. In
      setting out the background, the judge had already noted that [T]
      resides with his father, [V].  [V] is also the father of [E] and has
      parental responsibility for [E] although [E] lives with the appellant.
       The judge found it is in the best interests of [T] to remain in the
      care of his father who is his primary carer, and who is able to meet
      all of his physical, emotional, educational and welfare needs.  The
      judge found that it would also be in [T]'s best interests to maintain
      contact with the appellant.


  11. The judge found that it would be in [E]'s best interests for him to
      remain living with the appellant. She noted the best interests of the
      children can be outweighed by other factors.


  12. First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk referred to the decision of FtT Judge
      Bell promulgated on 26th September 2016, in which the judge had
      considered whether it would be unduly harsh for the two children to
      remain in the UK without the appellant if she is deported, or for the
      two children to live in Jamaica with the appellant. The judge reminded
      herself that the previous decision is a 'starting point' in respect of
      matters as they stood in September 2016, but she still had to make her
      own assessment of the evidence and developments since.  The judge
      noted the previous Tribunal was aware that [E] had been born prison
      and has lived with his mother from birth and was also aware that [E]
      has speech difficulties.  The judge noted the more recent evidence
      regarding the speech and language therapy treatment, and the letter
      from [E]'s primary school that demonstrates that the language
      difficulties continue.  At paragraph [42], the judge said:


         "...[E] is in receipt of additional help and support at school and
         he is receiving the help of a speech therapist. Since this is being
         provided by the state authorities in the form of school and the
         local authority I find there is no reason why this cannot continue
         in another county as the authorities would be under a statutory
         obligation to do so. I do not find therefore that the child's
         language plan and development would suffer or be altered by the
         deportation of the appellant."


  13. At paragraphs [43] to [49] of her decision, the judge addressed the
      claim by the appellant that [E]'s father, [V], does not want to know
      about [E] and is now unwilling to provide care for [E] if the
      appellant is removed to Jamaica.  The judge rejected the claim made by
      the appellant that [V] is unwilling to, or unable to care for [E].  At
      paragraph [50], the judge said:


         "I take into account that [E] would be in the same position as [T]
         in that he would be attending school and so this would not
         interfere with [V]'s work since [V]'s work pattern allows him to
         work around [T]'s schooling. The appellant accepted the practical
         reality of this in her oral evidence. Much, if not all, of the work
         for [E]'s speech difficulties is facilitated by his school and so
         there is little additional burden for [V] to bear in this regard."


  14. The Judge found the appellant has exaggerated her evidence that she is
      the only person who can understand [E], noting that her evidence is
      not supported by anything in the evidence before the Tribunal from
      [V], the school, and social services.  The judge also rejected the
      appellant's claim that [E] has the mental capacity or behaviour of a
      two-year-old.  The judge noted [E] attends a mainstream school and not
      a special needs school.


  15. The judge considered the impact of separation upon the two children
      and the matters set out in the psychological report of Mr Stephen
      Bland dated 31st July 2017.  The judge was not satisfied that the
      Psychologist had been provided with an accurate summary of the
      arrangements for the care of the children.  The judge noted the
      conclusion reached by the Psychologist is that it is difficult to
      assess the effect of separation from children and a deported parent.
      At paragraph [56] of her decision the judge stated:


         "I find that his specific conclusions in this case to be no more
         than what can be described as fairly obvious. The report states
         that it was likely that they would initially show a shock reaction,
         followed by angry feelings and mood difficulties (paragraph 5.2).
         The report did not attempt to conduct any assessment of wishes and
         feelings of [E] who would have been aged 4� at the time. I find
         that the report provides a generalised assessment of impact rather
         than one which is specific to this case and so I place little
         weight on this report."


  16.  The judge rejected the appellant's claim that [E] does not have a
      close relationship with his father.  At paragraphs [58] and [59], the
      judge concluded:


         "58. I find that there is an alternative home for [E] if the
         appellant does not wish to take him with her, which is with his
         father. The appellant does not claim that [V] has a history of
         criminal offending or that he could not accommodate [E]. The
         evidence is, which is unchallenged by the appellant, is that he has
         been able to provide [T] with a settled and stable home life. I
         accept that there would be for [E] a period of adjustment and
         change but that this would be in the short-term and ameliorated by
         living with his father and brother to whom he is close. I find that
         in respect of maintaining his relationship with his mother, that
         Skype and WhatsApp video calls are available between the two
         countries and so contact can be maintained daily. I accept that
         there would be an adverse impact on [E] being separated from his
         mother but that he would be looked after by his other parent who
         would be able to assist him with coping with this change.


         59.  I find that [T] would also experience a change of not having
         physical contact and that this would upset him. I take into account
         the expressive letter that he wrote about his mother. However, I
         find that he would have the support of his primary carer who would
         be able to provide understanding and stability to help him. I find
         that [T]'s relationship with his mother can also be maintained by
         modern means of communication and possibly visits.


  17. The judge found there is a very strong public interest in deporting
      the appellant.  She found it would not be unduly harsh on the children
      to remain UK if the appellant is deported.  She concluded that the
      deportation of the appellant is not disproportionate to the legitimate
      aim. The judge concluded the deportation of the appellant would not be
      in breach of Article 8 and the appellant has not demonstrated that
      there are any compassionate or exceptional circumstances such that the
      deportation order should be revoked.


The appeal before me


  18. The appellant advances a number of grounds of appeal. First, the
      appellant claims that in reaching her decision the judge proceeds, at
      [32], on the basis that [T] sees the appellant "occasionally", whereas
      the evidence of the appellant is that she sees [T] regularly and every
      two weeks. Second, the appellant claims the judge made contradictory
      findings in relation to the evidence of [V].  The judge cites an
      extract from the decision of FtT Judge Bell at paragraph [43] of her
      decision, noting FtT Judge Bell found [V] to be a credible witness who
      appears to live a stable life, looks after his son well, cares about
      his children and is able to work.  The judge noted, at [47], that [V]
      has provided a further letter in which he states he would have
      difficulties looking after [E] if the appellant is deported. The
      appellant claims that having accepted [V] had written a letter stating
      he could not care for [E], the judge did not have good reason for
      rejecting that evidence. Third, the judge made a number of findings
      without providing any or any adequate reasons. Fourth, the assistance
      being provided to [E] by the local authority under s17 Children Act
      1989 is based upon their conclusion that it is in the best interests
      of [E] to live with his mother and the judge failed to have regard to
      matters such as the need to continue the speech therapy at school, and
      the difficulty that [E] has in communicating using the telephone or
      social media. Finally, the judge erred by failing to consider the
      crucial question as to whether it is unduly harsh for [E] to leave the
      UK and go to Jamaica with the appellant, or whether it is unduly harsh
      for him to remain in the UK separated from the appellant, his
      principal carer, at the age of five.


  19.  Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Keefe
      and the matter comes before me to determine whether the decision of
      the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated by a material error of law, and if
      so, to remake the decision.


  20. Before me, Mr Madanhi adopts the grounds of appeal.  He submits the
      judge erred in her consideration of the impact of the appellant's
      deportation upon the minor children, and in particular, the impact
      upon [E].  Mr Madanhi submits the best interests of the child were not
      adequately considered and although the decision of the Supreme Court
      in KO (Nigeria) was cited but the judge, she erred by failing to give
      adequate consideration to the best interests of the children.  Mr
      Madanhi submits there had been a change in circumstances since the
      matter was considered by FtT Judge Bell.  [V] had provided a letter
      that is at page 17 of the appellant's bundle, in which he confirms
      that he is unable to take care of [E] and asks that the appellant be
      allowed to remain in the UK so that she can continue to look after
      [E].  Mr Madanhi submits the focus of the judge throughout has been
      upon the appellant's offending rather than the best interests of the
      children and the impact upon the children as set out in paragraph 5.2
      of the report of Steven Bland.


  21. Mr Madanhi informed the Tribunal the appellant is now detained and has
      been in detention for about a month.  [E] is currently being cared for
      by his elder sister, the appellant's daughter and is having ongoing
      contact with his father.


  22. In reply, Mr McVeety submits the best interests of the children are a
      paramount consideration but are capable of being outweighed by the
      public interest in deportation of foreign criminals. He submits the
      issue here, is regarding the arrangements for [E] in particular.  Mr
      McVeety submits it was open to the judge to reject the claim made by
      the appellant that [V] is now unwilling or unable to care for his son
      [E], and it was open to the judge to conclude that there is an
      alternative home for [E] in the UK.  The judge had noted that [V] was
      found to be a credible witness by FtT Judge Bell when he had expressed
      a willingness to look after [E] previously.  There was no oral
      evidence from [V] at the hearing before FtT Judge Birk and the judge
      clearly considered what had been said by [V] in the undated and
      unsigned letter that was before the FtT.  The weight the judge
      attached to the evidence was a matter for the judge.  Mr McVeety
      submits the judge considered the report of the Psychologist and the
      evidence before the Tribunal regarding the impact upon the children,
      was fairly general.  He refers to the decision of the Court of Appeal
      in SSHD v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213 and submits there has to
      be something above and beyond the normal consequences of deportation.
      Here, [V] is capable of stepping into the breach if the appellant is
      deported and the judge found that in the end, although there would be
      some difficulty, it is not unduly harsh for the children to remain in
      the UK without the appellant.  It was therefore open to the judge to
      conclude that the decision to deport the appellant is not
      disproportionate to the legitimate aim and would not be in breach of
      Article 8.


Discussion


  23. It is uncontroversial that the deportation of criminals is in the
      public interest.  Section 117C(2) of the 2002 Act confirms that the
      more serious the offence committed by the foreign criminal, the
      greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.
      Applying s117C(3) of the 2002 Act, the public interest required the
      appellant's deportation unless Exception 2 set out in s.117C(5)
      applies.  That is, the appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental
      relationship with a qualifying child and the effect of her deportation
      on the child would be unduly harsh.


  24. With specific reference to Exception 2 in S.117C(5) , Lord Carnwath in
      KO (Nigeria) observed, at paragraph 23:


         "The expression "unduly harsh" seems clearly intended to introduce
         a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness" under section
         117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the deportation
         of foreign criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies an element
         of comparison. It assumes that there is a "due" level of
         "harshness", that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable
         in the relevant context. "Unduly" implies something going beyond
         that level. The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1),
         that is the public interest in the deportation of foreign
         criminals. One is looking for a degree of harshness going beyond
         what would necessarily be involved for any child faced with the
         deportation of a parent. What it does not require in my view (and
         subject to the discussion of the cases in the next section) is a
         balancing of relative levels of severity of the parent's offence,
         other than is inherent in the distinction drawn by the section
         itself by reference to length of sentence. Nor (contrary to the
         view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras 55 and 64) can it
         be equated with a requirement to show "very compelling reasons".
         That would be in effect to replicate the additional test applied by
         section 117C(6) with respect to sentences of four years or more.".

  25. In SSHD v PG (Jamaica), Holroyde LJ said, at paragraph 34:


         "It is therefore now clear that a tribunal or court considering
         section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act must focus, not on the comparative
         seriousness of the offence or offences committed by the foreign
         criminal who faces deportation, but rather, on whether the effects
         of his deportation on a child or partner would go beyond the degree
         of harshness which would necessarily be involved for any child or
         partner of a foreign criminal faced with deportation. Pursuant to
         Rule 399, the tribunal or court must consider both whether it would
         be unduly harsh for the child and/or partner to live in the country
         to which the foreign criminal is to be deported and whether it
         would be unduly harsh for the child and/or partner to remain in the
         UK without him."

  26. At paragraph 38, Holroyde LJ further observed:


         "In the circumstances of this appeal, I do not think it necessary
         to refer to decisions predating KO (Nigeria), because it is no
         longer appropriate, when considering section 117C(5) of the 2002
         Act, to balance the severity of the consequences for SAT and the
         children of PG's deportation against the seriousness of his
         offending. The issue is whether there was evidence on which it was
         properly open to Judge Griffith to find that deportation of PG
         would result for SAT and/or the children in a degree of harshness
         going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any partner or
         child of a foreign criminal facing deportation.".

  27. It was uncontroversial that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting
      parental relationship with her children who are all British citizens.
       I reject the claim that in reaching her decision, the judge failed to
      have regard to the best interests of the children and erred in her
      assessment of the evidence regarding the arrangements for contact
      between [T] and the appellant.  At paragraph [8] of her witness
      statement dated 25th January 2019, the appellant confirmed that [T]
      lives with his father ".. but spends time during vacations with me.".
      The precise arrangements for contact were not set out, but undoubtedly
      there was some contact.  The judge referred to the evidence of the
      appellant regarding her contact with [T] at paragraph [14] of the
      decision.  Whether the contact between the appellant and [T] is
      described as 'occasional' or in some other way, is immaterial. It is
      quite clear that the judge was aware that [T] lives with his father
      and has contact with the appellant. At paragraph [36], the judge
      expressly found that it would be in [T]'s best interests to maintain
      contact with the appellant.


  28. I also reject the claim that the judge made contradictory findings in
      relation to the evidence of [V] and erred in her assessment of the
      evidence.  I have carefully read the unsigned and undated letter from
      [V] that is to be found at page 17 of the appellant's bundle. [V]
      states he would ".. have difficulties" in looking after his son [E] if
      the appellant is deported to Jamaica. He asks the authorities to allow
      the appellant to remain in the UK for the well-being of [E].  He
      confirms that he currently looks after [T] who is much older than [E],
      and he states "... It would be difficult for me to look after [E] as
      he is still young and needing the motherly attention all the time. I
      am now working, and I would have serious difficulties to look [E]
      (sic) as the mother is currently doing ...".  The judge carefully
      addressed the evidence of [V] at paragraphs [43] to [51] of the
      decision. [V] did not give evidence before the FtT, and the judge
      carefully considered the claim made by the appellant that [V] does not
      want to know anything at all regarding [E] and is not now prepared to
      take responsibility for his care. The judge found appellant to be
      exaggerating her evidence and rejected the claim that the relationship
      has broken down and [V] wants nothing to do with the appellant and
      [E].  The judge noted, rightly in my judgment, that [V] does not
      categorically say that he is unwilling to care for his son, and there
      is nothing that prevents him from doing so. It was in my judgement
      open to the judge to conclude that there is an alternative home for
      [E] with his father and brother in the event that the appellant is
      deported, for the reasons given in the decision.


  29. I also reject the claim made by the appellant that the judge has
      failed to give adequate reasons for the findings made. The judge
      carefully considered the evidence in the round having regard to the
      best interests of the children and the public interest in deportation
      of the appellant. As the Court of Appeal said at [18] of Herrera v
      SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ  412, it is necessary to guard against the
      temptation to characterise as errors of law what are in truth no more
      than disagreements about the weight to be given to different factors,
      particularly if the judge who decided the appeal had the advantage of
      hearing oral evidence. The assessment of such a claim is always a
      highly fact sensitive task.  The FtT judge was required to consider
      the evidence as a whole and she plainly did so, giving adequate
      reasons so that the reader of the decision is left in no doubt as to
      the reasons for the decision reached.


  30. Looking at the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, it is
      difficult to identify anything which distinguishes this case from
      other cases where a parent who is subject to deportation as a foreign
      criminal, is separated from a child. The First-tier Tribunal judge
      considered the report of the Psychologist and accepted that there will
      be an impact upon the two youngest children.  It goes without saying
      that all children should, where possible, be brought up with a close
      relationship with both parents. All children deprived of a parent's
      company during their formative years will be at risk of suffering
      harm. It is necessary to look for consequences characterised by a
      degree of harshness over and beyond what every child would experience
      in such circumstances.  It is important to bear in mind the
      observations of Hickinbottom LJ in PG (Jamaica) at paragraph 46:


          "When a parent is deported, one can only have great sympathy for
         the entirely innocent children involved. Even in circumstances in
         which they can remain in the United Kingdom with the other parent,
         they will inevitably be distressed. However, in section 117C(5) of
         the 2002 Act, Parliament has made clear its will that, for foreign
         offenders who are sentenced to one to four years, only where the
         consequences for the children are 'unduly harsh' will deportation
         be constrained. That is entirely consistent with Article 8 of ECHR
         . It is important that decision-makers and, when the decisions are
         challenged, tribunals and courts honour that expression of
         Parliamentary will."

  31. In my judgment it was neither irrational nor unreasonable for the
      First-tier Tribunal judge to conclude that it would not be unduly
      harsh for [E] and [T] to remain in the UK without the appellant.  The
      loss that they will feel is unfortunately, without more, an
      unfortunate consequence of the separation of a parent and child, when
      a parent is deported.


  32. Although the public interest in the deportation of a foreign criminal
      is not set in stone and must be approached flexibly, in my judgement,
      the judge had proper regard inter alia to the appellant's length of
      residence in the UK, the ties that he retains with her children, her
      immigration and offending history, and the family circumstances
      described in the evidence and in the report of Mr Bland.  It was in my
      judgment open to the judge to conclude there are no compelling
      circumstances which make the appellant's claim based on Article 8,
      especially strong.  It follows that in my judgement, it was open to
      the judge to conclude the deportation of the appellant is in the
      public interest and not disproportionate to the legitimate aim for the
      reasons given by her.


      Decision:


  33. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Birk, stands.


Signed                                  Date          18th March 2020

 Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
