
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19519/2018 [V]


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 October 2020                   |On 26th October 2020                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                T O (Nigeria)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Julie Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the respondent:    Mr Nigel Vaughan, legal representative with NBS
Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of T O who  is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.
Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
    decision on 10 September 2018 to refuse the appellant's application for
    leave to remain on human rights grounds.  The claimant is a citizen  of
    Nigeria.

Background

 2. The claimant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2004, but has  never  had
    leave to enter or remain.

 3. On 6 July 2005, she was arrested trying to board a  flight  to  Canada,
    using a stolen British  passport.    The  claimant  pleaded  guilty  to
    attempting to obtain services by deception and on 2 September 2005, she
    was sentenced to 12 months' imprisonment,  with  a  recommendation  for
    deportation. The  claimant  had  claimed  asylum  when  arrested.   She
    benefited from an in-country right of appeal on which  she  was  appeal
    rights exhausted on 24 April 2006.

 4. The claimant began a relationship  with  her  former  partner,  and  in
    October 2005, while she was in prison, she gave birth to a daughter who
    is a British citizen and is now 15 years old.

 5. The claimant's current partner came to the United Kingdom in  2000  and
    has lived  here  for  20  years,  including  some  years  before  their
    relationship began.  He has been granted a  Parental  Rights  Order  in
    respect of the older daughter.

 6. On 28 December 2006, a deportation order was signed. On 27 March  2007,
    the claimant failed to report and was treated as an absconder.

 7. On 8 December 2011, the claimant had another daughter with her  current
    partner, who has permanent residence in the United  Kingdom  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 and is a Nigerian
    citizen.  Their daughter together is 8 years old.

 8. On 20 April 2011, the claimant brought herself to the attention of  the
    authorities when she  made  an  application  under  the  asylum  legacy
    programme.  She was in a new relationship with her current partner.

 9. The claimant next made three applications  to  revoke  the  deportation
    order, in 2011, 2012 and 2013 which were unsuccessful.   Following  the
    failure of her last  revocation  application,  the  claimant  absconded
    again from 21 November 2014 until 10 September 2015.

10.  On  5  September  2016,  the  claimant's  partner  achieved  permanent
    residence in the United Kingdom  under  the  EEA  Regulations,  and  by
    October 2017, the parties had been living together for two  years.  The
    claimant applied for an EEA family members' residence card,  which  was
    refused on two occasions, in 2016  and  2018.   On  14  May  2018,  the
    claimant  applied  for  leave  to  remain  again,   but   voided   that
    application.

11. The application the subject of the present appeal was made  in  further
    submissions, resulting in a refusal letter  dated  12  September  2018.
    The Secretary of State refused to revoke the deportation order or grant
    leave to remain on human rights grounds.

12. In 2020, the claimant's partner visited Nigeria for a funeral.  He does
    still have connections there, family and friends.

Refusal letter

13. The  Secretary  of  State  did  not  dispute  the  nationality  of  the
    claimant's children, nor that they  lived  with  her  and  her  current
    partner as part of a family unit.  However, she did not  consider  that
    it would be unduly harsh for the  claimant's  partner  or  children  to
    remain in the United Kingdom without the claimant, or that  there  were
    very compelling circumstances outweighing the United Kingdom's right to
    control immigration.

14. The Secretary of State also considered that as both  the  claimant  and
    her partner were Nigerian, it was open to them  to  take  the  children
    with them and to return to Nigeria as  a  family.   Alternatively,  the
    claimant's partner could look after the girls in the United Kingdom.

15. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

16. On 18 February 2020, First-tier Judge Bunting began with the Devaseelan
    starting point, a decision by First-tier Judge Mulholland in  2017,  on
    which permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  refused.  Judge
    Mulholland noted that the claimant had  used  multiple  identities  for
    herself and her children, and had not attempted to correct this.

17. Judge Mulholland's primary finding was that both girls would be able to
    reside with the claimant's current partner and that there was no breach
    of the EEA Regulations as they would  not  be  required  to  leave  the
    European Union.  Judge Mulholland was not satisfied by  the  claimant's
    account that her elder daughter was  not  in  touch  with  her  father,
    following his release from prison in 2014, and made a secondary finding
    that he would be in a position to assume responsibility for her.

18. Judge Mulholland dismissed the EEA Regulations appeal.  There  were  in
    addition decisions from First-tier Judges Herlihy  and  Hanratty.   The
    decision of Judge Herlihy did not  add  significantly  to  the  factual
    matrix.  That of Judge Hanratty made a  negative  credibility  finding,
    but the appellant did not attend and he did not have the opportunity to
    see her evidence tested in cross-examination.

19. The present decision is based on oral evidence, with cross-examination.
    The judge found that both children were at school and in education  and
    had a private life outside the home.  The section 55 best interests  of
    both children were to stay with their mother, whether she  was  in  the
    United Kingdom or in  Nigeria.  In  addition,  it  was  in  their  best
    interests to remain in the  United  Kingdom  and  grow  up  as  British
    citizens.

20. The First-tier Judge found that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    children to live in the  United  Kingdom  without  their  mother,  with
    reference to paragraph 399(a) and 399(b) of the  Immigration  Rules  HC
    395 (as amended). The claimant was the primary carer, since her partner
    had employment but she did not.  The bond between mother  and  daughter
    was strengthened by this.  There was a  letter  from  the  older  child
    (albeit unsigned) emphasising that she wanted  her  mother  to  remain.
    The younger child was said to be clingy and 'too  heavily  reliant'  on
    the claimant.

21. The judge applied KO (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] UKSC 53 and  concluded  that  the  bond  between  the
    claimant and her children was sufficiently different from that of  most
    families to make her removal unduly harsh.  The elder daughter was just
    choosing her GCSEs, which she would study from September 2020.   Moving
    her now would be significantly detrimental to her education.  She had a
    circle of friends  and  interests,  within  and  outside  school.   The
    younger girl did not speak or understand  Yoruba,  although  she  would
    learn eventually, but it was the circumstances of the older girl  which
    were determinative on Article 8 ECHR grounds because  of  her  age  and
    educational circumstances.

22. The judge took account of the claimant's unlawful status in the  United
    Kingdom.  He then gave  separate  consideration  to  section  117C  and
    section 117B(6) which he correctly found to be inapplicable, as this is
    a case where a deportation order has been made.  The 12-month  sentence
    placed the claimant at the lower end of  'medium'  offending,  although
    passport offences were always serious.

23. The judge noted the public interest in  deportation,  but  the  present
    claimant had committed only one offence, 13 years ago,  and  was  'long
    past the point of being rehabilitated'.   Delay was a factor, but given
    the long periods of absconding, not one which  carried  much,  if  any,
    weight in this appeal.

24. In the  event  that  the  claimant  did  not  meet  the  terms  of  the
    exceptions, Judge Bunting considered that this was a  'near  miss'  and
    that in her peculiar circumstances, the appeal should be allowed.

25. The Secretary of State appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

26. There were two grounds of appeal: first, that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision failed to provide adequate reasons on a material  matter,  the
    question of undue harshness; and second a material misdirection,  again
    with reference to undue harshness, with reference to Secretary of State
    for the Home Department v PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ  1213  at  [39].
    With respect, both grounds appear to be the same.

27. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on  the
    basis that:

         "It is arguable, as asserted in the grounds, that the  judge  erred
         in finding the [claimant's] deportation unduly harsh on her  eldest
         child, when the children both live in  a  stable  environment  with
         their father/step-father, particularly if, as the grounds  suggest,
         the [claimant's] partner has a court order giving  parental  rights
         in relation to his step-daughter.  It is arguable the  judge  erred
         in finding as he did, on the basis only that the child was not  the
         biological daughter of the partner."

Rule 24 Reply

28. There was no Rule 24 reply on behalf of the claimant.

29. The appeal was listed for 4  September  2020  by  video  link  but  the
    claimant did not attend and  there  was  no  representation  from  her.
    After the hearing, email correspondence was received from  Mr  Vaughan,
    who had been unable to connect with the hearing and had not thought  to
    telephone the Tribunal and let us know.

30. The appeal was relisted for a  further  video  link  hearing  before  a
    different Upper Tribunal Judge.

31. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the  Upper  Tribunal
    today.

Submissions

32. For the Secretary of State, Ms Isherwood had sent the Tribunal an email
    (unfortunately not linked till after the hearing) in which she said she
    would rely on the following authorities:

       . PN (Uganda) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2020]
         EWCA Civ 1213

       . Imran (Section 117C(5); children, unduly harsh :  Pakistan)  [2020]
         UKUT 83 (IAC)

       . Secretary of State for the Home Department v  PG  (Jamaica)  [2019]
         EWCA Civ 1213

       . Secretary of State for the Home Department v  KF  (Nigeria)  [2019]
         EWCA Civ 2051

33. In addition, at the hearing she relied on AA (Nigeria) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2020]  EWCA  Civ  1296  at  [102]-[103],
    handed down on 9 October 2020.

34. Ms Isherwood argued that the judge had failed adqueately to reason  why
    it would be unduly harsh for the claimant's two daughters to remain  in
    the United Kingdom with her partner.

35. For  the  claimant,  Mr  Vaughan  also  relied  on  PG  (Jamaica).  The
    claimant's elder daughter had lived with just her mother from her birth
    in 2005 until her mother met her present partner in 2011.  The  younger
    child had known no other parents but the claimant and her partner,  the
    younger  child's   biological   father.    The   maternal   input   was
    irreplaceable.

36. The nature of the claimant's offence and the delay should both be given
    weight. The judge had elevated the parent-child bond  at  [105],  [112]
    and [114], weighing all relevant factors  fairly.    His  decision  was
    neither perverse nor irrational.  It had been open  to  the  First-tier
    Judge to find that it would be unduly harsh to separate these  children
    from their mother.

37. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Legal provisions

38. The claimant is a foreign criminal.   As  such,  section  117C  of  the
    Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002   (as   amended)   is
    applicable.  Her children are qualifying children as defined in section
    117D, because they are both British  citizens.   So  far  as  relevant,
    section 117C provides as follows:

         "117D    (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
                interest.

                (2)    The more serious the offence committed by a foreign
                criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation
                of the criminal.

                (3)    In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not
                been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or
                more, the public interest requires C's deportation unless
                Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies. ...

                (5)    Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and
                subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner, or a
                genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
                qualifying child, and the effect of C's deportation on the
                partner or child would be unduly harsh.

                (6)    In the case of a foreign criminal who has been
                sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least four
                years, the public interest requires deportation unless there
                are very compelling circumstances, over and above those
                described in Exceptions 1 and 2."

   Section 117D(4) (Exception 1) does not apply because it requires a person
   to show that they have been lawfully resident in the United  Kingdom  for
   most of their life.  The claimant in these  proceedings  has  never  been
   lawfully resident here.   Similar provisions are in the Immigration Rules
   HC 395 (as amended) at 398(b), 399 and 399A.

The authorities

39. The Supreme Court gave guidance on the meaning of 'unduly harsh' in  KO
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC  53.
    At [23] in the judgment of Lord Carnwath JSC, he said this:

         "23. On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh" seems  clearly
         intended to introduce a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness"
         under section 117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the
         deportation of foreign criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies
         an element of comparison. It assumes that there is a "due" level of
         "harshness", that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable
         in the relevant context. "Unduly" implies  something  going  beyond
         that level. The relevant context is that set  by  section  117C(1),
         that  is  the  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of   foreign
         criminals. One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond
         what would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
         deportation of a parent. What it does not require in my  view  (and
         subject to the discussion of the cases in the next  section)  is  a
         balancing of relative levels of severity of the  parent's  offence,
         other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn  by  the  section
         itself by reference to length of sentence.  Nor  (contrary  to  the
         view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v  Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ  932,  [2017]  1  WLR  240,
         paras 55, 64) can it be equated with a requirement  to  show  "very
         compelling reasons". That would  be  in  effect  to  replicate  the
         additional  test  applied  by  section  117C(6)  with  respect   to
         sentences of four years or more."

40. The cases relied upon by Ms Isherwood in 2019 and 2020  seek  to  apply
    the KO (Nigeria) principles. In PG (Jamaica), the Court of Appeal dealt
    with a case where there was a significant delay in  seeking  to  deport
    the appellant, the last offence being committed in 2008, and the  first
    deportation order made in January  2011.    Following  its  revocation,
    there  was  a  period  of  discretionary  leave,  followed  by  another
    application for leave to remain (in time) and a delay of  almost  three
    years in making a decision on that application.

41. The Court of Appeal applied KO (Nigeria).  Lord Justice Holroyde,  with
    whom Lord Justices Floyd and Hickinbottom agreed, said this:

         "38. The decision in KO (Nigeria) requires this court to  adopt  an
         approach which differs from that taken by Judge Griffith and  Judge
         Finch. In the circumstances of this  appeal,  I  do  not  think  it
         necessary to refer to decisions predating KO (Nigeria), because  it
         is no longer appropriate, when considering section 117C(5)  of  the
         2002 Act, to balance the severity of the consequences for  SAT  and
         the children of PG's deportation against  the  seriousness  of  his
         offending. The issue is whether there was evidence on which it  was
         properly open to Judge Griffith to  find  that  deportation  of  PG
         would result for SAT and/or the children in a degree  of  harshness
         going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any partner  or
         child of a foreign criminal facing deportation.

         39.  Formulating the issue in that way, there is in  my  view  only
         one answer to  the  question.  I  recognise  of  course  the  human
         realities of the situation, and I do not doubt  that  SAT  and  the
         three children will suffer great distress if PG is deported. Nor do
         I doubt that their lives will in a number  of  ways  be  made  more
         difficult than they are at  present.  But  those,  sadly,  are  the
         likely consequences of the deportation of any foreign criminal  who
         has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a  partner  and/or
         children in this country. ...  Many parents of teenage children are
         confronted with difficulties and upsetting events of  one  sort  or
         another, and have to face one  or  more  of  their  children  going
         through "a difficult period" for one reason  or  another,  and  the
         fact that a parent who is a foreign criminal will no longer be in a
         position to assist in such circumstances cannot of itself mean that
         the effects of his deportation are unduly  harsh  for  his  partner
         and/or children. Nor can the difficulties which SAT will inevitably
         face, increased as they are by  her  laudable  ongoing  efforts  to
         further her education and  so  to  improve  her  earning  capacity,
         elevate the case above the commonplace so far  as  the  effects  of
         PG's deportation on her are concerned. In this regard, I  think  it
         significant that Judge Griffith at paragraph  67  of  her  judgment
         referred to the "emotional and behavioural fallout" with which  SAT
         would have  to  deal:  a  phrase  which,  to  my  mind,  accurately
         summarises the effect on SAT of PG's deportation, but at  the  same
         time reflects its commonplace nature.

         40.  So far as PG's offending history is  concerned,  I  accept  Mr
         Lewis's  submission  that  neither  the  nature  of  the   offences
         committed after PG had served his prison sentence, nor the  overall
         passage of time, can  assist  SAT  or  the  children  now  that  KO
         (Nigeria) has made it clear that the seriousness of  the  offending
         is not  a  relevant  consideration  when  determining  pursuant  to
         section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act whether undue  harshness  would  be
         suffered."

42. In a short concurring judgment, Hickinbottom LJ said this:

         "46. When a parent is deported, one can only  have  great  sympathy
         for the entirely innocent children involved. Even in  circumstances
         in which they can remain in the United  Kingdom  with  their  other
         parent, they will inevitably be  distressed.  However,  in  section
         117C(5) of the 2002 Act, Parliament has made clear its  will  that,
         for foreign offenders who are sentenced to one to four years,  only
         where the consequences for the children  are  "unduly  harsh"  will
         deportation  be  constrained.  That  is  entirely  consistent  with
         article 8 of the ECHR. It is important  that  decision-makers  and,
         when their decisions are challenged, tribunals  and  courts  honour
         that expression of Parliamentary will. In this case,  in  agreement
         with Holroyde  LJ,  I  consider  the  evidence  only  admitted  one
         conclusion: that, unfortunate as PG's deportation will be  for  his
         children, for none of them will it result in undue harshness."

43. In KF (Nigeria), Lord Justice Baker, with whom Lord Justice Ryder, then
    the Senior President of Tribunals, agreed, applied  both  KO  (Nigeria)
    and the observations above of Hickinbottom LJ in PG's case.   At  [30],
    Baker LJ said this:

         "30. ... The First-tier Tribunal judge found that the  respondent's
         son would be deprived of his father at a crucial time in his  life.
         His view that  "there  is  no  substitute  for  the  emotional  and
         developmental  benefits  for  a  three-year-old  child   that   are
         associated with  being  brought  up  by  both  parents  during  its
         formative years" is indisputable. But those benefits are enjoyed by
         all three-year-old children in the care of both parents. The  judge
         observed that it was a "fact that being deprived  of  a  parent  is
         something a child  is  likely  to  find  traumatic  and  that  will
         potentially have long-lasting adverse consequences for that  child"
         and that he was entitled to take judicial notice of that fact.  But
         the "fact" of which he was taking "judicial notice"  is  likely  to
         arise in every case where a child is  deprived  of  a  parent.  All
         children should,  where  possible,  be  brought  up  with  a  close
         relationship with both parents. All children deprived of a parent's
         company during their formative years will be at risk  of  suffering
         harm. Given the changes to the law introduced by the amendments  to
         2002 Act, as interpreted by the Supreme Court, it is  necessary  to
         look for consequences characterised by a degree of  harshness  over
         and  beyond   what   every   child   would   experience   in   such
         circumstances."

44. And at [33]:

         "33. In my judgment, there is no need to remit this case. Like  the
         Court of Appeal in PG (Jamaica), I have reached the conclusion that
         there is really only one possible outcome. There simply was not the
         evidence on which a tribunal, properly  directed  as  to  the  law,
         could conclude that the deportation of KF would lead to his partner
         and child  suffering  a  degree  of  harshness  beyond  what  would
         necessarily be involved for any part of child of a foreign criminal
         facing deportation. As in that case, the evidence does not  provide
         a basis upon which KF could establish Exception 2  under  s.117C(5)
         of the 2002 Act and paragraph 399 of  the  Immigration  Rules,  and
         accordingly under s.117C(3) the public interest requires that he be
         deported."

45. In February 2020, in Imran, the Upper Tribunal  gave  guidance  on  the
    proper application of section 117C(5), with the  judicial  headnote  as
    follows:

         "1.  To bring a  case  within  Exception  2  in  s.117C(5)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  the  'unduly  harsh'
         test will not be satisfied,  in  a  case  where  a  child  has  two
         parents, by either or both of  the  following,  without  more:  (i)
         evidence of the particular importance of one parent in the lives of
         the children; and (ii) evidence of the emotional dependence of  the
         children on that parent and of the emotional  harm  that  would  be
         likely to flow from separation.

         2.   Consideration as to what constitutes 'without more' is a  fact
         sensitive assessment."

46. I was not taken to PN (Uganda) during the hearing.  The judgment  cited
    by the Secretary of State relates to unlawful detention and as such has
    no direct relevance to the facts of this appeal.

47. Finally, in AA  (Nigeria)  Lord  Justice  Popplewell,  with  whom  Lord
    Justice Moylan and Baker  agreed,  were  considering  the  case  of  an
    appellant brought to the United Kingdom in 1999 by a parent when he was
    11 years old, who arrived perhaps on a visit visa, but had no leave  to
    remain from at least 2000.  His mother abandoned him, and  he  went  to
    live with an aunt.  He was physically abused by his uncle, and sexually
    abused by his football coach, which had a huge impact on him.

48.  In  2006,  AA's  then  British  citizen  partner  gave  birth  to  the
    appellant's child.  He was just 18 years old.  The marriage broke  down
    in 2011 and he had no contact with his former partner after  that:  the
    appellant began committing crimes, including drug running, and went  to
    prison for over 4 years in November  2013.   By  then  he  had  an  EEA
    citizen partner, who was pregnant with his child, which was born  while
    the appellant was in prison.

49. On his release in August 2015, the appellant lived with his new partner
    and their son, but his older child by the previous  relationship  spent
    time with them and the half siblings bonded.   He  was  served  with  a
    deportation order in April 2017 and made a human rights claim.

50. The First-tier Judge found that the appellant had been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since the age of 11, for 19 years, and had a private and family
    life here,  despite  his  unlawful  presence.    The  First-tier  Judge
    considered it most unlikely that the appellant would re-offend,  having
    regard to his vulnerability at the time of his offending,  his  current
    stable family circumstances, and also to  his  conduct  in  prison  and
    following release, which demonstrated a desire to address his offending
    behaviour and obtain skills he could use in the community to reduce the
    risk of reoffending.

51. The appeal was allowed in the First-tier Tribunal  but  set  aside  and
    remade negatively in the Upper Tribunal.  The Court of Appeal set aside
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal and restored  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Court of Appeal  considered  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal had unlawfully restricted the range of reasonable views  which
    might be reached by First-tier Tribunal judges, and substituted its own
    view as to what the outcome should be, for that  of  First-tier  Judges
    who had heard and seen the parties give evidence.

52. At [41], Popplewell LJ said this:

         "41. ... This appears to me  to  be  a  case  in  which  the  Upper
         Tribunal has interfered merely on  the  grounds  that  its  members
         would themselves have  reached  a  different  conclusion.  That  is
         impermissible.  I  appreciate  that  under  the  tribunal   system,
         established by the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act  2007  Act,
         the Upper Tribunal  is  itself  a  specialist  tribunal,  with  the
         function of ensuring that First-tier Tribunals adopt  a  consistent
         approach to the determination of questions of principle which arise
         under  the  particular  statutory  scheme  in  question  by  giving
         guidance on those questions of principle: see per Lord Carnwath JSC
         in the tax context in HMRC v Pendragon Ltd [2015] UKSC 37  at  [48]
         and Baroness Hale PSC in the immigration context in MM (Lebanon)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] 1 WLR 771 at [69]
         to [74]. However it is no part of such function to seek to restrict
         the range of reasonable views which may be reached by FTT Judges in
         the value judgments applied  to  the  many  different  private  and
         family life circumstances which make almost all cases in this  area
         different from each other. It is emphatically  not  part  of  their
         function to seek conformity by substituting their own views  as  to
         what the outcome should be  for  those  of  first  instance  judges
         hearing the evidence. ..."

53. Popplewell LJ relied on the guidance given by Lord Justice Carnwath  in
    Mukarkar v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    1045 at [40], and cited with  approval  by  Baroness  Hale  PSC  in  MM
    (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  UKSC  10
    at [106]-[107]:

         "106.    ... The considerations listed above provide ample  support
         for the conclusion reached by the First-tier Tribunal, and for  the
         view of the Upper Tribunal that any legal errors were not material.

         107. It is no doubt desirable that there  should  be  a  consistent
         approach to issues of this kind at tribunal level, but as  we  have
         explained there are means  to  achieve  this  within  the  tribunal
         system. As was said in Mukarkar v Secretary of State for  the  Home
         Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1045, para 40 (per Carnwath LJ):

             "... It is of the nature  of  such  judgments  that  different
             tribunals, without  illegality  or  irrationality,  may  reach
             different conclusions on the same case ... The mere fact  that
             one tribunal has reached what may seem an  unusually  generous
             view of the facts of a particular case does not mean  that  it
             has made an error of law ... Nor does it create any precedent,
             so as to limit the Secretary of State's right to argue  for  a
             more restrictive approach on a similar  case  in  the  future.
             However, on the facts of the particular case, the decision  of
             the specialist Tribunal should be respected. ""

54. In effect, it seems that the Court of Appeal treated the  finding  that
    removal of a parent would be unduly harsh as a finding  of  fact,  with
    which the Upper Tribunal should not interfere, save in the very limited
    circumstances set out by Lord Justice Brooke in R (Iran) v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ  982  at  [90],  in  sub-
    paragraphs (3) and (4):

         "90. It may now be convenient to draw together the main threads  of
         this long judgment in this  way.   During  the  period  before  its
         demise, when the IAT's powers were restricted to appeals on  points
         of law: ...

             2.   A finding might only be set aside for error of law on the
             grounds of perversity if it was irrational or unreasonable  in
             the Wednesbury sense, or one that was  wholly  unsupported  by
             the evidence.

             3.   A decision should not be  set  aside  for  inadequacy  of
             reasons unless the adjudicator failed to identify  and  record
             the matters that were critical to  his  decision  on  material
             issues, in such a way that the IAT was  unable  to  understand
             why he reached that decision."

55. That is  the  legal  matrix  within  which  this  appeal  falls  to  be
    considered.

Analysis

56. The core finding in the First-tier Judge's decision, on which all  else
    turns, is at [114]:

         "114.    In this case, I conclude that  the  family  dynamics,  the
         fact that [the elder daughter] is not the  biological  daughter  of
         the  [claimant's]  partner,  and  the  bond  between  [the  younger
         daughter] and the [claimant], combine to compel a  conclusion  that
         the family situation is sufficiently different from  most  families
         as to mean that the consequences for the children in  losing  their
         mother would be not only harsh, but unduly so. "

57. The real question therefore is whether on the limited  evidence  before
    the judge, he was entitled to find that it would  be  unduly  harsh  to
    expect the children to remain in the United Kingdom with  their  father
    (in the case of the younger daughter) or step-father (in  the  case  of
    the elder daughter).

58. The Secretary of State's complaint is that it was not open to the First-
    tier Judge to find that removing  the  claimant  to  Nigeria  would  be
    unduly harsh, on the evidence before him.   I note that at  [123],  the
    First-tier Judge acknowledged that the resumption of  life  in  Nigeria
    was the price the claimant had to pay for her conviction, but held that
    it would be more traumatic for the children to readjust to life  there.



59. Much of the decision is devoted to considering the difficulty  for  the
    children in going to Nigeria, but that is not material.  Both  children
    are now British citizens:  as the First-tier Judge  acknowledged,  they
    cannot be compelled to leave the United Kingdom and the expectation  is
    that they are entitled to grow up as British citizens  here,  with  the
    full benefit of their citizenship.

60. The basis of the decision which the  judge  made  seems  to  have  been
    simply that the step-daughter has no biological relationship  with  her
    step-father. At [107] the judge  noted  that  there  was  an  effective
    family unit where the claimant's father played an active  part  in  the
    life of both children but that the claimant 'is the person who has more
    contact with the children than her partner, or that she is the  primary
    source of personal and emotional support'.  The judge accepted the oral
    evidence of the claimant that the younger child 'is  somewhat  reserved
    and ... too heavily reliant on the [claimant]'.  The judge accepted the
    claimant's evidence that separating the younger child from  her  mother
    'would go beyond  the  difficulties  that  would  inevitably  occur  in
    separating an 8-year old girl from her mother'.

61. Before the decision in AA (Nigeria), I would have had no hesitation  in
    finding  that  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Judge  was   not
    sufficient to support a finding that, objectively, it was unduly  harsh
    for the children to remain in the United Kingdom with her partner,  who
    is parent to one, and has  a  Parental  Rights  Order  for  the  other.
    However, as the law currently stands, I consider that the  decision  of
    the First-tier Judge was (jus) open to him, given his acceptance of the
    oral evidence of the claimant.

62. The finding of fact that it would be unduly harsh  for  the  claimant's
    daughters to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  without  her  is  neither
    irrational nor Wednesbury unreasonable and the judge did  identify  and
    record the matters that were  critical  to  his  decision  on  material
    issues.  That being so, the Upper Tribunal has no  power  to  interfere
    with it.

63. The decision of the First-tier Judge is sustainable and I uphold it.



DECISION

64. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson     Date:    20 October 2020
     Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


