
                                        [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/19746/2016
                                                               HU/19752/2016
                                                               HU/19753/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 October 2018                            |On 29 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                 Fahana begum
                                luthfa begum
                                 julfa begum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Mustafa of Kalam, solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  dismissing  their  appeals  against  the   respondent's
    decisions of 18 July 2016 (first appellant) and 19  July  2016  (second
    and third appellants) refusing their applications for  entry  clearance
    as the children of their mother and sponsor, a person  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom.


Background

2.    The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh born on  26  June  1998,  18
    July 1999 and on 19 November 2000 respectively.  Their  mother  entered
    the UK on 5 March 2014 following the grant  of  a  certificate  of  the
    right of abode on  18  February  2014.   Subsequently,  the  appellants
    applied for entry clearance to join her, but  their  applications  were
    refused on the basis that the birth certificates submitted  in  support
    showed that their births had not been registered  until  December  2007
    and the certificates were only issued on 21 July 2014.  The  respondent
    was not satisfied that the appellants were related as  claimed  to  the
    sponsor,  taking  into  account  that  she  had  not  visited  them  in
    Bangladesh and there was little or no evidence of contact or  financial
    support.  The respondent also found that as the appellants were  living
    with a maternal uncle, there were no serious compelling family or other
    considerations to make their exclusion undesirable.


3.    The grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  argued  that  the
    appellant's father had died and their mother was present and settled in
    the UK and, therefore, the provisions of para 297(1)(d)  of  HC  395[1]
    (emphasised in bold in the grounds)  were  satisfied.   It  is  further
    argued that, in any event, under article 8 it would be disproportionate
    to expect the children to be separated from their mother.


4.     The  refusal  decisions  were  reviewed  on  2  December   2016   and
    maintained.  In the review, the Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) said that
    unfortunately it had not been possible to locate the documents retained
    by the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) when the decision was made but  he
    was satisfied that the ECO had seen the documents referred  to  in  the
    decision. The appellants had  chosen  not  to  provide  any  additional
    documentation to show how they were related to the sponsor, apart  from
    a further copy of the birth certificates.  The ECM  commented  that  it
    appeared from the grounds of appeal that  the  appellant's  father  was
    dead, but it was not clear whether  acceptable  evidence  of  this  was
    before the ECO and no  evidence  had  been  provided  with  the  appeal
    papers.  If their father was  not  dead,  the  sponsor  would  need  to
    demonstrate sole responsibility or serious compelling family  or  other
    circumstances making exclusion undesirable.  The  ECM  found  that  the
    sponsor had not shown that she had sole responsibility and that article
    8 was not satisfied as it was not shown that the appellants had  family
    life with her but, if they had, the  decisions  were  proportionate  as
    family life could continue as it had done up until now.


The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.    By the time of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  DNA  tests
    had been obtained showing that the  appellants  and  the  sponsor  were
    related as claimed. At the hearing the appellants'  representative,  Mr
    Mustafa, produced  a  death  certificate  for  the  appellants'  father
    showing that he had died on 23 December 2001.  He also  relied  on  the
    contents of a letter dated 8 June 2016 from the appellants'  solicitors
    which was said to be the letter submitted with the online applications,
    the letter referring to an appointment  booked  for  21  June  2016  at
    Sylhet  Visa  Application  Centre  ("the  visa  centre")  and  to   the
    applications being submitted in person.  On a separate sheet  with  the
    letter, the documents enclosed were itemised and refer to the  original
    death certificate of the appellants' father [7].


6.    Mr Mustafa indicated that the hearing would be proceeding  by  way  of
    oral submissions and that it was not proposed to call the  sponsor  who
    was present at the hearing.  It was submitted that if  the  appellant's
    father was dead, then the issue of sole responsibility  did  not  arise
    and the appeal must succeed [8].  The  judge  indicated  that,  in  any
    event, she might wish to hear  oral  evidence  on  the  issue  of  sole
    responsibility and also  on  adequate  maintenance  and  accommodation,
    pointing out that these issues were dealt with in the witness statement
    [9].  Insofar as there was an issue about the reliability of the  death
    certificate, the appellant's representative indicated he was seeking an
    adjournment to make enquiries of the registrar in Bangladesh, given the
    challenge to its validity by the presenting officer [11].

7.    The judge  accepted  the  presenting  officer's  submission  that  the
    appellants had had ample time to provide further evidence:  the  notice
    of hearing been sent out on 13 April 2017 for a  hearing  on  9  August
    2017.  She gave the appellant's representative a short  adjournment  to
    take instructions on whether the sponsor wished to give  oral  evidence
    but he maintained his position that the hearing would proceed by way of
    submissions and that sole responsibility was not being pursued because,
    if the finding was that the appellant's father was not dead, then  sole
    responsibility could not arise if he was alive, but, if  he  was  dead,
    then the appeals succeeded [13].


8.    It was submitted by the presenting officer  that  the  father's  death
    certificate had not been provided to the respondent with  the  original
    applications and that there would have been no reason for  the  ECO  to
    mention it in his decision.  It was clear from the terms of the  review
    that the ECM had noted the assertion that the  appellant's  father  was
    dead, but he said that no  further  documents  were  provided  for  the
    review.  Had a death certificate been  provided,  the  ECM  would  have
    dealt with it.  He also argued that there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    letter of 8 June 2016 was in fact sent with the online applications and
    the document was no more than a copy.   The  usual  practice  was  that
    documents submitted with an application were returned stamped,  but  it
    was unclear or there was no evidence whether this had been  done.   The
    respondent's case was that the death certificate had been produced  for
    the first time on the morning of the hearing.   The  presenting  office
    submitted further that the death certificate was not reliable  and  the
    sponsor had not been called to give oral evidence to  answer  questions
    about how the death certificate had been obtained.

9.    The appellants relied on PJ Sri Lanka) v  Secretary  of  State  [2104]
    EWCA Civ1011. It was submitted that the death certificate  was  at  the
    centre of the claim and there was an obligation on the respondent by  a
    simple process of enquiry to determine  whether  it  was  genuine.   Mr
    Mustafa submitted that he should have an opportunity  of  providing  an
    affidavit  from  the  relevant  authorities  and   of   rebutting   the
    submissions of the respondent.  The judge gave the appellants  28  days
    to produce further evidence and 7 days to produce a  copy  of  PJ  (Sri
    Lanka) and to make written submissions on the effect of that  decision.
    After the hearing further  documents  and  submissions  were  filed  on
    behalf of the appellants and a response was filed from  the  presenting
    officer.


10.   Having reviewed the evidence including the documents  and  submissions
    made after the close of the hearing, the judge said that given the lack
    of a paper trail she could not make any positive  findings  on  whether
    the covering letter of 8 June 2016 had been attached to  or  sent  with
    the appellants' applications  made  online.   She  commented  that  the
    letter produced at the hearing had no email heading to indicate that it
    was sent with the online applications and  the  practice  of  returning
    documents submitted with the application without keeping at  least  one
    full copy on file was to be regretted.  She set out a number of factors
    at [35]-[38] which led her to the  view  that  there  was  no  adequate
    evidence to show that the purported covering letter of 8 July 2016  was
    sent with the  online  applications,  a  fact  which  could  have  been
    established by the appellant's solicitors by evidence of an email being
    sent or a proper paper trail but no such evidence  had  been  provided.
    She also gave weight to the fact that there was no evidence from any of
    the appellants to establish what, if any, documents they took with them
    when they attended the visa centre  to  submit  their  applications  in
    person.


11.   The judge went on to consider the death certificate.  She  found  that
    it was not a reliable document to which she could give any weight.   It
    was not a death certificate as such as it had  not  emanated  from  the
    Office  of  the  Registrar  of  Birth  and  Deaths  unlike  the   birth
    certificates produced.  She found that the affidavit of the chairman of
    No 3 Dewanbazar Union Parishad ("U/P") dated 29 August  2017  made  the
    death certificate first produced even more unreliable as he conceded in
    para 3 that the death certificate he issued on 30 February 2016 was not
    in accordance with the format of a death certificate due to inattention
    and he did not explain why further details not  been  provided  in  the
    first certificate.

12.    There  had  been  no  explanation  why  the  U/P  was  issuing  birth
    certificates and not the Registrar of Births and Deaths.  She commented
    on the inadequacy of the contents of the chairman's affidavit and found
    that the notarial certificate was carelessly produced as there had been
    no deletion of the alternative  documents  allegedly  being  certified.
    She noted that the  most  recent  death  certificate  had  a  different
    spelling  of  the  sponsor's  name  compared  with  the  earlier  death
    certificate and commented that the documents produced after the hearing
    raised more and further questions rather than  answers  creating,  even
    more unreliability about the death certificates produced [48].


13.   The judge went on to consider the reasoning in PJ (Sri Lanka)  setting
    out paragraphs 29-32  of  the  judgment.   She  found  that  the  death
    certificate had only been produced on the morning of  the  hearing  and
    that there had been no opportunity or obligation on the  respondent  to
    make any enquiries at all and, in any event,  he  had  not  been  in  a
    position to do so.  There had been  no  breach  of  any  obligation  to
    undertake a proper process of verification.


14.   In these  circumstances,  the  application  was  dismissed  under  the
    Rules.  The judge went on to consider article  8  but  found  that  the
    decision to refuse  entry  clearance  was  justified  by  the  need  to
    maintain effective immigration control.


      The Grounds of Appeal

15.   In ground 1 it is argued firstly that the judge erred in  her  finding
    that the father's death certificate had not  been  produced  until  the
    morning of the hearing and had not been enclosed with  the  application
    for entry clearance.  It is argued that the covering letter of  8  June
    2016 overwhelmingly established that the appellants had submitted their
    father's death certificate with the application for entry clearance and
    that, therefore, the death certificate was before the  respondent;  the
    covering letter made it plain that the appellants  were  applying  with
    reference to para 297(1)(d) and the  reasoning  that  the  respondent's
    decision made no reference to the  death  certificate  nor  raised  any
    concern in relation to it and that therefore the death certificate  was
    not delivered was irrational especially as  the  respondent  might  not
    have referred to the death certificate for a variety of reasons.

16.   The judge's understanding of the situation was vitiated  by  the  fact
    that she did  not  appreciate  that  an  application  was  made  online
    following which any covering letters together with supporting documents
    were submitted in person at the appointed date at the visa centre;  the
    reliance on the ECM's review conveniently ignored the admission that it
    had  not  been  possible  to  locate  the  documents  retained  by  the
    respondent  when  the  decision  was  made;  the   comment   that   the
    respondent's decision made no specific reference to para 297(1)(d)  was
    a glaring mistake as the decision clearly referred to paras  297(1)(a)-
    (e) which obviously included (d); the finding that the notice of appeal
    made no reference to the death certificate and therefore the  same  was
    not submitted with the application was irrational because the  decision
    took no issue with the death certificate which meant there was no  need
    to refer to it in the notice of appeal and,  finally,  no  reasons  had
    been given for rejecting the appellants' written submissions  on  these
    issues.


17    Ground 2 argues that the finding that the appellant's  father's  death
    certificate was unreliable amounted to an error of  law  as  the  judge
    failed to give any reasons for her finding that it was not  in  form  a
    death certificate whereas it was issued by the person who  stated  that
    he was responsible for registering births and deaths in  his  U/P;  the
    judge ignored the evidence in the affidavit which provided  details  of
    how births and deaths were verified and put inordinate  weight  on  the
    format of the death certificate; the jurisdiction of the  U/P  was  set
    out in  the  relevant  Births  and  Deaths  Registration  Act  2004  in
    Bangladesh and finally, the judge placed  undue  weight  on  immaterial
    considerations.

18.   Ground 3 argues that the judge's references to PJ (Sri  Lanka)  amount
    to a material error of law as it  indicated  a  misunderstanding  that,
    according to her, PJ (Sri Lanka) was only applicable if  there  was  an
    allegation of forgery and she wrongly took the view that this authority
    did not apply to documents produced on  the  morning  of  the  hearing,
    which was clearly not the case and the finding that  any  enquiries  of
    the chairman of the  U/P  would  be  self-serving  indicated  a  closed
    judicial mind on this issue.

19.   Mr Mustafa adopted his  grounds  emphasising  his  argument  that  the
    judge had  misunderstood  the  procedure  when  making  an  application
    online.  After the application was made online, the documents  and  the
    covering letter would have been submitted by hand at the  visa  centre.
    The judge had failed to give adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the
    death certificate had not been submitted; she had failed to give proper
    weight to all the evidence on this issue and had been  being  wrong  to
    express concerns which had not been raised  with  the  representatives.
    He further submitted that this was  a  case  where  verification  would
    conclude the issue and therefore fell within the principles set out  in
    PJ (Sri Lanka).


20.   Mr Kandola submitted that ground 1 was only of  peripheral  relevance,
    if any, if ground 2 succeeded.  The judge had considered  the  evidence
    about  the  death  certificate  and  the  parties  had  been  given  an
    opportunity of producing further evidence.  There was no error  in  her
    finding that  the  death  certificate  was  not  a  reliable  document,
    particularly in circumstances where the  sponsor  had  not  given  oral
    evidence.  There was no adequate explanation why  it  was  provided  so
    late, assuming it was only provided on the day of  the  hearing.     So
    far as PJ (Sri Lanka) was concerned, there was no general duty  on  the
    respondent to authenticate documents.  There had been no breach, so  he
    submitted,  of  any  obligation  to  attempt  to   verify   the   death
    certificate.


Assessment of whether the Judge Erred in Law.

21.    I shall deal with the grounds in the order in which they are set  out
    in the grounds of appeal.  Ground 1 argues that the judge erred in  law
    in her finding that it was not shown that  the  death  certificate  had
    been submitted with the original application.  This was essentially  an
    issue of fact for the judge to assess in  the  light  of  the  evidence
    before her.  When considering this issue, the  judge  was  entitled  to
    take into account that there  had  been  no  reference  to  it  in  the
    original decision by the ECO, that the appeal forms  submitted  against
    the  original  decision  did  not  make  any  reference  to  the  death
    certificate neither did the covering letter, whereas it  did  refer  to
    the  birth  certificates.   She  noted  that  the  grounds  of   appeal
    highlighted the reference to para 297(1)(d) but also the fact that  the
    issue of the father's death was only implicit in the grounds of  appeal
    rather than explicit.

22.   She also took into account  that  there  was  no  supporting  evidence
    about the covering letter being sent with the online application or, in
    the alternative, being taken to the visa centre.  It  was  argued  that
    the judge had misunderstood the system but whether or not the judge was
    working on  the  basis  of  the  letter  being  sent  with  the  online
    application or later being taken to the visa centre, she  was  entitled
    to comment there  was  no  evidence  from  any  of  the  appellants  to
    establish what, if any, documents they  took  with  them  to  the  Visa
    Centre or no other evidence from  the  representatives  about  how  the
    letter was sent to the respondent save the  production  of  the  letter
    itself.


23.   This is a case where different inferences could rationally  have  been
    drawn from the evidence about when the death certificate  was  produced
    in support of the application and whether the letter of 8 June 2016 was
    sent to the respondent.  However, these were inferences of fact for the
    judge to make and I am satisfied that she reached a finding open to her
    on the evidence.  Her analysis of the evidence and her  conclusions  do
    not indicate any error of law which would  undermine  her  findings  of
    fact on these issues or make them unsustainable.  The issues raised  in
    ground 1 are in substance an attempt to re-open and re-argue  an  issue
    of fact, where the judge has reached findings properly open to  her  on
    the evidence.

24.   In any event, I accept, as Mr Kandola submitted,  that  the  issue  of
    whether the letter and the death certificate were sent to  the  ECO  is
    peripheral to the outcome  of  the  appeal  if  grounds  2  and  3  are
    unsuccessful as the judge considered the appeal under  para  279(1)(d).
    At the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  sponsor  was  not
    called to give evidence  and  the  appeal  proceeded  by  way  of  oral
    submissions, the judge having given an opportunity to  the  appellants'
    representative to consider whether the sponsor  should  be  called  but
    that course was not taken.  The judge, therefore, had to  consider  the
    matter on the evidence before her.  She  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    death certificate was genuine.  Again, this was a question of fact  for
    her to resolve on the evidence before her.

25.   The judge has set out in her decision why she was not  satisfied  that
    it was a reliable document.  She said that on its face it  differed  in
    form from the birth certificates relied on. She  gave  the  parties  an
    opportunity producing further evidence  and  took  that  evidence  into
    account.  The judge was entitled to take into  account  the  fact  that
    there had been a revised certificate, there was a  discrepancy  between
    those certificates in relation to the spelling of  the  sponsor's  name
    and the fact that the notarial certificate been inadequately completed.
     She also commented that the chairman of the U/P had referred  to  Book
    no 02/12 but no copy had been provided and there was no explanation why
    the book was dated 2012 when the death certificate was dated  30  March
    2016 and the certificate gave no reason  for  the  death  and  did  not
    specify the date of death.

26.   The judge also commented on the fact the  certificate  came  from  the
    chairman of the U/P. The grounds at para 3(iii) set  out  the  relevant
    provisions of Bangladeshi legislation to show that the  chairman  of  a
    U/P can act as a registrar but these provisions  were  not  before  the
    judge and she did not err in  law  by  failing  to  take  into  account
    matters not in evidence before her but in any event the  other  reasons
    given by the judge amply support her finding.  Again, the  grounds  are
    seeking to re-argue issues of fact and in relation to  para  3(iii)  to
    introduce further evidence which was not  before  the  judge.   On  the
    basis of the evidence before her, the judge  reached  findings  on  the
    death certificate properly open to her for the reasons she gave.


27.   So far as PJ (Sri Lanka) is concerned (ground 3), the  judge  has  set
    out the relevant paragraphs of the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  at
    [49] of her decision.  As the Court made clear there is no general duty
    on the respondent to make enquiries to verify a document and  the  fact
    that a document is potentially capable of being verified does not  mean
    that national authorities have an obligation to take  that  step.   The
    claimed  death  certificate  does  not  fall  within  the  category  of
    documents identified by the Court where it may be necessary to make  an
    enquiry to verify its authenticity and reliability such as when  it  is
    at the centre of a request for protection and when a simple process  of
    enquiry would conclusively prove its authenticity and reliability.  The
    judge was entitled to find that there was no breach of  any  obligation
    on the respondent to undertake a process of verification on  the  facts
    in the appellants application.


28.   In summary, I am not satisfied that the grounds disclose any error  of
    law on the part of  the  judge.   Her  findings  and  conclusions  were
    properly open to her for the reasons she gave.

      Decision


29.   The judge did not err in  law  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stands. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
                 Dated: 20 November 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
-----------------------
[1] The provisions of para 297 setting out the requirements to be met by a
person seeking indefinite leave to enter as a child are set out in full at
[5] of the First-tier Tribunal decision.

