
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/19813/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28 May 2019                          |On 25 June 2019                    |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                           Beebee Rassida Dinally
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rene, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant's appeal which is said by Mr Rene  to  be  effectively  a
    consideration of Article 8 outside of  the  Rules,  was  considered  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge C J Woolley sitting at Newport  on  11  March
    2019.  He dismissed the appeal by way of a decision promulgated  on  22
    March 2019.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer
    by way of a decision dated 18 April 2019.  In the grant of  permission,
    it was said:-

     "It is arguable that the Judge has made conflicting findings  regarding
         economic dependency and usefulness to society which may be material
         to the balancing exercise required under Article  8.   All  grounds
         may be argued".

3.   Mr Rene in his oral submissions before me said that he  relied  on  his
    grounds of appeal, that there were no credibility issues  and  nor  had
    the Respondent raised any such issues in relation to credibility in the
    Rule 24 response.  Mr Rene took me to various paragraphs of the judge's
    decision, and it may be useful to summarise those. He first took me  to
    paragraph 34 where the judge had said:-

     "Her continued presence will be an economic burden on the  country.   I
         find  that  the  interference  is  necessary  in  pursuance  of   a
         legitimate aim, namely the economic wellbeing of  the  country  ...
         The  macro-economic   effects   of   access   to   healthcare   and
         accommodation must be given their due weight".

4.   The grounds of appeal said this should be viewed in  context  with  the
    findings at paragraph 36(ii) where the judge states:-

     "Since the expiry of her working permit the  Appellant  will  not  have
         had the right to work, although she has apparently  been  doing  so
         continuously.  She has not had to rely on State support and can  be
         regarded as financially independent".

5.   The grounds say it is clear that these two findings are not  compatible
    with each other which is material.  It is also said that the  judge  is
    right in relation to his  finding  at  paragraph  36(ii)  in  that  the
    Appellant has been financially independent.  It is also clear  that  he
    wrongly placed new weight  on  an  erroneous  factor,  and  this  is  a
    material error of law.

6.   The grounds of appeal also say that at paragraph 36(v)  the  judge  had
    said:-

     "I accept that the Appellant has performed a socially useful role as  a
         dispenser in a pharmacy.  Nevertheless, the Appellant represents  a
         significant  economic  burden  on  the  country  in  terms  of  the
         provision of housing and potential healthcare,  especially  as  she
         grows older".

    There is then reference to these findings.  For example,  it  said  the
    Appellant is aged 55 and that it was unreasonable for the judge to have
    used the Appellant's age against her in that she still has  many  years
    of working life left, but it was entirely plausible that having  worked
    and paid her taxes in the past and would likely to do so in the  future
    she would be entitled to a pension rightly earned and  therefore  could
    not be properly regarded as a burden on the  state  as  stated  by  the
    judge.  It was also said that the judge accepted the Appellant has been
    of benefit to the community in the  UK  in  light  of  her  work  as  a
    dispenser.  Evidence was provided to show the concerns of  the  General
    Pharmaceutical Council in relation to shortage of workers in this field
    of work post-Brexit.  The grounds of  appeal  say,  "It  is  not  clear
    whether due weight had been given to the important factor in the public
    interest".



7.   The grounds say at 36(iv):-

         "It must however be emphasised that Article 8 is properly concerned
         only with the integrity of private and family life.  The  FT  Judge
         had made reference to the Appellant's age, he had also  made  clear
         findings that the Appellant had established a private life here and
         that there would be interference as to engage  Article  8,  however
         there is one dimension that the judge fails to  consider,  that  is
         physical and psychological integrity of the Appellant (see Pretty v
         UK [2002] 35 EHRR).  At this stage of her life the judge has simply
         failed to give weight to what she has established here as a person.
          This was material to the appeal".

8.   The grounds then say:-

         "At paragraph 37 there is a  more  glaring  error  of  law  in  its
         application.  The FT Judge states  the  social  usefulness  of  her
         employment does not reach the level expressed by Sir David Keene in
         UE (Nigeria) so as to affect the importance of a  firm  immigration
         policy.  It is submitted that no reasonable  authority  could  have
         come to such a conclusion on the facts  on  this  case,  especially
         when the FT Judge found that  "I  accept  that  the  Appellant  has
         performed a socially useful role as  a  dispenser".   Coupled  with
         this  is  the  article  by  the  General   Pharmaceutical   Council
         expressing its concern about the shortage of workers in  this  area
         of work.  The court is referred  to  Counsel's  skeleton  argument,
         paragraph 4, which quotes the relevant findings by Sir David Keene.
          The judge's interpretation dilutes exactly what has been  said  by
         Sir David Keene.  This is a material error of law".

9.   In the grounds, still at paragraph 37, is said  "The  FT  Judge  states
    and in a measure of refusing her application is rationally connected to
    the objective legitimate immigration control in the economic  interests
    of the UK.  It is submitted that this  finding  is  indicative  of  the
    judge's mindset and has been a recurring theme  of  his  determination.
    The fault of this finding was not supported by the  evidence  and  also
    the FT Judge has made  a  clear  finding  that  the  Appellant  can  be
    regarded as financially independent.  This  was  a  material  error  of
    law".

10.  Added to  those  detailed  grounds  of  appeal  Mr  Rene  in  his  oral
    submissions said at paragraph 34 the judge effectively focused  on  the
    economic wellbeing of the country but that the portion  of  the  actual
    evidence does not make out  the  point.   The  judge  was  looking  for
    further reasoning.  There is reference to  the  Appellant's  age.   The
    Appellant was granted leave and the Appellant had paid the  immigration
    health surcharge and it would be in compliance of  the  Rules  had  she
    paid the surcharge when she made her current application.  In any event
    she had worked in the  UK  as  well  and  had  paid  tax  and  national
    insurance.  The P60s had borne that out and in any event  further  work
    should be continuing in the same vein.  There was no evidence  to  show
    she would be a burden.   In  any  event,  economic  independence  is  a
    neutral factor when looking at Section 117.

11.  The second point said Mr Rene was that the Appellant had  worked  as  a
    dispenser at a pharmacy.  The judge takes the positives at paragraph 36
    but where he notes the useful role as a dispenser, but he diluted it by
    taking a point against the Appellant which he should  not  have  taken.
    It was a factual error in itself.  There is reference to Mauritius  and
    that needs to be considered in the context of the integrity  of  family
    and private life.  Although  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  Rules
    because of a short absence she had lived in  the  UK  for  over  twenty
    years.

12.  At the hearing at the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Rene said  he  had  given
    the judge a copy of a policy  for  analogy  purposes.   There  were  no
    credibility findings  against  the  Appellant.   It  was  necessary  to
    consider the case of Pretty and the psychological and  physical  effect
    of the position.  The pharmaceutical journal at 31 and 33  noted  there
    was a huge drop in a number of pharmacies since Brexit and  it  was  of
    huge concern.  That point had been made to the Respondent.

13.  The Appellant had undertaken various courses and there were  copies  of
    those in the Respondent's bundle.

14.  I was taken to the Rule 24 and Mr Rene made submissions in  respect  of
    it.  The case of Thakrar was not on point.  There was a  family  member
    who was relevant.  I was taken to head note (2) and (3).   I  was  also
    taken further to the judgment itself, particularly at paragraphs 83 and
    then 87 to 94.  He said the most important paragraph was  paragraph  94
    which referred to a social worker.  It was submitted that the judge was
    wrong to conclude that the Appellant's employment did not reach the  UE
    (Nigeria) levels and so the decision was  unsafe.   Mr  Rene  said  the
    final ground was in respect of his paragraph 7 and that related to  the
    economic interest and he took me through that.

15.  I then heard from Mr Tufan.  He said he thought that  it  would  appear
    that Mr Rene had sought to expand the grounds which had  been  drafted,
    particularly in respect of paragraph 276ADE and  that  matter  was  not
    before me.  Mr Tufan said he relied on the Rule 24 response but that he
    thought his colleague who drafted that document was wrong at  paragraph
    2 but he went on to the other matters.  Ultimately insofar as  this  he
    said that looking at the case of Rhuppiah v Secretary of  State  [2018]
    UKSC 58 at paragraphs 52 and 58  that  case  was  all  about  financial
    independence and Mr Tufan said that case did not take things  too  much
    further, but in any event Section 117 views financial independence  and
    English language as a neutral factor.

16.  Insofar as the Appellant's contribution to  society  is  concerned  the
    Appellant's history was set out within the reasons for  refusal  letter
    which was not disputed.  As of April 2005, the Appellant had  no  leave
    to remain.  Mr Rene said what she had done  was  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom in September 2017 and then she came back as a visitor for  only
    six months.  When that  leave  ran  out,  she  then  made  the  current
    application.  She has no right to work and she did not have a right  to
    work.  Her contribution to the society, if it could be called that, had
    to  be  considered  in  that  context.   He   said   insofar   as   her
    qualifications are concerned,  he  did  not  think  the  Appellant  was
    qualified.  Mr Tufan referred  to  the  case  of  UE  and  particularly
    paragraph 21 of that judgment.  He also took me to  paragraphs  35  and
    36.  It was necessary to consider the context of what was being said by
    the Court of Appeal, "very significant contribution" to  the  community
    was required.  As for the other decision  of  AE  (Algeria)  there  was
    reference to treatment and care but that was a secondary point. Insofar
    as the case of Thakrar is concerned, the head note at (2) and  (3)  set
    that out as did paragraph 94.  The difference here was that  the  whole
    local community had come  to  depend  on  the  Appellant  so  in  those
    circumstances this was a very different case to this Appellant's case.

17.  Mr Rene in reply said that by its very  nature  someone  who  would  be
    relying on coming to the court now would  have  to  have  been  working
    illegally, but there was a period of time in 2003 for around two  years
    where the Appellant had been working legally  on  a  salary  of  around
    �20,000,  therefore  she  had  not  been  here  illegally  in  the   UK
    throughout.  The positive contribution from the Appellant was  accepted
    by the judge.  In fact, the judge had made that point twice in terms of
    the  social  usefulness  and  the  economic  burden  aspect.   Mr  Rene
    submitted that the determination contains an error of law.  He took  me
    to the Respondent's bundle where it showed that although a dispenser is
    not a pharmacist the Appellant had a qualification on 21  January  2008
    as a Level 2 in Pharmacy Services dispenser.  I was  shown  a  copy  of
    that certificate.

18.  I had reserved my decision. Having  considered  the  rival  submissions
    and having reconsidered the judge's decision  alongside  the  documents
    that were before him. It is clear to that the judge sought to deal with
    the positives and negatives of the case in accordance with the  Supreme
    Court's guidance in Hesham Ali.  Indeed, the judge in this case set out
    various sub-headings to his decision.  He  made  very  clear  what  the
    issues in the appeal were, namely paragraph 276ADE and then whether  or
    not an appeal pursuant to Article 8 could succeed.

19.  Insofar as this appeal is concerned, and as Mr Rene himself said,  this
    was an appeal in respect of consideration of Article 8 outside  of  the
    Rules. That was fully set out from paragraphs 28 onwards.  There is  no
    criticism from any of the parties that the  judge  fully  and  properly
    referred to all of the leading case law including Agyarko  v  Secretary
    of State [2017]  UKSC  11,  Hesham  Ali  [2016]  UKSC  62,  Razgar,  UE
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2010] EWCA  Civ  975  and  indeed  references  to  AG
    (Eritrea) [2007] EWCA Civ 801 and indeed to other authorities  as  well
    which I shall return to.

20.  In my judgment the judge  considered,  for  example  at  paragraph  36,
    those factors which went against the Appellant and those factors  which
    were in favour of the  Appellant  and  he  put  those  sub-headings  to
    highlight this. Therefore, it clear to me that  he  considered  against
    the Appellant her immigration history.  The judge was  entitled  to  do
    that, and indeed he was duty bound to do that.   Similarly,  the  judge
    considered  knowledge  of  English,  the  financial  independence,   he
    considered development of private life, the  reasonableness  of  return
    and the economic burden on the country in compliance  with  the  Rules.
    In favour of the Appellant, the  judge  considered  all  the  positives
    including, the importance of the family and private  life  in  the  UK,
    social usefulness, the fear of returning to Mauritius. Then  ultimately
    the judge in his sub-headings of overall conclusions in relation to the
    proportionality exercise balanced all the factors into account.  I  see
    no conflict in what he said. The judge had to  take  into  account  the
    evidence that the Appellant had been working as  a  dispenser,  but  he
    also had to take into account that the work was without permission  for
    almost all of the period of time. Indeed, I note  that  on  re-entering
    the UK as a visitor the Appellant  would  have  to  have  declared  her
    previous overstaying and intention to leave the UK after her  visit.  I
    am not sure that she did that. Whether she did or not, there is nothing
    wrong with the judge concluding that a person living in the UK even  if
    in their mid-fifties, is likely to require  medical  treatment.  It  is
    also reasonable to assume that at some stage assistance from the  state
    will be required for that medical treatment and indeed  for  assistance
    with living in the UK in terms of  accommodation.  This  was  not  mere
    speculation. It is a reality that as we  get  older  our  health  needs
    increase and our reliance  on  support  services,  including  on  those
    providing accommodation increases.

21.  Having considered the case law, in my  judgment  it  is  imperative  to
    have at the forefront  that  the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  UE
    (Nigeria) v The Secretary of State [2010]  EWCA  Civ  975,   Sir  David
    Keene (with whom Richards and Ward LJJ agreed)  very clearly  noted  at
    paragraphs 35 and 36 as follows:-

         "35. For my part, therefore, I conclude that it  is  open  to  this
             court to find that the loss of such public benefit is  capable
             of being a relevant consideration when  assessing  the  public
             interest side of proportionality under  Article  8  and  as  a
             matter of principle I do so find.  That is where  this  aspect
             comes  in  to  the  proportionality  exercise.    Given   that
             conclusion, it is unnecessary for me to deal with Mr Knafler's
             argument about whether removal would fall to be in  accordance
             with the law.


         36.  I would, however, before  concluding,  emphasise  that,  while
             this factor of public value can be relevant in the way which I
             have described, I would expect it to make a difference to  the
             outcome  of  immigration  cases  only  in  a  relatively   few
             instances where the positive contribution to this  country  is
             very significant, perhaps of the  kind  referred  to  by  Lord
             Bridge in Bakhtaur Singh.  The  main  element  in  the  public
             interest will normally consist of the need to maintain a  firm
             policy of immigration control, and little will go to undermine
             that.  It will be unusual for  the  loss  of  benefit  to  the
             community to tip the scales in an applicant's favour,  but  of
             course all will depend upon the detailed facts which exist  in
             the individual case and in particular on  the  extent  of  the
             interference with his private and/or family life."

22.  Additionally, in the  case  of  Thakrar  (Cart  JR,  Art  8,  value  to
    community) [2018] UKUT 00336 (IAC) the President considered  issues  in
    respect of removal from the United Kingdom.  I  was  referred  to  head
    notes (2) and (3) which say as follows:-

         "(2)     Before concluding that submissions regarding the  positive
             contribution made by an  individual  fall  to  be  taken  into
             account, for the purposes of Article  8(2)  of  the  ECHR,  as
             diminishing  the  importance  to  be  given   to   immigration
             controls, a judge must be satisfied that the  contribution  is
             very significant. In practice, this is likely  to  arise  only
             where the matter is one  over  which  there  can  be  no  real
             disagreement. One touchstone for determining this  is  to  ask
             whether the removal of the persons concerned would lead to  an
             irreplaceable loss to the community of the United  Kingdom  or
             to a significant element of it.


         (3)  The fact that a person makes a substantial contribution to the
             United Kingdom economy  cannot,  without  more,  constitute  a
             factor  that  diminishes  the  importance  to  be   given   to
             immigration controls, when determining the Article 8  position
             of that person or a member of his or her family"

     and then I was taken particularly to  paragraph  94  of  that  decision
    which refers to Lord Bridge in Bakhtaur Singh,  and  particularly  sub-
    paragraph (3) where it was said:-

         "A person liable to deportation is a  social  worker  upon  whom  a
         particular local community has come  to  depend.   His  deportation
         will deprive the local community of  his  services  which  will  be
         difficult to replace".


23.  Without going into detail in the further authorities  which  have  been
    referred to, I turn again to the judge's decision.  In my judgment  the
    judge did clearly consider the contribution of  the  Appellant  to  the
    United Kingdom.  He set it out,  particularly  at  36(ii)  because  the
    judge said, "I accept that she has performed a socially useful role  in
    her work as a dispenser". There can be no  doubt  therefore  that  this
    relevant factor was considered by the judge. The issue of  what  effect
    that was to have is the crux of the matter being raised before me.   In
    my judgment the case law is very different to  this  Appellant's  case.
    As is abundantly clear of what is required in Thakrar:-

         "One touchstone for determining this is to ask whether the  removal
         of the person concerned would lead to an irreplaceable loss to  the
         community of the United Kingdom or a significant element of it"

     or as Sir David Keene said:-

         "I would  expect  it  to  make  a  difference  to  the  outcome  of
         immigration cases  only  in  a  relatively  few  instances  with  a
         positive contribution to this country is very significant,  perhaps
         of the kind referred to by Lord Bridge in Bakhtaur Singh"

    and that then takes me back to paragraph 94 of the decision in  Thakrar
    where there is reference to the social worker.

24.  In  my  judgment,  even  if  there  is  a  shortage  of  dispensers  at
    pharmacies in the United Kingdom this Appellant clearly  did  not  meet
    the sort of level which the case law envisages.  It is certainly not to
    the level of being one of the "limited number of cases" which the Court
    of  Appeal  contemplated,  and  indeed   which   the   Upper   Tribunal
    contemplated in Thakrar either.

25.  My task is to consider whether or not the judge made a  material  error
    of law, and it is right to say  that  I  have  much  sympathy  for  the
    Appellant, because it is possible that a  different  judge  might  have
    come to a different conclusion, but that is not the legal test  that  I
    have to apply. That is because the Court  of  Appeal's  decision  in  R
    (Iran) defines the limits of the appeal before me.  I have to find that
    there is a material error of law.  In my  judgment  there  is  no  such
    material error of law.  The judge had  weighed  up  the  positives  and
    negatives of the Appellant's case.   He  had  taken  into  account  the
    various positives, but ultimately, he has  decided,  having  considered
    the fact that the Appellant has been working illegally in the UK,  that
    she has resided here in the UK in breach of the Immigration Rules for a
    long period of time, that although there is a socially useful  role  in
    her work as a dispenser it did not meet the level which  was  required.
    The judge specifically said at paragraph 37:-

     "The social usefulness of her employment  does  not  reach  the  levels
         expressed by Sir David Keene in UE (Nigeria) so as  to  affect  the
         importance of a firm immigration policy".

26.  The judge did apply the case law. Ultimately the judge  said  that  the
    importance of legitimate immigration control outweighed the  rights  of
    the Appellant which he had fully and  properly  summarised  previously.
    The judge also noted the Supreme Court's decision in Agyarko  that  the
    Appellant had not produced a very strong or compelling case  so  as  to
    outweigh the public interest in removal.  In  my  judgment,  ultimately
    the judge was also entitled to bear in mind that  there  might  come  a
    time where the Appellant would have to look  to  using  the  healthcare
    system in the United Kingdom, that there might be issues  in  terms  of
    housing, but those were not factors of such magnitude to enable  me  to
    conclude that the balancing exercise was somehow incorrectly  performed
    by the judge.  In my judgment the judge had  weighed  up  the  relevant
    factors, he had done so fully and completely taking  into  account  the
    various submissions which were made by Mr Rene. The judge saw and heard
    from the Appellant and came to the decisions that he did.

27.  Not all judges would have come to the decision that this judge  did.  I
    have said already, that would not be the test for  finding  a  material
    error of law. In my judgment the  judge  appropriately  considered  and
    balanced the various aspects of both sides. The fact that the judge did
    not agree with the Appellant's side does  not  mean  that  there  is  a
    material error of law.

28.  In the circumstances, although sympathetic to the Appellant's  position
    and although Mr Rene has said all that he possibly could have on behalf
    of the Appellant, I conclude that there is no material error of law.





Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law.   The  decision  of  Judge  C  J  Woolley
    stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   A Mahmood                               Date: 4 June 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   A Mahmood                               Date 4 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
