
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
HU/19241/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25 April 2018                          | On 11 May 2018                   |
|                                          |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              mr manpreet singh
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Moriarty, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,
    I refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India  born  on  24  February  1990.   He
    arrived in the UK on 3 December 2011 as a student, with leave to remain
    subsequently granted until 30 March 2016.  On 17 March 2016 he made  an
    application for leave to remain on human rights grounds, with reference
    to Article 8 of the ECHR, as a partner and parent.  His application was
    refused in a decision dated 26 July 2016.

 3. The appellant appealed against that refusal and his appeal came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Row ("the FtJ") on 11 August 2017, the result
    of which was that the appeal was allowed.

 4.  The  respondent's  decision  accepted  that  the   appellant   has   a
    'qualifying' relationship with his British citizen partner, and did not
    dispute that he has a parental relationship with  his  son  B  and  his
    partner's son S.  However, the basis of the refusal to grant  leave  to
    remain was in terms of the suitability requirements of  the  Article  8
    Rules.  The respondent was of the view that the appellant had  obtained
    an English language test certificate by deception and that he had  used
    that TOEIC certificate in support of an application for leave to remain
    dated 13 February 2013.

    The FTJ's decision

 5. The FTJ referred to the  respondent's  reliance  on  the  now  familiar
    'generic' witness statements in ETS cases, namely from Peter Millington
    and Rebecca Collings.  He also referred to a printout  which  indicated
    that a test taken by the appellant on  28  November  2013  was  invalid
    because the test had been taken by a proxy.

 6. He concluded that that generic evidence provided  a  prima  facie  case
    that the test was taken by proxy, and that it was open to the appellant
    to rebut that case.  He referred to the appellant's  evidence  that  he
    took the test himself.  However, he said that it was perhaps surprising
    that having been effectively accused of conspiracy to  defraud  in  the
    decision letter, the appellant  had  taken  no  steps  to  protest  his
    innocence  to  ETS  and  to  demand  an  explanation  from  them.   The
    appellant's evidence was that he had sent them an email.  However,  the
    FTJ said that he did not produce a copy of that email  at  the  hearing
    and concluded that there was no email.

 7. At [9] the FTJ said that there were nonetheless,  matters  that  caused
    him to doubt the accuracy of the information provided  by  ETS  to  the
    respondent.  He noted that the data provided by ETS indicated that  two
    tests were taken, one at New London College on 28 November 2012 and the
    other at Manchester College of Accountancy and Management  on  18  June
    2013.  The appellant's  case  was  that  he  never  took  any  test  at
    Manchester College.  The respondent had  accepted  that  the  appellant
    never took any such test at Manchester College and that the information
    provided by ETS in that respect was incorrect.  The FTJ  said  that  it
    appeared that the printed data related to someone else called  Manpreet
    Singh, with a different date of  birth,  2  March  1990.   However,  he
    referred to the fact that  the  printout  indicated  that  both  people
    referred to had the same passport number,  which  was  the  appellant's
    passport number.  He said that there was no explanation of how that had
    happened.

 8. He then stated that those facts "hardly inspires  confidence  that  the
    information provided by ETS can be relied upon".

 9. In the next paragraph he concluded that "On balance" the appellant  had
    rebutted the prima facie case against him and that the  respondent  had
    not shown that the appellant took the test by proxy.   Accordingly,  he
    concluded that  the  appellant  met  the  suitability  requirements  of
    Appendix FM.  He further  concluded  that  he  was  able  to  meet  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  EX.1  and  similarly,  s.117B(6)  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").

10. He found that the appellant had a genuine parental responsibility  with
    his son B, and although he  may  have  such  a  relationship  with  his
    partner's older child, he  concluded  that  it  was  not  necessary  to
    consider  that  matter.   The  issue,  he  said,  was  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect the appellant's child to leave the United Kingdom.

11. He next referred to the respondent's  guidance  dated  August  2015  in
    relation to Appendix FM.  He referred to the fact that  the  Presenting
    Officer before him indicated that that guidance still  represented  the
    respondent's position.  He said that the respondent's position was that
    it was not reasonable to expect a British citizen child  to  leave  the
    EU.

12. He thus concluded that as the appellant met the  requirements  both  of
    paragraph EX.1 and s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act, the public interest  does
    not require his removal.  Thus, the decision to refuse leave to  remain
    represented a disproportionate interference with his Article 8  rights,
    and on that basis the appeal was allowed under Article 8.

    The grounds and submissions

13. The grounds on which permission to appeal was granted contend that  the
    FTJ's reasons for finding  the  appellant  had  rebutted  the  evidence
    against him are inadequate.   Although  the  FTJ  had  found  that  the
    information contained in the printed data did not  inspire  confidence,
    it is said  in  the  grounds  that  the  information  was  nevertheless
    accepted by the FTJ and Counsel for the appellant.

14. Given that the FTJ had noted that the appellant had failed to take  any
    steps to protest his innocence, and that he did not send any  email  as
    claimed, that cast doubt on the appellant's credibility in  respect  of
    his innocent explanation.  Thus, it is argued that there was  no  basis
    for  the  judge's  finding  that  the  appellant  had   rebutted   "the
    respondent's evidence", as there was no further  evidence,  other  than
    that which was rejected.

15. Reliance is placed on the decision in MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) Nigeria
    [2016] UKUT 450 (IAC), a decision which the grounds assert  was  relied
    on by the respondent's representative at the hearing.  Thus, it is said
    that there may be reasons why a person who is able to speak English  to
    the required level would nevertheless cause or permit a proxy candidate
    to undertake an ETS test on their behalf, or otherwise to cheat.  It is
    said that the FTJ had erred by failing to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    holding that a person who speaks English would therefore have no reason
    to secure a test certificate by deception.

16. The grounds continue that although the respondent accepts that the  ETS
    verification system is not infallible,  it  is  adequately  robust  and
    rigorous.  In any  event,  the  respondent  must  necessarily  rely  on
    information provided to her by an applicant which has been certified as
    being true by  a  third  party.   If  the  third  party  withdraws  the
    certificate, as here, and is no longer able to vouch for  the  validity
    of the information, then the basis of leave is also removed.

17. It is  thus  argued  that  the  FTJ's  proportionality  assessment  was
    coloured by his error in respect of his finding that the appellant  had
    rebutted the assertion of deception.  In addition,  he  had  failed  to
    identify compelling circumstances indicating  a  breach  of  Article  8
    (outside the Rules).

18. Lastly, it is said that there was  nothing  to  prevent  the  appellant
    returning to India in order to apply for the correct  entry  clearance.
    Any separation would be temporary and proportionate in the interests of
    an effective immigration control.

19. In oral submissions, Mr Melvin relied on the grounds.  He accepted that
    it is not apparent from the FTJ's decision that he made any findings in
    terms  of  the  appellant's  English  language  ability  vis-�-vis  the
    contention that his  decision  was  contrary  to  the  decision  in  MA
    (Nigeria). Mr Melvin indicated that there was a note or minute from the
    Presenting Officer who appeared at the hearing before the  FtJ  stating
    that MA (Nigeria) was relied on, although that note has not  previously
    been relied on, was not referred to in the grounds  and  has  not  been
    served.

20. It was submitted that although the FTJ  had  recognised  the  error  in
    relation to the other test that the appellant was said to  have  taken,
    that was not a sufficient basis from which the FTJ could have concluded
    that the appellant had rebutted the allegation of deception.   Reliance
    was placed on the judicial review decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  R
    (on the application of  Nawaz)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (ETS: review standard/evidential basis)  [2017]  UKUT  00288
    (IAC).  Reference was made  in  particular  to  [43],  [45]  and  [47].
    Likewise, the decision of the Court of Appeal in Ahsan v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 2009,  in  particular  at
    [25] - [33] in support of the submission that the appellant could  have
    requested a tape of the test and sought independent expert evidence.

21. Further, in terms of the FTJ's proportionality assessment, that  should
    have started from the standpoint that the appellant had used  deception
    in obtaining an English language certificate.  It was accepted  however
    that if, contrary to the respondent's submissions, I concluded that the
    FTJ's assessment of the deception point was sustainable,  there  was  a
    sufficient basis for the Article 8 appeal to  have  been  allowed.   At
    least, that is as  how  I  understood  the  submission  that  was  made
    initially.

22. In his submissions Mr Moriarty  contended  that  nowhere  did  the  FTJ
    suggest that the appellant's English language ability was a  sufficient
    basis from which to conclude that he had  rebutted  the  allegation  of
    deception.  This was not therefore, an MA (Nigeria) case.

23. It was at the very least open to the FTJ to conclude that the Secretary
    of State had not discharged the legal burden of proof and the  FTJ  was
    entirely  correct  to  look  at  the  weaknesses  in  the  respondent's
    evidence.

24. Furthermore, it was submitted that s.117B(6) was correctly  applied  by
    the FTJ in order to allow the appeal.  In that context I  was  referred
    to Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC),  in
    particular at [20].

25. Likewise, in relation to general principles, I was referred to Dasgupta
    (error of law - proportionality - correct approach)  [2016]  UKUT  0028
    (IAC), especially at [17] - [23].

26. Furthermore, insofar as the  respondent  contends  that  the  appellant
    could apply for entry  clearance,  that  would  be  refused  under  the
    suitability grounds on the basis of the respondent's  assertion  as  to
    deception.

27. In reply, contrary to what I  understood  to  be  Mr  Melvin's  earlier
    submissions, he said that it was not accepted that the appellant  could
    succeed under s.117B(6) if the suitability requirements  of  the  Rules
    were not met.  There would need to a further assessment  of  who  would
    look after the child and so-forth.

28. In terms of the MA (Nigeria) point, the appellant's  witness  statement
    refers to his English language ability and that he had no need to use a
    proxy test taker.

    Assessment

29. It is understandable why the respondent is  aggrieved  with  the  FTJ's
    decision.  With all due respect to  the  FTJ,  had  his  decision  been
    rather more detailed, and had it included a more thorough  analysis  of
    the evidence which led him to his conclusions, the scope for  complaint
    would have been much reduced.

30. For example, whilst the FTJ's decision does not refer to  any  analysis
    of the  appellant's  English  language  ability  as  discussed  in  the
    decision in MA (Nigeria), it  is  evident  from  the  FTJ's  manuscript
    record of proceedings that that case was referred to on behalf  of  the
    respondent.  Furthermore, neither of the appellant's nor his  partner's
    witness statements are referred to in terms of the details given as  to
    the circumstances  in  which  the  test  taken  in  November  2012  was
    undertaken.  Both of their witness statements contain evidence in  that
    respect, for example his partner stating that she travelled to the test
    centre with the  appellant,  and  so-forth.   The  appellant's  witness
    statement gives details as to the taking of  the  test  in  terms,  for
    example, of the content of the test. Furthermore, the oral evidence was
    barely summarised.

31. However, having said all  that,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  FTJ  gave
    sustainable reasons for concluding that the appellant had rebutted  the
    prima facie case of deception.  It is important to bear in  mind  that,
    as the authorities make clear, assessments in this area are very  fact-
    specific.  Here, what the FTJ was concerned about was what was  plainly
    a  very  significant  anomaly  in  the  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    appellant.  The respondent's decision dated 26 July 2016 is  predicated
    on the conclusion that the appellant took tests at  two  test  centres,
    New  London  College,  and  Manchester  College  of   Accountancy   and
    Management.  It was accepted before the FTJ that he  did  not  in  fact
    take any such test at the Manchester College.  The FTJ noted  that  the
    printed data related to someone else  called  Manpreet  Singh,  with  a
    different date of birth but with the same passport number  as  that  of
    the appellant.  He said that there was no explanation of how  that  had
    happened, and it appears  there  was  no  explanation.   He  was  fully
    entitled to conclude  that  that  hardly  inspired  confidence  in  the
    information provided by ETS.

32. It is not as if the FTJ was in some way looking for reasons to find  in
    favour of the appellant.  He made it clear that he found it  surprising
    that the appellant had taken no steps to protest his innocence to  ETS,
    or to demand an explanation for the allegation of deception.  He  found
    that the appellant's evidence that he sent an email  to  them  was  not
    true.

33. The assessment of the evidence and its relative weight was a matter for
    the FTJ.  Plainly, it would not be sufficient to conclude that  another
    judge might have come to a different conclusion.  One must also bear in
    mind, albeit that the FTJ did not make specific reference to  it,  that
    the appellant and his partner  in  their  witness  statements  gave  an
    account of  the  test  taken  by  the  appellant  and  its  surrounding
    circumstances.

34. I do not consider that there is any merit in  the  MA  (Nigeria)  point
    made on behalf of the respondent.  There  is  no  indication  from  the
    FTJ's decision that he considered that any ability in English that  the
    appellant may have had any bearing on the question of whether  he  used
    deception in the taking of the English language test. I can see that it
    could equally be argued that there is no indication that the  FTJ  took
    into account  what  the  appellant  and  his  partner  said  about  the
    circumstances in which the test  was  taken  and  that  therefore  that
    evidence could not be said to support the FTJ's conclusion of a lack of
    deception.  However, the situation in  relation  to  those  two  issues
    (language ability and test circumstances) is subtly, but significantly,
    different.  If the FTJ had taken into account the  appellant's  English
    language ability to support his conclusions, that would  probably  have
    been impermissible.  On the other hand, it would have been  permissible
    for him to have regard to the evidence of the  circumstances  in  which
    the test was taken.

35. I am satisfied that the FTJ was entitled to conclude that the appellant
    met the suitability requirements of the Rules.  He went on to find that
    therefore, paragraph EX.1 was  satisfied.   However,  the  two  do  not
    necessarily follow, because there are other eligibility requirements of
    the Rules that need to be satisfied.  Having said  that,  the  skeleton
    argument on behalf of the appellant that was before  the  FTJ  at  [16]
    made the point that the respondent had identified  no  further  grounds
    for refusal under the partner route in Appendix FM.

36. In any event, there  is  no  error  in  the  FTJ's  assessment  of  the
    application of s.117B(6). Even if therefore, the FTJ did err in law  in
    his assessment of the  deception  point,  that  error  of  law  is  not
    material in that he would have been bound to allow the  appeal,  as  he
    did, outside the Article 8 Rules.

37. S.117B(6) of the 2002 Act states as follows:

    (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
             with a qualifying child, and


         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
             United Kingdom.

38. I said in  my  summary  of  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent before me that there was some ambiguity in the  respondent's
    position in terms of the application of s.117B(6).  Insofar as  it  was
    argued that merely meeting the strict words of that provision would not
    be a route to success for the appellant under Article 8, I disagree.  I
    indicated at the hearing that I was conscious there  may  be  Court  of
    Appeal authority on the point.  Both parties agreed that they would not
    seek the opportunity to make further submissions  in  relation  to  any
    such authority if I were to refer to it in my decision in circumstances
    where it unequivocally points to the answer to the  question  posed  in
    this case.  The decision of the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) & Ors,
    v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) &  Anor  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705, is the authority.  It  is only necessary to quote from [17]  -
    [20].  There, the Court said as follows:

      1. Subsection (6) falls into a different category again. It  does  not
         simply  identify  factors  which  bear  upon  the  public  interest
         question. It resolves that question in the  context  of  article  8
         applications which satisfy the conditions  in  paragraphs  (a)  and
         (b). It does so by  stipulating  that  once  those  conditions  are
         satisfied, the public interest will  not  require  the  applicant's
         removal. Since the interference with the right to private or family
         life under article 8(1) can only be  justified  where  there  is  a
         sufficiently strong countervailing public interest  falling  within
         article 8(2), if the public  interest  does  not  require  removal,
         there is no other basis on which removal  could  be  justified.  It
         follows, in my judgment, that there can be no  doubt  that  section
         117B(6) must be read as a self-contained  provision  in  the  sense
         that Parliament has stipulated that where the conditions  specified
         in the sub-section are satisfied,  the  public  interest  will  not
         justify removal. It is not legitimate  to  have  regard  to  public
         interest considerations unless that is permitted, either explicitly
         or implicitly, by the subsection itself.

      2. Ms Giovannetti QC, counsel  for  the  Secretary  of  State,  argued
         otherwise. She contended that there may be circumstances where even
         though the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (b) are  satisfied  and
         the applicant is not liable for deportation, the Secretary of State
         may nonetheless refuse leave to remain  on  wider  public  interest
         grounds. But as she had to accept, that  analysis  requires  adding
         words to subsection (6) to the effect that where the conditions are
         satisfied, the public interest will not normally  require  removal,
         because on her approach, sometimes it will. I see  no  warrant  for
         distorting the unambiguous language of the section in that way.

      1. In my judgment, therefore, the  only  questions  which  courts  and
         tribunals need  to  ask  when  applying  section  117B(6)  are  the
         following:

         (1)  Is the applicant liable to deportation? If so, section 117B is
             inapplicable and instead the relevant  code  will  usually  be
             found in section 117C.

         (2)  Does the applicant have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
             relationship with the child?

         (3)  Is the child a qualifying child as defined in section 117D?

         (4)  Is it unreasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  United
             Kingdom?

      1. If the answer to the first question is no, and to the  other  three
         questions is  yes,  the  conclusion  must  be  that  article  8  is
         infringed.

39. It appears to have been accepted on behalf of the respondent before the
    FTJ that it was not reasonable to expect either of the children in this
    case to leave the UK with the  appellant  to  go  to  India.   In  that
    context it is as well also to point out that the FTJ  referred  to  the
    respondent's guidance on the issue  of  'reasonableness'  in  expecting
    British citizen children to leave the UK.

40. MA (Pakistan) is unequivocal  in  terms  of  how  s.117B(6)  is  to  be
    applied.  There is no room for the contention, as suggested  on  behalf
    of the respondent before me, that where the suitability requirements of
    the Rules are not met, an appellant cannot take advantage of s.117B(6).
    That provision unequivocally applies to a person who is not  liable  to
    deportation.  If it  excluded  people  who  were  also  caught  by  the
    suitability requirements of the Rules it would have  said  so  (and  so
    would the Court of Appeal).

41. Accordingly, the FTJ was correct to allow the appeal with reference  to
    s.117B(6).

42. In all these circumstances, I am not satisfied that there is any  error
    of law in the FTJ's decision.  Insofar as it could  be  said  that  his
    decision betrayed a want of reasons in terms of  the  deception  point,
    any error of law in that respect is not material.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.   Its  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds is to stand.






Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            dated 8/05/18
