
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/19835/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard by Skype for Business          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 28 April 2021                     |On 07 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ABDOU CISSE
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD was represented by Ms Everett, Senior Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.  The appellant was  represented  by  Mr  Heeps,  of  McGlashan
    MacKay, Solicitors.  I am obliged to  both  representatives  for  their
    succinct submissions.

 3. The appellant identifies himself as having been born in the Ivory Coast
    on 28 June 1982, his father (with whom he has lost  touch)  being  from
    Mali, and his late mother from Senegal.

 4. By a decision dated  27  November  2019,  the  respondent  refused  the
    applicant leave as a stateless person, refused his claim on family  and
    private life grounds,  and  declined  to  revoke  a  deportation  order
    against him.

 5. A panel comprising FtT Judges Connal and J  C  Grant-Hutchison  allowed
    the appellant's appeal by a decision promulgated on 23 April 2020.

 6. The SSHD sought permission to appeal to the UT on grounds set out at [1
    - 8] of her application dated 14 July 2020.

 7. UT Judge Sheridan granted permission on 31 July 2020, on the view  that
    arguably the FtT failed to treat the  appellant's  claim  as  a  "limbo
    argument" and failed to analyse it according  to  the  guidance  in  RA
    (Iraq) v SSHD EWCA Civ 850.

 8. The appellant responded to the grounds as set out at [1 -  17]  of  his
    communication dated 26 April 2021.

 9. I was not referred directly to any passage in RA.  The present case  is
    not closely analogous to  the  "limbo"  issues  discussed  there.   The
    grounds rely also on Patel [2013] UKSC 72 and on  Shou  Lin  Xu  [2014]
    UKUT 375 for the proposition that the SSHD is entitled  to  proceed  on
    the basis that those unlawfully in the  UK  will  leave  of  their  own
    accord.

10.  The  FtT's  decision  was  based   on   the   "significant   practical
    difficulties" - see [36, 38, 40, and 54] - in removing or deporting him
    to Ivory Coast, or to Mali (or elsewhere; he has indicated in the  past
    that he is from Guinea, although he has  since  retreated  from  that).
    Although Mr Heeps made a subsidiary argument  that  the  outcome  could
    stand on other factors, this was a matter given  such  significance  by
    the panel that its decision could not withstand its excision.

11. The FtT's decision is detailed and meticulous in  all  other  respects.
    It is difficult to see that it might rationally  have  arrived  at  the
    same conclusion on very compelling circumstances, over  and  above  the
    exceptions in statute  and  in  the  immigration  rules,  but  for  the
    impracticality of removal.

12. The FtT might have defined  the  issue  more  clearly  as  whether  the
    appellant could not be removed through no fault of his  own,  in  which
    case the outcome discloses no  error;  or  only  because  of  his  non-
    cooperation, in  which  case  the  outcome  should  have  been  to  the
    contrary.  The SSHD is correct that persons unlawfully in  the  UK  are
    expected to leave, if they can,  and  cannot  benefit  from  their  own
    recalcitrance.

13. The FtT says that the "significant practical difficulties" in returning
    the appellant, "weigh against the public interest in his  deportation".
    Those passages might be read as if he benefits from those  difficulties
    even if he has contrived them.  On closer reading, however,  I  do  not
    consider that is what the FtT found.  Although the judges note that the
    appellant has given conflicting and unreliable information in the past,
    they accept his account as most recently given to them. At [37-38]  and
    at [39-40] they accept that he co-operated  in  procedure  respectively
    with the authorities of Ivory Coast and of Mali.

14. Ms Everett criticised the finding at [41] that there "is no requirement
    for the appellant to do more than he has done in completing the Ivorian
    ETD process and attending those interviews arranged by  the  respondent
    to date".  She was correct in her submission that the appellant has  an
    obligation to avail himself of any nationality to which he is entitled.
     However, the finding by the judges, reading their decision as a whole,
    is that he has done all he can.

15. The  grounds  found  on  the  conflicting  and  unreliable  information
    previously given by the appellant, but the judges noted that  position.
    While they might have been more explicit in resolving credibility, they
    were entitled to accept the evidence they had from  the  appellant  and
    his witnesses, and they plainly did so.

16. The SSHD's grounds resolve into insistence and  disagreement  with  the
    FtT on a matter of fact, rather than identification of error on a point
    of law.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

        Hugh Macleman

      28 April 2021
      UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.


