
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19808/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Leeds Combined Court Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2019                      |On 12 August 2019                    |
|Decision given at hearing            |                                     |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                     nm
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bazini, Counsel instructed by Riaz Khan & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge O R
    Williams who, following a  hearing  in  Manchester  in  December  2018,
    dismissed the human rights appeal of the appellant, subsequent  to  the
    refusal by the respondent of the appellant's human rights claim.

 2. The immigration history of the appellant is extensive.  It involves two
    unsuccessful appeals before, respectively,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Clayton and, the following year First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain.  The
    appellant had been disbelieved by those judges in respect of aspects of
    her claim to fear her ex-husband and other members  of  her  family  in
    Pakistan.

 3. The nature of the appeal before First-tier Tribunal Judge O R Williams,
    however, was somewhat different.  By the time of the  decision  against
    which the appellant was appealing, her son, ZA, had been in the  United
    Kingdom for over seven years.  He had come to this country aged  8  and
    at the time of the hearing before Judge O R Williams, he  was  16.   He
    had recently completed his GCSE exams in a school in the United Kingdom
    and had just done the first term of his two-year A Level course.

 4.  The  judge  in  essence  decided  that  the  appellant  and  ZA  could
    reasonably return to Pakistan.  The judge reached  that  conclusion  in
    the teeth of two experts' reports, which  pointed  to  the  son  facing
    significant difficulties if he were to be uprooted from his  school  in
    the United Kingdom and required to pick up his education  in  Pakistan.
    That was particularly problematic, given that ZA could speak some  Urdu
    with his mother  but  had  no  facility  in  reading  or  writing  that
    language.

 5.  The  overall  approach  of  the  judge  to  the  expert  evidence  was
    considerably  coloured  by  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had   been
    unsuccessful before Judges Clayton and Hussain and had been disbelieved
    by those judges in respect of elements of her claim at that time.   The
    judge's approach was also coloured by the judge's own view of  what  he
    took to be common knowledge in  the  public  domain  that  "whilst  the
    national language of Pakistan is Urdu, the English language  may  be/is
    used for  official  purposes  with  most  government  ministries  using
    English and it is also spoken by the country's 'elite'" (paragraph 29).



 6. The judge considered that the experts, Professor Akhter  and  Dr  Khan,
    had not considered the option of the appellant being privately educated
    in an English- medium school, which would give  him  access  to  higher
    education  and  government   jobs   that   require   English   language
    qualifications.  According to the judge, it was common  knowledge  that
    Pakistan has a number of international schools teaching in English.

 7. Mr Bazini's attack on the judge's overall findings has been mounted  in
    some detail.  It is no disrespect to Mr Bazini if I seek to  synthesize
    his submissions as follows.  So far as concerns the  relevance  of  the
    earlier decisions of Judges Clayton and Hussain, Mr  Bazini  points  to
    the fact that Judge O R Williams  referred  to  the  appellant  as  not
    having put forward a case that involved hostility from members  of  her
    family other than her husband.  That is not the position,  as  one  can
    see from those decisions, and in particular from paragraph  44  of  the
    decision of Judge Hussain, who notwithstanding that  he  did  not  find
    credible the appellant's claim to be in fear  of  her  ex-husband,  the
    father of ZA, nevertheless found that she had experienced the  physical
    hostility of at least one of her brothers.  There  was  also  evidence,
    not disbelieved in terms, that  another  brother  had  been  forced  by
    family pressure to distance himself from the appellant.

 8. Mr Bazini asserts that the  judge  could  not  possibly  extrapolate  a
    finding from this, which is central to the judge's decision,  that  the
    family, far from being hostile to the appellant, would be  willing  and
    able to fund the education in English of ZA, if he were  to  return  to
    Pakistan with his mother.  I  accept  that  submission.   Even  leaving
    aside the problems identified with the decision by Mr Bazini  regarding
    the relevance of the earlier decisions, we cannot infer from an absence
    of hostility the positive likelihood that the family would  assist  the
    appellant and ZA to the very material  extent  necessary  in  order  to
    support the judge's overall findings  regarding  education  for  ZA  in
    Pakistan.

 9. The other problem with the judge's decision concerns his  treatment  of
    the expert evidence.  Whilst it may the case that there are  facilities
    in Pakistan, albeit of a private kind, for  teaching  in  English,  the
    clear thrust of the reports of both of the experts was that removing ZA
    from his United Kingdom academic environment at this  particular  point
    would be damaging to him, since  even  if  he  were  to  be  taught  in
    English, he would have been removed in the middle of his A Level course
    and his lack of knowledge of Urdu would clearly  present  problems  for
    him, even though his education might be carried out in English.

10. One cannot avoid the inference that the judge, having taken against the
    appellant as a result of her unsuccessful attempts  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom by reference to allegations  regarding  her  ex-husband,
    then created a  scenario  in  which,  according  to  him  it  would  be
    reasonable, for the appellant and ZA to return.  Mr  Bazini  makes  the
    point that under the Immigration Rules and, I  would  add,  also  under
    section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,
    the focus is on whether it would be reasonable to expect  a  qualifying
    child, which ZA is, to return with the appellant  to  Pakistan.   There
    are various places in the judge's decision, beginning at paragraph  10,
    where he clearly conflates the assessment of the appellant, on the  one
    hand, and the assessment of ZA,  on  the  other,  in  a  way  which  is
    impermissible  under   the   relevant   rules   and   legislation,   as
    authoritatively  interpreted  by  the  Higher  Courts,   including   KO
    (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.  As a result of  these  errors,  the  judge's
    decision cannot stand. I set it aside.

11. I explored with the representatives the question as to  how  one  might
    proceed in the event of the judge's  decision  being  set  aside.   Mrs
    Petterson, with admirable candour, helpfully indicated that she saw  no
    reason for further oral evidence and she wished in that  event  not  to
    make any submissions on re-making.

12. I therefore re-make the decision on the basis of and  by  reference  to
    the written materials before me, including the  statement  of  ZA,  who
    gave evidence to the judge but whose evidence is not expressly recorded
    in the judge's decision.  I also have regard to the expert  reports  to
    which I have made reference.

13.  It seems to me that the position in Pakistan is of little relevance in
    a case of this kind.  We have here a boy who came to the United Kingdom
    at the age of 8 and whose formative years have been spent in the United
    Kingdom.  He is in the midst of  his  education  at  secondary  school.
    Even if ZA were able to return to Pakistan  and  to  find  by  whatever
    means access to the English-speaking academic environment that Judge  O
    R Williams thought would  be  there  for  him,  it  is  manifestly  the
    evidence of the experts that there would, nevertheless,  be  damage  to
    ZA's education.  One does not really need to be an expert to appreciate
    that that is so.  The judge made reference to the fact that parents can
    and will uproot children at various stages of their education in  order
    to seek work elsewhere or for other reasons.  That is  undoubtedly  the
    case; but we are here looking not at the free will of persons  but  the
    actions  of  the  State,  seen  through  the  prism  of  human   rights
    legislation.

14. Viewed in that light, it is in my  view  plain  that  ZA  would  suffer
    significantly if he were to be removed with his mother.   In  terms  of
    section 117B(6) and the related Immigration Rules, it  is  in  my  view
    manifest that it would not be reasonable for  that  to  happen.   Given
    that, the public interest in removing the  appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom evaporates for the reasons given  by  KO  (Nigeria)  and  other
    cases decided in its wake.

15. I therefore set aside the decision of the judge for error of law and re-
    make the decision by allowing it on human rights grounds.



Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                      Signed                     Date 2 August 2019


                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber
