
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19044/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 19 March 2018                   |On :  21 March 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                milagros [m]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Murphy, instructed by Juris Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born on 18  August  1959.
    She has been given permission to appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Fox dismissing her appeal against the  respondent's
    decision to refuse her application for leave to remain as a spouse.

 2. The appellant entered the UK on 23 July 2008 with leave to enter  as  a
    student and was subsequently granted  further  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student until 30 March 2013. An application for leave to remain outside
    the immigration rules was rejected on 22 March 2013 and an  application
    for leave to remain on family/private life grounds was  refused  on  31
    May 2013 with no right of appeal. A further application  for  leave  to
    remain on Article 8 grounds made on 24 September 2015 was  refused  and
    certified as clearly unfounded on 27 January 2016. On 4  May  2016  the
    appellant applied for leave to remain as a spouse.

 3. The appellant's application was refused on 22 July 2016. The respondent
    accepted  that  the  appellant  was  in  a   genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship with her partner [PG] but considered that  she  failed  to
    meet the eligibility requirements of the immigration rules under the 5-
    year partner route because  she  was  an  overstayer  and  because  the
    evidence  she  had  produced  did  not  meet   the   English   language
    requirements. The respondent considered that the appellant did not meet
    the requirements  of  EX.1.  of  Appendix  FM  because  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in the  Philippines.
    The respondent  considered  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    criteria in paragraph 276ADE(1) and that the appellant's  circumstances
    were not  exceptional  for  the  purposes  of  Article  8  outside  the
    immigration rules.

 4. The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox on  26
    May 2017. The judge considered the appellant's circumstances and  those
    of her husband  and  found  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements  of  the  immigration  rules  and  that  the  respondent's
    decision was proportionate and did  not  breach  her  Article  8  human
    rights. He accordingly dismissed the appeal.

 5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the  appellant
    on several grounds: firstly, that the judge had failed to give  reasons
    for  his  findings  that  she   did   not   qualify   under   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi); secondly, that the judge had failed to delineate between
    EX.1, paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) and Article  8  outside  the  immigration
    rules and referred to them interchangeably despite the  lower  test  in
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi); thirdly that the judge had failed  to  address
    Counsel's submissions on Chikwamba v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 40;  fourthly, that the judge had made  mistakes
    in respect of evidence given and events at the hearing with  regard  to
    her English language qualifications, the medical treatment available to
    her husband in the Philippines, the papers provided  to  the  Tribunal,
    her husband's ability  find  employment  in  the  Philippines  and  her
    intentions in regard to making an entry clearance application;  fifthly
    that the judge drew conclusions without explanation  or  evidence  with
    respect to her husband's medical condition; and sixthly that the  judge
    gave the perception of being biased against her.

 6. Permission was granted on 11 January 2018 on the second ground only, on
    the basis that the judge arguably applied too high a test  in  applying
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). The sixth ground was found in particular to be
    unarguable.

Appeal Hearing

 7. At the hearing it was confirmed that no application had  been  made  to
    the Upper Tribunal to renew the other grounds  seeking  permission.  Mr
    Murphy indicated, however, that if no error of law was found in respect
    of ground 2, he  would  seek  to  argue  the  other  grounds.  He  then
    proceeded to make submissions on ground 2, submitting that the  judge's
    reference   to   "exceptional   circumstances"   and    "insurmountable
    obstacles", at [12], [23], [24], [26],  [29]  and  [38]  alongside  his
    reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) showed that he had  conflated  the
    legal tests  in  EX.1,  Article  8  outside  the  rules  and  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) and had applied a higher test to paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
    and had materially erred in law.  Mr  Murphy  also  expressed  concerns
    about the judge's finding at [24] that the sponsor did not have serious
    health problems, when his GP's letter confirmed that he  suffered  from
    ischaemic heart disease and chronic kidney  disease  and  that  it  was
    advisable that he remained in the UK for health reasons.

 8. Mr Jarvis submitted that the judge had made clear  findings  about  the
    appellant's private  life  and  her  circumstances  on  return  to  the
    Philippines   which   were   in   substance   findings   on   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi). The judge considered the medical evidence and noted that
    the sponsor was still working and his condition had not worsened. There
    were no errors of law in the decision. Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal had no jurisdiction to consider the other grounds of appeal as
    permission was refused in the First-tier Tribunal with respect to those
    grounds and no application was made to renew the grounds in  the  Upper
    Tribunal in accordance with the Procedure Rules.

 9. Mr Murphy reiterated his submissions in response.

10. I advised the parties that I found no material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision in relation to ground 2. I did not permit Mr Murphy to
    argue the other grounds of appeal as no application had been  made  for
    permission to do so. My reasons for concluding as such are as follows.

Consideration and findings

11. As I stated at the hearing, I agree that the judge did not refer to the
    test of  "very  significant  obstacles  to  integration"  in  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi)   in   his   findings   and   referred   repeatedly    to
    "insurmountable obstacles" and  "exceptional  circumstances"  alongside
    references to paragraph 276ADE. I refer by way of example to [12], [29]
    and [38]. To that extent it seems to  me  that  the  judge  has  erred.
    However I do not consider such an error to be material in any  way.  It
    is  clear  that  the  judge  was  aware  of  the  test   in   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi), as a separate  consideration  to  paragraph  EX.1(a)  of
    Appendix FM and Article 8 outside the immigration rules, as he set that
    out clearly at [2] in the last four bullet points, when summarising the
    reasons for refusal. I also agree with Mr Jarvis that the  issue  is  a
    matter of form rather than substance and  that  the  substance  of  the
    relevant test in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) was in fact fully and properly
    considered and addressed by the judge.  At  [13]  and  [14]  the  judge
    addressed matters relevant to integration into the Philippines,  namely
    the appellant's period of residence outside the Philippines, her family
    ties in the Philippines and  her  ability  to  find  accommodation  and
    employment in the Philippines. At [16] and [23] the judge addressed the
    evidence of the appellant's husband's ability to  find  employment  and
    medical treatment in the Philippines. I find no  basis  for  concluding
    that the judge applied any higher test than was appropriate  in  making
    his findings on these matters. The judge plainly considered all aspects
    of the appellant's life and that of her husband  and  was  entitled  to
    conclude as he did.

12. As for Mr Murphy's concerns about  the  judge's  findings  at  [24]  in
    regard to the  sponsor's  health  problems  in  light  of  the  medical
    evidence, it seems to me that those findings were  made  further  to  a
    very detailed and careful consideration of all the  evidence  and  were
    fully and properly open to the judge.  The  judge  had  regard  to  the
    letter from the sponsor's GP at [20] and  his  observation  as  to  the
    limited assistance the letter provided was entirely apt,  in  my  view.
    Having regard to the letter at Annex 5 of the appeal bundle,  the  GP's
    view, that it was advisable for the sponsor to remain  in  the  UK  for
    health reasons, was without any explanation or detail and the judge was
    entitled to accord it limited weight. The  judge  also  considered  the
    detailed medical notes and the medication the sponsor  was  taking  and
    made appropriate  findings.  I  therefore  do  not  share  Mr  Murphy's
    concerns about the judge's findings on the sponsor's medical issues and
    note, in any event, that permission was not granted in respect to  that
    ground of challenge.

13. Finally, addressing Mr Murphy's submission that the  other  grounds  of
    appeal should be re-opened, I find no merit in such a  suggestion.  The
    First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  with  respect   to   the   permission
    application was specific in limiting the grounds upon which  permission
    was granted. That decision was issued to  the  parties  accompanied  by
    form IA68 which clearly  advised  that  an  application  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was to be made if permission were sought on grounds  on  which
    permission had been refused. No  application  was  made  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal to renew the grounds  seeking  permission.  It  would  not  be
    appropriate for the appellant to simply bypass the  requirement  for  a
    written application to the Upper Tribunal and, aside from any  question
    of the Tribunal's jurisdiction to re-open the grounds, I find no  basis
    for permitting her to do that.

14. For all of these reasons I  find  no  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision requiring it to be set aside. On the evidence before  him  the
    judge was fully and properly entitled to conclude  that  the  appellant
    could not meet the requirements in Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE(1)
    and that there were  no  circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of  leave
    outside the immigration rules on wider Article 8 grounds. Accordingly I
    uphold the judge's decision.

DECISION

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    an error on a point of law requiring it to be set aside.  The  decision
    to dismiss the appeal stands.

Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 19 March 2018
