
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19443/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th August 2019                            |On 11th September 2019        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                YAIMUDOW [M]
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge A L B Nixon, promulgated on 1st May 2019, following a hearing  at
    Birmingham on 4th April 2019.  In the determination, the judge  allowed
    the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State made an application for, and was granted, permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Gambia, is 59 years  of  age,  and  is  a
    female.  She was born on 21st June  1959.   She  appealed  against  the
    decision of the Respondent refusing her application for leave to remain
    on the basis of her Article 8 rights.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge observed that the Appellant, who had no family  remaining  in
    Gambia, could not show that there were very  significant  obstacles  to
    her  integration  into  that  country,  if  she  was  returned   there.
    Therefore, the Appellant could not succeed under  paragraph  276ADE  of
    Appendix FM.  However, the judge  went  on  to  consider  the  position
    outside the Immigration Rules and observed that the Appellant had  lost
    two children in tragic circumstances, and only had one child  now,  who
    has ILR in the UK and upon whom she is  dependent.   She  also  has  an
    elderly mother in the UK, who is extremely ill and is to a great extent
    reliant on the assistance of the Appellant.   At  the  same  time,  the
    Appellant had been in the UK for over sixteen years.  Although she  had
    lived in Gambia until she was 43, and did retain knowledge of the  life
    and language in that country, removing her to Gambia would  now  breach
    her Article 8 rights.

 4. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  failed  to  identify
    exceptional circumstances and appeared to conflate  private  life  with
    family life making no decision upon relationships of  dependency.   The
    judge also overemphasised  the  Appellant's  role  within  the  Gambian
    community in referring to UE (Nigeria) [2010]  EWCA  Civ  975.   In  so
    doing, the judge failed to incorporate the failure of the Appellant  to
    meet the relevant  Immigration  Rules,  as  a  weighty  factor  in  the
    proportionality assessment.

 6. On 21st May 2019 permission to appeal was granted, with the observation
    that paragraph 19 of the determination appeared  to  suggest  that  the
    only public interest factor was the Appellant's unlawful residence.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me, on 9th August 2019,  Mr  Reza,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, handed up a Rule 24 response,  which  he  said
    was missing from the papers and he would wish to rely upon.

 8. As this was the appeal of the Respondent Secretary of State, Mr McVeety
    relied upon the grounds of application.  He submitted  that  the  judge
    had flouted the established jurisprudence  of  Article  8  cases.   For
    example, the judge had given credit to the Appellant (at paragraph  19)
    for the fact that she spoke English, even though the  established  case
    law held that this was a neutral factor.  The  judge  had  also  stated
    that there were no public interest factors demanding her removal.  This
    overlooked the fact that Section 117B expressly  led  to  the  contrary
    conclusion.  Ultimately, if there was no evidence to allow  the  appeal
    under the Rules, it was difficult  to  see  how  the  appeal  could  be
    allowed outside the Immigration Rules.

 9. For his  part,  Mr  Reza  submitted  that  there  was  evidence  to  be
    considered under the Rules, which the judge did consider, but  went  on
    to reject; and it was this evidence that the judge was ultimately  able
    to take into account in allowing the appeal outside the  Rules.   There
    was nothing incongruous about that.  The evidence here in question  was
    the illness of the Appellant's mother (see the  Appellant's  bundle  at
    page 67).  There were also witness statements from the Appellant's  son
    and sister.  There were also supporting letters and  other  documentary
    evidence about the Appellant's role in the Gambian society.  The  judge
    had plainly concluded that the Appellant could not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

10. However, he had then gone on to consider  "exceptional  circumstances",
    and these included the Appellant's long residence, her personal tragedy
    of losing two children, her dependency on her only surviving child, and
    her care for her elderly mother.  The judge was entitled to take all of
    this into account in coming to the conclusion that the Appellant  could
    succeed outside the Immigration Rules.  The reference to the case of UE
    (Nigeria) was not illegitimate.  The judge was entitled  to  apply  the
    jurisprudence in this case.  Equally, the judge was  entitled  to  take
    into account a series of positive factors.

11. Although the judge did not refer to the case of  Rhuppiah  [2018]  UKSC
    58, what the Supreme Court said in that case was  relevant.   This  was
    that,

         "Although  a  court  or  Tribunal  should  have   regard   to   the
         consideration that little weight should be given  to  private  life
         established  in  [the  specified]  circumstances,  it  is  possible
         without violence to the  language  to  say  that  such  generalised
         normative guidance may be overridden  in  an  exceptional  case  by
         particularly strong features of the private life in question  ...".



    This is what the judge had done.  There was no error.

12. In reply, Mr McVeety submitted that the decision was not  open  to  the
    judge given that he had already concluded that the very high  threshold
    of "very significant obstacles" had not been met by the Appellant under
    the Immigration Rules.

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

14. The judge has plainly adopted the correct approach to the assessment of
    the  evidence  before  her.   She  begins  by  consideration   of   the
    Immigration Rules (at paragraph 16) and concludes  that  the  Appellant
    cannot succeed on the basis that there are very  significant  obstacles
    to her integration into the country.  Thereafter, the  judge  considers
    the position outside the Rules, and does make it clear that she has  to
    carry out "the necessary balancing  act"  and  to  "bear  in  mind  the
    provisions of Section 117B and keep in mind that this private life  was
    established while she was here unlawfully and therefore should  attract
    little weight" (paragraph 19).  There is nothing in this approach  that
    suggests that the judge has over-extended herself.  It is not the  case
    that the judge has actually attached any particular weight to the  fact
    that the Appellant is fluent in English because she simply states  that
    "I note that she speaks fluent English, has at no time claimed benefits
    and is of good character" (paragraph 19).  There is no suggestion  here
    that she has treated this particular finding  in  a  way  that  is  not
    anything more than just neutral.

15. In the same way, it is not the case that the judge has said that  there
    are no public interest factors.  What she has said is that "other  than
    the fact that she overstayed her lawful leave,  I  find  there  are  no
    public interest  factors  demanding  her  removal".   This  is  because
    "looking at the case in the round, I do not find  that  this  outweighs
    the positive factors I have set  out"  (paragraph  19).   The  positive
    factors in question are  that  the  Appellant  has  established  strong
    friendships in the UK, has played an active role in the community,  has
    been described by the president of the Gambian Community in  Birmingham
    as "one of the pillars of our society", and has played a  special  role
    in advising women and youths in difficulty and has won awards  for  her
    part.  She has appeared  on  BBC  television  promoting  Gambian  food.
    (Paragraph 19).

16. These factors, the judge considers alongside the  Appellant's  personal
    circumstances where "she has suffered the loss of her two  children  in
    tragic circumstances, leaving her with only one child, who has  ILR  in
    the UK" and has a "elderly mother, who is also in the UK, is  extremely
    ill, and is to  a  great  extent  reliant  on  the  assistance  of  the
    Appellant" (paragraph 17).  It was for  this  reason,  that  the  judge
    concludes that, "I find that it would be disproportionate to  the  need
    for effective immigration control to making  the  decision"  (paragraph
    19).  It is difficult to see why that decision  was  not  open  to  the
    judge on the evidence  that  the  judge  evaluated  in  the  particular
    circumstances of this case.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction is made.

19. This appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 10th September 2019
