
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19778/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 August 2019                    |On 4 September 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           mrs tania nkechi agbara
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                    Claimant

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Mahfuz, Counsel instructed by Global Solicitors
                    & Advocates

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Colin Chapman promulgated on 25 April 2019 allowing
    the claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State of
    12 September 2018 to refuse her application for leave to remain on  the
    basis that  EX.1  did  not  apply  and  there  were  no  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Rai on 24
    June 2019 on the  basis  that  it  was  arguable  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge failed to provide  adequate  reasons  why  the  claimant
    would face a kidnapping risk and failed to  consider  the  Foreign  and
    Commonwealth Office (FCO) advice and whether, if followed,  the  advice
    would be able to overcome the kidnapping risk.

 3. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set aside.  For the reasons  set  out  below,  I
    find there was an error of law of sufficient materiality to require the
    decision to be set aside and remade.

 4. Mr Avery points out that the judge's decision appears to be based  upon
    reliance on what is said to be FCO advice and that provides the support
    for the finding in relation to insurmountable obstacles; I was referred
    to paragraphs 57 to 65 of the decision where the judge  concludes  that
    it would not be safe for the sponsor as a  British  citizen  to  go  to
    Nigeria.  The judge considered submissions that the FCO advice did  not
    apply to all areas  of  Nigeria  but  referred  to  section  F  of  the
    appellant's  bundle,  said  to  be  the   published   policy   security
    information about abductions in Nigeria.  I do not know what  the  date
    of that was but Mr Mahfuz has produced today an up-to-date  extract  of
    the same advice. It was submitted to the judge that the FCO advice  was
    not reliable objective evidence to  show  that  the  sponsor  would  be
    targeted.  The judge relied on the principle that Home Office  guidance
    should normally be followed; that point has been made to me today by Mr
    Mahfuz in submissions.  However, the case he relies on, SF  and  Others
    (guidance post 2014 Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC),  is  about  a
    different issue.  In that case the Albanian appellants  relied  on  the
    Home Office's guidance as to whether it will be reasonable to expect  a
    British citizen child to leave the UK,  and the  court  concluded  that
    the Tribunal ought to take  the  Secretary  of  State's  guidance  into
    account, if it points clearly to a particular outcome  in  the  instant
    case, so that consistency be maintained between those cases that do and
    those that do not come before the Tribunal.

 5. The point made by Mr Avery in this regard  is  that  is  not  the  same
    situation as FCO travel advice which he points out is advice of caution
    aimed necessarily at the lowest common denominator, largely  applicable
    to tourists.  It is true to say that the document put before the  judge
    from gov.uk said that there was a  high  threat  of  kidnap  throughout
    Nigeria but reading the document further it is  clear  that  the  risks
    that were referred to are  geographically  located,  primarily  in  the
    Niger Delta.  Apparently some 117,000 people from the UK visit  Nigeria
    each year.  The complaint of the Secretary of State is that  there  was
    no proper risk assessment and the judge gave undue weight  to  the  FCO
    travel advice to reach a conclusion that was unbalanced.  I agreed with
    that submission.

 6. Of concern also is paragraph 61 of  the  decision.   There,  the  judge
    appears to have  done  something  of  his  own  research  in  citing  a
    paragraph from FCO travel advice referring to a link  and  a  paragraph
    that is set out headed, "When we advise against  foreign  travel".   Mr
    Mahfuz and Mr Avery have been unable to find what it was the judge  was
    actually looking at but it certainly was not material  put  before  the
    Tribunal; it was not part of the evidence.  The judge appears  to  have
    done his own internet research on the matter.

 7. Further, at paragraph 62 the judge says, "The latter sentence  of  this
    extract adds weight to the assessment provided in  travel  advice  that
    the risk of British nationals in Nigeria is at a high  level"  but  the
    last sentence of the quotation  cited refers to terrorism  and  states,
    "In the case of  terrorism  we  will  only  advise  against  travel  in
    situations  of  extreme  and  imminent  danger  where  the  threat   is
    sufficiently specific, etc."  It  is  not  clear  what  the  judge  was
    referring to. Mr Mahfuz referred  me  to  a  sentence  earlier  in  the
    extract which states:

         "We sometimes advise against all travel on all but essential travel
         to a particular place.   In  cases  of  non-terrorist  threat  like
         coups, civil unrest or natural disasters we advise  against  travel
         only when we consider the risk to British nationals is unacceptably
         high."

    It does not mention kidnapping.  It appears that the judge  was  unduly
    swayed by this extract, derived from  information  that  he  discovered
    apparently after the hearing so that it was not able to commented  upon
    by either parties' representatives.

 8. Looking at the evidence as a whole, whilst there are certainly risks in
    particular areas, they are largely in relation to tourists whereas  the
    appellant is not a tourist but a person who has lived  in  Nigeria  for
    most of her life and in any event she would not be returning to an area
    where the risks are said to be higher.

 9. In the circumstances I find  that  the  conclusions  of  the  judge  in
    relation to both the appellant and her  partner  as  to  insurmountable
    obstacles are not properly assessed, somewhat unbalanced and rather one-
    sided.  There was in fact no evidence to show there was any significant
    risk to someone  such  as  the  appellant.   In  the  circumstances,  I
    conclude that the Tribunal did not properly or adequately  engage  with
    the insurmountable obstacles test and therefore the decision is  flawed
    for error of law, cannot stand, and must be set aside to be remade.

10. Where a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside, Section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act requires either  the
    case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with directions or it  must
    be remade by the Upper Tribunal.  The scheme of the  Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the functions of primary fact-
    finding to the Upper Tribunal.  Where there is an error such as that in
    the present case, there has not  been  a  valid  determination  of  the
    issues.

11. In the circumstances and at the invitation and request of both  parties
    to re-list this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal,
    I do so on the basis that this is a case which  falls  squarely  within
    the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  at  paragraph  7.2   and
    therefore it is appropriate to remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal sitting at Birmingham for it to be determined afresh.
                  Signed[pic]


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 28 August 2019


Consequential Directions

    1. The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
       Birmingham.

    2. The appeal  is  to  be  decided  afresh  with  no  findings  of  fact
       preserved.

    3. It may be listed  before  any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  with  the
       exception of Judge Chapman and Judge Rai.

    4. The estimated length of hearing is three hours.

    5. The appellant is to ensure that all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
       contained within a single consolidated indexed and  paginated  bundle
       with all objective and subjective material together with any skeleton
       argument and copies of all case authorities to  be  relied  on.   The
       Tribunal is unlikely to accept materials submitted on the day of  the
       appeal hearing.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  in  the
Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014.  There has been no  application  and  in  the
circumstances I do not make an anonymity direction or order.

To the Respondent
Fee Award

In the light of my decision I make no fee award because  the  acumen  appeal
remains to be decided in the First-tier Tribunal.

                  Signed[pic]

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 28 August 2019
