
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19858/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 May 2021 via Teams             |On 16 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                         Mr Mubarak Hanif Adam Lala
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Y. Din, Counsel instructed by VRS Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to  /  not  objected
to by the parties.  The form of remote hearing was  V  (video).  A  face  to
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.


The documents that I was referred to were  primarily  the  bundle  from  the
proceedings before First-tier Tribunal, and a supplementary bundle  prepared
for the appeal before the Upper Tribunal,  the  contents  of  which  I  have
recorded.


The order made is described at the end of these reasons.


The parties said  this  about  the  process:  they  were  content  that  the
proceedings had been conducted fairly in their remote form.


 1. The appellant, Mubarak Hanif Adam Lala, is a citizen of India born on 1
    January  1999.  He  appeals  under  section  82  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") against a decision  of
    the Secretary of State dated 20  November  2019  to  refuse  his  human
    rights claim to remain in the United Kingdom, made on 30  August  2018.
    The appellant originally appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which,  in
    a decision promulgated by First-tier Tribunal Judge P  Hollingworth  on
    10 March 2020, dismissed his appeal.  At a hearing on 11 February 2021,
    I held that the decision of Judge Hollingworth involved the  making  of
    an error of law and set it aside with no findings of fact preserved.  I
    directed that the appeal be reheard in this tribunal. It was  in  those
    circumstances that the appeal came before me to be  heard  afresh.   My
    earlier judgment may be found in the Annex to this decision.

Factual background

 2. The appellant arrived in this country as a visitor  in  2015  with  his
    parents.  He was 16 years  old  at  the  time.   In  my  error  of  law
    decision, I outlined the relevant background in these terms:

         3.   The appellant is part of a  large  extended  family  who  live
         together or close by to one another  in  Leicester.   Much  of  the
         family life rotates around the  appellant's  elder  brother  Bilal.
         Bilal has a severe form of cerebral palsy and requires  around  the
         clock care.  The appellant's parents were granted leave  to  remain
         outside the Rules to care for him.

         4.   The appellant has a sister, Fatima, who arrived alongside  him
         in 2015.  She was then aged 19.  She  also  applied  for  leave  to
         remain outside the Immigration Rules, on the basis that as a single
         woman in Pakistan, she would face 'very significant  obstacles'  to
         her integration. Her application was  initially  refused,  but  her
         appeal against that decision was allowed, coincidentally, by  Judge
         Hollingworth.  In a decision promulgated  on  7  August  2019,  the
         judge found that Fatima would face 'very significant obstacles'  to
         her return to India as a single female woman, having considered the
         background materials relating to single women in Pakistan.   Fatima
         was granted leave to remain  outside  the  Rules.  She  appears  to
         continue to hold limited leave to remain in that capacity.

    It appears that Fatima was not a single woman facing  return  to  India
    alone, as Judge Hollingworth had held in the earlier appeal  concerning
    her human rights claim on the basis of the evidence presented to him on
    that occasion.  In his judgment in this  appellant's  case,  the  judge
    found that he had been misled,  that  the  family  (not  including  the
    appellant in this matter, or Bilal) had conspired to mislead  him.   On
    the evidence before the judge at this appellant's hearing, it was clear
    that Fatima had been  married  at  all  material  times.   For  present
    purposes, nothing turns on this prior deception.

 3. In these proceedings, the appellant claims that  he  would  face  "very
    significant obstacles" to his  integration  in  India  if  he  were  to
    return. He has not lived there since he was a child, and  he  would  be
    unable to cope on his own. He relies on the care  and  support  of  his
    extended family, with whom he lives,  in  this  country.  He  has  been
    diagnosed as experiencing a social anxiety disorder, which would  stand
    in the way of him being  able  to  develop  relationships  and  form  a
    private life of his own in India. His relationship with  Bilal  engages
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights ("the ECHR") as it
    goes beyond normal emotional ties,  he  submits,  and  the  nature  and
    quality of the dependency between the two is  such  that  it  would  be
    unjustifiably harsh for him to be removed, given the impact on both  of
    them.

 4. For the Secretary of State, Mr Walker contends that the appellant would
    be returning to his country of nationality, to a familiar language  and
    culture, where he would enjoy the ability to live  in  family  property
    that still exists there, close to his grandfather.  He  is  of  working
    age, and to the extent any medication is required to  assist  with  his
    condition, it would be available in India.  Mr Walker submits that  the
    appellant's family have conspired to evade immigration controls in this
    country, as demonstrated by their false evidence  in  Fatima's  appeal.
    This application is merely another example of that.  I  should  dismiss
    the appeal, he submits.

Legal framework

 5. This appeal is brought under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  The essential issue for my consideration is  whether  it
    would  be  proportionate  under  the  terms  of  Article  8(2)  of  the
    Convention for the appellant to be removed, in the light of the private
    and family life he claims to have established here.  This issue  is  to
    be addressed primarily through the lens of the respondent's Immigration
    Rules (in this case, paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)) and by reference  to  the
    requirements of Article 8 directly.  There are a  number  of  statutory
    public interest considerations that are set out in Part 5A of the  2002
    Act to which I must have regard.

 6. The appellant bears the burden of demonstrating that his removal  would
    engage Article 8 of the ECHR, to the balance of probabilities standard.
    Once he has demonstrated that article 8 would so be engaged, it is  for
    the Secretary of State to establish that any  interference  with  those
    rights would be justified.

Documentary evidence

 7. The appellant relied on the bundle  he  prepared  for  the  proceedings
    before the First-tier Tribunal, plus a  supplementary  bundle  prepared
    for these proceedings.  In  my  error  of  law  decision,  I  gave  the
    appellant permission to rely on new evidence, and in  any  event,  very
    fairly there was no objection from Mr Walker to him doing so before me.
     Mr Din prepared a helpful skeleton argument, featuring  hyperlinks  to
    background materials in relation to India.

 8. The supplementary bundle featured an expert psychological  report  from
    Ms Diana da Silva, dated 20 May 2021.



The hearing

 9. A feature of the appellant's case is that he experiences social anxiety
    disorder. Mr Din invited me to treat  the  appellant  as  a  vulnerable
    witness, which I did. The specific reasonable adjustments requested  by
    Mr Din were  to  avoid  complex  and  competitive  questions  in  cross
    examination, and to provide the appellant with the  opportunity  for  a
    break every 15 to 20 minutes. I am satisfied that Mr Walker  approached
    his cross-examination with his customary fairness, and I  ensured  that
    there were appropriate breaks throughout the proceedings  as  requested
    by Mr Din.

10. The appellant gave evidence and participated in the proceedings through
    a Gujarati interpreter. At the outset, I established that the appellant
    and interpreter could understand one another  and  communicate  through
    each other.

11. The appellant gave evidence and adopted the undated statement he relied
    upon before the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  his  supplementary  witness
    statement prepared for these proceedings dated 21 May 2021.  I  do  not
    propose to set out the evidence I had in detail in  this  decision  but
    will do outline the evidence I heard to the extent necessary  to  reach
    my findings and give reasons for them.

12. The hearing took place remotely in order to guard against the spread of
    Covid-19.  Following some initial technical difficulties,  all  parties
    were able fully to participate in the  proceedings  digitally.  At  the
    conclusion of the hearing, Mr Din and Mr  Walker  confirmed  that  they
    were content the proceedings have been conducted fairly in their remote
    form.

Discussion

13. I reached the following findings having considered the entirety of  the
    evidence and submissions, including those set out in Mr Din's  skeleton
    argument, in the round, to the balance of probabilities standard.

14. The appellant's private and family life rights under Article 8  of  the
    ECHR are plainly engaged.  He has lived here for over five years,  with
    his family.  He arrived as a child. His removal  would  interfere  with
    his private and family  life  rights  and  have  consequences  of  such
    severity so as to engage the operation of Article 8.  It  would  be  in
    accordance with the law, in the sense that it would be governed  by  an
    established legal framework, coupled with a right  of  appeal  to  this
    tribunal. It would be capable,  in  principle,  of  being  regarded  as
    "necessary  in  a  democratic  society"  for  one  of   the   permitted
    derogations listed in Article 8(2). The essential question  is  whether
    the appellant's removal would be  proportionate  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8(2). To assess that issue, I will address the  proportionality
    of the appellant's removal through the lens of the  Immigration  Rules,
    and then outside the rules.

Very significant obstacles -  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration
Rules

15. I will deal first with the report of Ms da Silva.  At paragraph 1.3  of
    her report, she concludes  that  the  appellant  experiences  a  social
    anxiety disorder (social phobia), which, in her view, makes it  "highly
    likely that [the appellant] will struggle if deported [sic] to  India."
    At paragraph 4.6, Ms da Silva records that the appellant  has  no  pre-
    existing medical  conditions,  and  that  he  denied  experiencing  any
    psychological issues  in  the  past.  He  is  very  worried  about  his
    immigration status and experiences  nightmares  about  his  removal  to
    India. The appellant is not displaying symptoms of depression,  but  he
    does suffer from moderate to  severe  symptoms  of  anxiety.  He  feels
    excessively anxious in different social situations, such as those where
    he has to meet unfamiliar people, having 'intimate' conversations  with
    colleagues, going out with friends, and performing in front of  others,
    such as presentations at college. He does not have any friends  outside
    his college, save for  his  brother  Bilal.  He  spends  all  his  time
    interacting with his relatives.  He fears negative evaluation by others
    and avoids interacting with them.  His palms become sweaty  with  fear,
    and, even before the pandemic, he avoided shaking hands.   His  anxiety
    is out of proportion to the actual threat posed by the social context.

16. The appellant does not experience any language impairment and displayed
    no cognitive abilities,  Ms  da  Silva  reported.  He  does  experience
    negative thoughts ahead of his possible removal to India. He presents a
    low suicide risk. Ms da Silva recommends cognitive behavioural  therapy
    ("CBT") as the primary treatment, although medication or a  short  term
    psychodynamic psychotherapy would be other, less effective, options.

17. The above conclusions appear to be within Ms da Silva's competence as a
    psychologist. However, appendix 5 of her report purports to discuss the
    appellant's likely ability to integrate upon his return to India, under
    the title "Will Mr Lila struggle as a lone muscle and  mail  in  India?
    Will he be exposed to criminals?" Later she addresses "Is  he  able  to
    cope by himself  in  India?"  and  "How  Mr  Lala  contributes  to  his
    brother's daily life? [Sic]" As Mr Din very fairly  accepted,  much  of
    the analysis  in  this  part  of  her  report  exceeds  Ms  da  Silva's
    competence.  The analysis that features in appendix 5 is  of  the  sort
    one would expect from a country expert (and possibly a  social  worker)
    not a psychologist. Ms da Silva does not purport to have any  expertise
    in relation to in-country conditions  in  India,  nor  in  relation  to
    appellant's relationship with Bilal, and therefore her  conclusions  in
    these respects attract less weight.

18. The overall weight of the da Silva report is lessened by  the  author's
    willingness to set out conclusions which  superficially  supported  the
    appellant's  case  on  matters  wholly  outside  her   expertise.   Her
    willingness to do so gives rise to concerns in relation to  the  weight
    the remaining aspects of  her  report  attract,  even  in  relation  to
    matters within her expertise.  However, I accept that the appellant  is
    an anxious individual.  The concrete examples given  by  the  da  Silva
    report relate primarily to presentations he has had to give a  college.
    I accept that meeting new people can be an anxious activity for him.  I
    accept Mr Din's submission that the conditions outlined in  the  report
    will impact the appellant's ability to integrate  upon  his  return  to
    India.

19. Under cross-examination, the appellant confirmed that there is a family
    property in India in the form of a family home, although added that  it
    is currently locked up and closed down and would have to be opened  up.
    His grandfather lives nearby in  India,  although  he  is  elderly  and
    infirm. The appellant's  family  in  this  country  would  support  him
    financially, in the event he were to return, he confirmed. In light  of
    this evidence, I find that the appellant would have  available  to  him
    property and funds upon his return. He is from a supportive family  and
    there is no evidence to demonstrate that the support they have provided
    him this  far  in  his  life  would  cease  upon  his  return.  As  his
    grandfather still lives in India, he would not be without  some  family
    assistance, although I accept that his grandfather is elderly, and that
    he would not enjoy the support currently provided by  his  parents  and
    wider family in this country.  While I have  no  reason  to  doubt  the
    appellant's subjective belief that he could not  cope  on  his  own  in
    India, that is not a fear that is grounded in objective reality.

20. Against that background,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant's  integration  would  be  faced   with   "very   significant
    obstacles"  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)   of   the
    Immigration Rules. Mr Din invites me to perform the  "broad  evaluative
    assessment" commended by Lord Justice Sales in Kamara  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 813; [2016]  4  WLR  152,
    addressing  the  ability  of   the   appellant   to   form   meaningful
    relationships, and establish  a  private  life  of  his  own  within  a
    reasonable period  of  time.   I  find  that  the  appellant  would  be
    returning to India with a firm command of  the  Gujarati  language,  as
    demonstrated by his reliance on the Gujarati interpreter to participate
    in the proceedings before  me.  He  is  plainly  familiar  with  Indian
    customs and culture, having lived in India until he was 15  years  old,
    and living in a large  extended  family  of  Indian  citizens  in  this
    country. He is 22 years old, and has studied computing in this country,
    and studied to secondary level in India. He does not have any  physical
    ailments.

21. Ms da Silva records at paragraph 4.6 of her report that  the  appellant
    has not reported conditions of this nature previously.   Her  operative
    conclusions do not reconcile this new and relatively  sudden  diagnosis
    with the absence of prior symptoms of social anxiety disorder.  In this
    respect, it is relevant that a significant feature of  the  appellant's
    anxiety, as confirmed by Ms da Silva, relates to the  prospect  of  his
    return. Of course, upon the appellant's return to  India,  the  anxiety
    concerning his immigration status, and the uncertainty that hangs  over
    him currently, will have come to an end.  That is not a factor  the  da
    Silva report considers.

22. I find that there is no reason why  the  appellant's  mother  or  other
    members of his family would not be able to return to India with him, at
    least initially. In her statement prepared for the  proceedings  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, his mother said at paragraph 11 that she would
    have to return to India  with  the  appellant,  suggesting  that  would
    entail leaving Bilal behind permanently. The family  have  that  option
    (as discussed further below), or his mother could return with the for a
    short period, or visit regularly, to assist with the initial period  of
    settling in.  Either way,  the  appellant  would  not  be  without  the
    support he needs to begin, and later complete, his integration.

23. Mr Din also relies on certain background country  materials  concerning
    the position of Muslims in India, as  a  religious  minority,  and  the
    provision of healthcare.

24. The respondent's Country Policy and Information Note India: Medical and
    healthcare  provision,  version  1.0,  October   2020   confirms   that
    escitalopram and sertraline, two of the drugs  recommended  by  the  da
    Silva report for the appellant's condition,  are  available  in  India.
    While it may be harder to secure CBT or other  psychological  treatment
    in India than in this  country,  medication  is  available  there.   In
    isolation, difficulties in receiving CBT in respect of a social anxiety
    disorder, when adequate alternative treatment would  be  available,  is
    not capable  of  meeting  the  high  threshold  for  very  "significant
    obstacles".

25. In her Country Policy and Information Note India: Religious minorities,
    version 2.0, May 2018, the respondent outlines reports  of  anti-Muslim
    violence.  Mr Din prays these reports, plus similar reports in  the  US
    State Department 2019 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: India,
    in aid of his argument that the appellant would face  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration.  I do not  accept  that  these  materials
    demonstrate the appellant's prospects of integration will be  met  with
    obstacles of the sort claimed. The evidence relied upon is incapable of
    demonstrating that the integration  of  a  young  Muslim  man  of  this
    appellant's likely profile would be affected to any significant  extent
    by the violence experienced by some Muslims in India.  Nothing  in  the
    appellant's  evidence   demonstrates   that   the   family   previously
    experienced difficulties in this respect, and although his  grandfather
    still lives  in  India,  there  are  no  reports  of  him  experiencing
    discrimination or persecution on that basis.

26. Drawing this analysis together, I accept that there will  be  obstacles
    to the appellant's integration of the sort many would face  upon  their
    involuntary  return  to  their  country  of  origin.    Some   may   be
    significant.  None will be very significant.  I  find  that,  with  the
    support of his family, whether on a remote  basis  or  in-country,  the
    appellant would not face very significant obstacles to his integration.
     There is no evidence that his Muslim faith  will  expose  him  to  the
    persecution   and   discrimination   experienced   by   some   Muslims.
    Establishing a private life in India would not entail very  significant
    hardship and will be possible  within  a  reasonable  period  of  time.
    Adopting a broad view of  his  likely  circumstances,  social  anxiety,
    housing,  cultural  awareness,  language  skills,  family   assistance,
    physical health, and the support from his grandmother, I do not  accept
    that the  appellant  would  face  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration in India.  I find he enjoys the capacity to form a  private
    life of his own within a reasonable period of time.

27. The appellant's Article 8 appeal cannot succeed on the  basis  that  he
    meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

Article 8 outside the rules

28. I accept that the appellant, Bilal, and the wider UK-based family enjoy
    Article 8 family life together.  They  are  siblings  and  have  always
    lived together since the appellant arrived in this country as a  child;
    family life does not suddenly cease to exist simply upon  reaching  the
    age of majority, especially in the context of a relationship  involving
    someone with health conditions as severe as those experienced by Bilal.
     The appellant assists with Bilal's care, and does so as a brother, out
    of  genuine  love.   The  appellant's  only  friends  are  his  family,
    including Bilal.  I accept that there is strong emotional  support  and
    dependence between Bilal and  the  appellant,  within  the  meaning  of
    Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003]  EWCA  Civ
    31.

29. The appellant revealed under  cross-examination  that  he  has  another
    brother, Sohel, who also  lives  in  the  family  home.   There  is  no
    evidence that the appellant and Sohel enjoy family  life  together  for
    Article  8  purposes;  the  appellant  does  not  mention  him  in  his
    statement.

30. The appellant, however, is not the sole carer for Bilal.   Professional
    carers attend four times each day.  Other members of the family assist.
     Until the pandemic, the appellant attended college, and  was  at  home
    much less.  The appellant's parents  also  assist  with  Bilal's  care.
    They have been granted compassionate leave to remain in order to do so.

31. To assess the proportionality of the prospective interference with  the
    appellant's private and family life Article 8 rights, I  will  adopt  a
    balance sheet approach.  In doing so, I ascribe no significance to  the
    appellant's family's deception before Judge Hollingworth; there  is  no
    evidence the appellant was part of that, and it is irrelevant  to  this
    proportionality assessment, which concerns his removal.

32. Factors in favour of the appellant's removal include:

          a.  The  public  interest  in  the   maintenance   of   effective
             immigration controls, which is a statutory consideration under
             section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act;


          b. The appellant does not meet any of  the  requirements  of  the
             Immigration Rules,  in  particular  he  would  not  face  very
             significant obstacles to his integration upon his return;


          c. The appellant would return to property  and  his  grandfather,
             with family financial support and with a firm command  of  the
             language, and an understanding of the culture and  customs  of
             his home region in India, where he grew up and lived until  as
             recently as 2015.  His mother would (and other family members)
             would be able to visit, or relocate to  be  with  him,  should
             they choose to do so;


          d. The appellant is in good physical health, and although he  has
             a moderate to severe social anxiety disorder,  the  presenting
             trigger for his symptoms,  namely  the  uncertainty  over  his
             immigration  status,  would  be  resolved  upon  his   return.
             Treatment is available in  India  for  his  condition  in  any
             event;


          e. The appellant does not speak English,  which  is  a  statutory
             consideration under section 117B(2) of the 2002  Act  relevant
             to his ability to integrate in this country.


33. Factors mitigating against the appellant's removal include:

          a. The appellant was brought here by his parents aged 15.   Given
             he was a child at the time, he cannot be held responsible  for
             decisions taken by  others  in  relation  to  his  immigration
             status as a child (however it was not until August  2018  that
             the appellant made a human rights claim, having  attained  the
             age of majority some 20 months earlier);


          b. The appellant enjoys family life with Bilal. Bilal's condition
             makes it highly unlikely that the  family  could  relocate  to
             India.  On the evidence before me, Bilal looks set  to  remain
             here for the foreseeable future.  Removal of the appellant  is
             likely to mean he will never live in the same country  as  his
             brother;


          c. The appellant enjoys family life with his parents and siblings
             living with him  (although  there  is  no  evidence  that  the
             appellant enjoys family life with Sohel, for the  purposes  of
             this analysis I will assume that he  does).   The  appellant's
             removal would entail separation from his family, including his
             mother, or, alternatively, his  mother  would  have  to  leave
             Bilal in the hands of  other  carers,  should  she  choose  to
             accompany him to India;


          d. The  appellant's  social  anxiety  disorder  will  place  some
             obstacles in the way of his integration in India,  albeit  not
             very  significant  obstacles.   Even  in  this  country,   the
             appellant's integration  is  limited,  as  his  life  revolves
             around his  family,  suggesting  that  without  those  support
             networks, his integration will face difficulties;


          e. The appellant has known only life as a child in India  (albeit
             not as a very young child, having lived  there  until  he  was
             16), and he currently enjoys the close support  and  provision
             of a large extended family household. By  contrast,  upon  his
             return to India he will be without that support, and will need
             to learn to look after himself to a significant extent, albeit
             that he will enjoy the presence of his grandfather,  at  least
             initially, and his mother will be able to visit, if not  other
             family members, too;


          f. There is no evidence that the  appellant  is  not  financially
             independent, which is a neutral factor under  section  117B(3)
             of the 2002 Act.


34. Drawing these factors together, I consider that the reasons  in  favour
    of the appellant's removal  outweigh  those  in  favour  of  him  being
    permitted to stay. He has no basis to stay under the Immigration Rules,
    and the public interest in the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is a weighty factor, capable  of  outweighing  the  cumulative
    force of the  considerations  set  out  above  mitigating  against  the
    appellant's  removal.  While  this  decision  is  likely  to  mean  the
    appellant and Bilal will not be able to live together in this  country,
    there is no reason why the appellant cannot make periodic return visits
    to see his brother, and  other  family  members.  The  mere  fact  that
    Article 8 is engaged on a family life basis  does  not  mean  that,  by
    definition,  removal  will  be  disproportionate.  The  social  anxiety
    disorder experienced by the appellant is not so severe as to render his
    removal unjustifiably harsh, even when combined with the other  factors
    set out above. Treatment will be  available  in  India.   There  is  no
    evidence that the appellant has a risk profile such that he will suffer
    discrimination on account of his faith.  His  mother  could  choose  to
    spend time with him in India, and while that would  mean  that  Bilal's
    care would have to be entrusted to others more than it is  at  present,
    that is a choice open to the family, and  at  no  time  will  Bilal  be
    without the care he needs.  I find that the appellant's removal will be
    proportionate. The appellant may be removed  from  the  United  Kingdom
    without breaching his rights under Article 8  of  the  convention,  nor
    those of the remaining family members in this country.

35. The Secretary of State has demonstrated that the interference that  the
    appellant's removal would entail to  his  Article  8  rights  would  be
    justified for the purposes of Article 8(2).

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed Stephen H Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

Date 28 May 2021



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed Stephen H Smith

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

Date 28 May 2021

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19858/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 February 2021                  |                                     |
|Extempore decision                   |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                           MUBARAK HANIF ADAM LALA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Y Din, Counsel, instructed by VRS Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M
    Hollingworth promulgated on 10 March 2020 dismissing an appeal  brought
    by the appellant against a decision of the respondent dated 20 November
    2019.  The respondent's decision was to refuse  the  appellant's  human
    rights claim made on 30 August 2018.



Factual Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 1 January 1999.  He arrived
    here in September 2015 aged 16.  He was brought here  by  his  parents,
    both of whom have subsequently been granted leave to remain outside the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. The appellant is part of a large extended family who live  together  or
    close by to one another in Leicester.  Much of the family life  rotates
    around the appellant's elder brother Bilal.  Bilal has a severe form of
    cerebral palsy and requires around the  clock  care.   The  appellant's
    parents were granted leave to remain outside the Rules to care for him.



 4. The appellant has a sister, Fatima, who arrived alongside him in  2015.
    She was then aged 19.  She also applied for leave to remain outside the
    Immigration Rules, on the basis that as a single woman in Pakistan, she
    would  face  'very  significant  obstacles'  to  her  integration.  Her
    application was initially refused, but her appeal against that decision
    was allowed, coincidentally, by  Judge  Hollingworth.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 7 August 2019, the judge found that  Fatima  would  face
    'very significant obstacles' to her return to India as a single  female
    woman, having considered the background materials  relating  to  single
    women in Pakistan.  Fatima was granted  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Rules. She appears to continue to hold limited leave to remain in  that
    capacity.

 5. It is now common ground that Judge Hollingworth was misled in  relation
    to Fatima's situation at her appeal.  Although she purported  to  be  a
    single woman who remained part of the family  unit  consisting  of  her
    parents, this appellant and Bilal, she had, in fact,  married  in  July
    2018, a year before that hearing in July 2019.  By the  time  of  those
    proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal,  Fatima  had  left  the  family
    home, and was living with her husband, not  far  from  the  appellant's
    home that he shares with his parents and with Bilal.

 6. Judge Hollingworth found in his decision  concerning  this  appellant's
    appeal that he had been 'gravely misled' in relation to the position of
    Fatima in her appeal (see [20]).

 7. The judge outlined the evidence that had been given  by  the  appellant
    and by his parents on this occasion.  The evidence related both to  the
    claimed difficulties the appellant contended he would  face  in  India,
    and also the role he performs in caring  for  Bilal  in  this  country.
    From the judge's operative reasoning, it is  clear  that  he  considers
    that he was misled by two of the witnesses in these proceedings  during
    Fatima's appeal.  The judge's sense of frustration is both palpable and
    understandable.  He concluded that none of the witnesses were  credible
    and the appeal must be dismissed.  He found  there  were  discrepancies
    between what the appellant had written in his statement concerning  the
    care he provided to Bilal and the extent to which  Fatima  visited  the
    family home, and the evidence that he  had  given  orally.   The  judge
    found at [23]:

         'The discrepancies to which I have referred above go to the core of
         the evidence with which I have been provided by the  appellant  and
         by his parents.  I do not find the appellant or his parents  to  be
         credible.  I reject their evidence.'

 8. Then, at [24] the judge concluded in these terms:

         'I do not find that it has been shown that  the  Immigration  Rules
         have been fulfilled.  I do not find that it  has  been  shown  that
         there would be any breach of Article 8 outside the Rules.   I  have
         rejected the evidence.'

    The judge dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of Appeal

 9. The grounds of appeal have two limbs.  Under the  first  limb,  Mr  Din
    contends that the judge erred in his credibility assessment by  holding
    against this appellant the evidence  that  his  parents  had  given  in
    Fatima's appeal.  The appellant had  not  given  evidence  in  Fatima's
    appeal.  He had not been part of those proceedings.  While Mr Din makes
    no complaint about the judge's assessment of  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's parents' evidence, he contends that it was  incumbent  upon
    the judge to conduct a proper analysis of the appellant's own  evidence
    in  these  proceedings,  in  particular  the  circumstances  that   the
    appellant claimed would face him upon his return to India.

10. That leads in to the second limb of the grounds of  appeal  pursued  by
    the appellant.  It is said that there was no assessment of whether  the
    appellant would face very significant obstacles to his own  integration
    in India.  Rather than engaging with the contents  of  the  appellant's
    witness statement and his oral evidence, the judge has simply  asserted
    that  the  Immigration  Rules  are  not  met  and  that  there  are  no
    requirements outside the Rules which would  justify  the  appeal  being
    allowed on that basis either.  The appellant is entitled to know why he
    has lost this appeal, Mr Din submits.  Mere  assertion  unsupported  by
    reasoning of any kind is insufficient he submits.

11. On behalf of the respondent, a Rule 24 notice was  sent  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 30 September 2020.  The respondent contends that the  judge
    was entitled to conclude that  the  witnesses  lacked  credibility  and
    that, in the absence of a factual foundation upon which the findings of
    the First-tier Tribunal could be based, it was open  to  the  judge  to
    dismiss the appeal in these  terms.   The  witnesses  did  not  give  a
    faithful or truthful account.  The judge is not to  be  criticised  for
    having dismissed the appeal.

Legal Framework

12. An appeal lies to this Tribunal on the basis of a finding an  error  of
    law rather than an error of fact.  Of course, certain  errors  of  fact
    may amount to errors of law, for example in circumstances where a judge
    failed to consider all relevant  considerations  or  where  the  weight
    ascribed to a consideration may properly be said to be irrational.   It
    is also well-established that a judge must give sufficient reasons  for
    reaching their decision.  It is trite law that the parties need to know
    the reasons for a judge's decision.

Discussion

13. In submissions, Mr Din, who did  not  appear  below,  sought  to  stray
    beyond the grounds of appeal in relation to which the appellant enjoyed
    permission to appeal.  He submitted that  it  was  incumbent  upon  the
    judge to conduct his own research into the contents of the respondent's
    Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  ('the  CPIN')  concerning  the
    appellant's return to Pakistan.  He  accepts  that  the  CPIN  was  not
    before the judge, but nevertheless submits that it was  incumbent  upon
    the judge to consider those matters of his own motion.

14. There is no merit to that  submission.   It  is  for  an  appellant  to
    establish their case to the balance of probabilities, and the  task  of
    doing so requires the reliance on evidence rather than  assertion.   It
    was incumbent upon the appellant to rely upon the  relevant  background
    materials.  The premise of this submission is deeply flawed, as  judges
    should not do their  own  evidential  research,  for  well  established
    reasons.

15. It is striking  that  in  Fatima's  appeal  there  had  been  extensive
    reliance on the background materials relating to single women in India,
    as is clear from the judgment in that  case.   Judge  Hollingworth  was
    clearly accustomed to engaging with detailed background information and
    applying it to the facts of a case.  It cannot be said that it  was  an
    error for the judge to fail to conduct  research  and  obtain  evidence
    which should have been provided by the  appellant.   Nothing  turns  on
    this aspect of Mr Din's submissions.

16. As I indicated during the course  of  argument,  Mr  Din  was  on  much
    stronger ground submitting that the judge simply failed to engage  with
    the evidence of the appellant.   While  the  judge  was  understandably
    shocked that he had been misled in such a brazen  way  during  Fatima's
    appeal, it was nevertheless incumbent  upon  him  to  engage  with  the
    detail of the appellant's evidence.  To the extent that the  judge  had
    credibility concerns with the appellant's  mother  and  father  arising
    from the evidence they had given in Fatima's  appeal,  he  should  have
    addressed those concerns in light of considering the  evidence  in  the
    case in the round.

17. However, it was  not  open  to  the  judge  impute  to  this  appellant
    credibility concerns arising from the evidence that his parents gave in
    separate proceedings when he was still a very young  man.   That  would
    have been irrational.  It is not clear  whether  the  judge  did  that,
    although  it  is  the  implication  from  the  frustration   which   is
    understandably  evident  from  the   concluding   paragraphs   of   his
    discussion.  However, the point that Mr Din makes in this respect is  a
    simpler one: the evidence adduced on behalf of the appellant  going  to
    his likely circumstances in India, a country he left as a minor, needed
    to be considered.  By failing to consider those matters the judge  fell
    into error.  He failed to make findings on a material matter.

18. I also accept Mr Din's submission that the  judge  simply  provided  no
    reasons for finding that the provisions of the Immigration  Rules  were
    not met.  On the judge's part at [24] there was simply a bold assertion
    with no underlying explanation.  That was an error.

19. It follows that the decision of the  judge  was  infected  by  material
    error in relation to the credibility assessment of  the  appellant  and
    the operative analysis of the appellant's case  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and outside the Rules.

20. Having considered the bases relied upon by the appellant for contending
    that there would be very significant obstacles to  his  integration  in
    India, while some judges may not allow an appeal on the basis  of  what
    the appellant sought to rely on, I cannot conclude at this  stage  that
    it would be impossible for the appellant  to  succeed  on  the  factual
    matrix that he advanced.

21. It therefore follows that the decision of Judge  Hollingworth  must  be
    set aside to the extent that it was flawed on the bases outlined above.
     As Mr Din very fairly accepted, there is no basis upon which he  could
    challenge the credibility  findings  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    parents and Fatima.  I therefore preserve all findings reached  by  the
    judge save for those relating to the appellant's circumstances in India
    and his own personal credibility.  I direct that this matter be reheard
    in the Upper Tribunal in  order  for  a  proper  consideration  of  the
    appellant's circumstances to take place and for those findings of  fact
    to be analysed through the appropriate provisions  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.  The decision  of  Judge  Hollingworth  involved  the
making of an error of law and is set aside save for the savings referred  to
above.

It will be reheard in the Upper Tribunal  with  a  time  estimate  of  three
hours, at a remote hearing.

If either party objects to the matter being resumed at a remote hearing,  it
must file and serve reasoned objections within 14 days of  being  sent  this
decision.

Within 28 days of being sent this decision, the appellant  is  to  file  and
serve on the Secretary of State any updated evidence upon which he seeks  to
rely at the resumed hearing, consisting of evidence specific to him and  the
care  he  currently  provides  for  Bilal  and,  if  relevant,  any  updated
background materials.

I direct a Gujarati interpreter.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed Stephen H Smith                                Date 11 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith
