
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number: HU/19459/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On Wednesday 25th November 2020               |On Wednesday 09th December 2020   |
|                                              |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L SMITH
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R THOMAS


                             THIR BAHADUR THAPA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Jaja, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant, who is 53 years of age, is Nepalese. He is married  and
      has two children aged 14 and 24.  His  wife  and  children  remain  in
      Nepal. The Appellant's mother, Phistimaya Thapa, is 89 years  of  age.
      Her late husband - the Appellant's  father  -  served  in  the  Gurkha
      Brigade from 1948 to 1964 and he died in Nepal in 2002.  She  obtained
      entry clearance for settlement as a Gurkha widow on 10th July 2014 and
      arrived in the United Kingdom in September of that year.


   2. The Appellant obtained entry clearance as a family visitor and entered
      the United Kingdom on 23rd October 2015  with  leave  until  29  March
      2016.  He applied for leave to remain on 7th March 2016 on the grounds
      that to remove him would involve a  disproportionate  interference  in
      the family life he enjoys in this country with his elderly mother. The
      Appellant relies in particular on  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
      'historic injustice' suffered by former soldiers of the Gurkha Brigade
      who had been treated less favourably than other comparable non-British
      Commonwealth soldiers  serving  in  the  British  army  by  not  being
      permitted to settle in the  United  Kingdom  on  completion  of  their
      service.

   3. The Respondent refused his application in a decision of 28th July 2016
      on the grounds that he did not have  a  family  life  in  the  UK  and
      therefore Article 8(1)  was  not  engaged.  On  13th  September  2019,
      Immigration  Judge  Kimnell  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal.   That
      decision was set aside on 10th March 2020 by the Upper Tribunal (Upper
      Tribunal Judges Craig and Smith) on the grounds that  it  involved  an
      error of law and directions were made  for  a  resumed  hearing.  That
      decision is appended below. The resumed hearing took place on  a  face
      to face basis on 25th November 2020.


   The Hearing

   4. In support  of  his  case,  the  Appellant  relied  upon  the  Amended
      Consolidated Bundle of Appellant's Evidence in Support. That contained
      his witness statement, two witness statements from his mother, letters
      from his wife and on behalf of two community organisations  with  whom
      the Appellant has been volunteering,  his  mother's  medical  records,
      banks statements, and information confirming his father's service.  He
      also relied on a Supplementary  Bundle  that  was  prepared  for  this
      hearing,  containing  an  updated  statement  from  his   mother,   an
      additional letter from her GP, and further financial  information.  We
      have considered carefully all that material.

   5. The Appellant gave oral evidence. He adopted his witness statement and
      was asked additional questions about the  recently  served  statements
      from Standard Chartered Bank in Nepal. In  cross-examination,  he  was
      asked: about the domestic and financial arrangements when he lived  in
      Nepal with his mother and wife and children: about the extent  of  the
      emotional support he provides in the UK to his mother: and  about  the
      extent to which he assists with her obtaining  medical  treatment  and
      with her day to day care. He was asked also about what  other  support
      was available to his mother, who would care for her if he got  a  job,
      and about why it was that there was a change to the original plan that
      she would return with him. We address his evidence  and  our  findings
      below.


   6. His mother, Phistimaya Thapa, also gave oral evidence. She adopted her
      statements. She is illiterate and very hard of hearing but was able to
      confirm through an interpreter that someone had read the statements to
      her and she had signed them. Ms Cunha  sensibly  confined  her  cross-
      examination to one area, namely the assistance she had  been  provided
      by a family friend whilst in the  UK  alone.  Again,  we  address  our
      findings on her evidence below.

   7. The parties made submissions and we reserved our judgment.


   Our Approach

   8. In Jitendra Rai v Entry Clearance Officer (New Delhi) [2017] EWCA  Civ
      320, the Court accepted the  Secretary  of  State's  submissions  that
      there were three stages of analysis in a case of this kind: first, the
      application of the Immigration Rules; second, the consideration of the
      Appellant's case under Article 8; and third, the question  of  whether
      there were exceptional circumstances under the policy.

   9. The  discretionary  policy  in  Rai  -  and  all  the  other  relevant
      authorities  to  which  we  have  been  referred  -  was  that   under
      Immigration Directorates' Instructions  ('IDI'),  Ch  15,  section  2A
      paragraph 13.2 and 'Annex A (of March 2010)' which provided:

           'Dependents
           ...
           Children over the age of 18 and other dependent  relatives  will
           not normally qualify for the exercise of discretion in line with
           the main applicant and would be expected to qualify for leave to
           enter or remain in the UK under the relevant  provision  of  the
           Immigration Rules, for example under paragraph 317, or under the
           provisions  of  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights  Act   [sic].
           Exceptional circumstances may be considered on a  case  by  case
           basis. For more  information  on  exceptional  circumstances  in
           which discretion may be exercised see Section 13.2.'

  10. That policy has been  superseded  and  we  have  to  consider  firstly
      whether the introduction of the policy now found in 'Annex K  -  Adult
      Dependent Children of Former Gurkhas' that applies to all applications
      after 5th January 2015 necessitates a different approach.  Whether  it
      has a substantive impact  on  our  decision  is  a  separate  question
      addressed as part of the proportionality assessment (at paragraphs 38-
      39 below).

  11. Annex K provides for adult children of former  Gurkhas  who  completed
      their service in the Brigade of Gurkhas of the  British  Army  between
      1948 and 1997 to be granted settlement in certain  circumstances.  The
      policy is available only to applicants outside the United Kingdom  and
      applies only to those under the age of 31. It  is  common  ground  the
      Appellant would not qualify given his age and of  course  this  is  an
      application for leave to remain, not enter. The concluding  paragraphs
      of Annex K are therefore pertinent:

           "Refusal Cases
           26. Where an application falls for refusal  under  this  policy,
           the decision maker must consider  whether  Article  8  otherwise
           requires them to be granted leave on the  basis  of  exceptional
           circumstances in  accordance  with  the  guidance  contained  in
           Appendix FM 1.0b: Family Life  (as  a  Partner  or  Parent)  and
           Private Life: 10- year Routes.

           27. As part of any proportionality aspect of this consideration,
           decision makers must take account of the following relevant case
           law:


           The Court of Appeal  confirmed  in  Gurung  &  Ors,  R  (on  the
           application of) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
           [2013] ECWA Civ 8 (21 January 2013) that the 'normal position is
           that they (adult dependent relatives) are expected to apply  for
           leave to enter or remain under the relevant  provisions  of  the
           Rules or under the provisions  of  Article  8  of  the  European
           Convention on Human Rights'.  The  Court  also  found  that  the
           historical injustice faced by  Gurkhas  who  were  not  able  to
           settle in the UK until 2009 should be taken into account  during
           the  Article  8  consideration  of  the   case   but   was   not
           determinative. If a Gurkha can show that, but for  the  historic
           injustice, he would have settled in the UK at a  time  when  his
           dependant (now) adult child would have been  able  to  accompany
           him as a dependant child under the age of 18, that is  a  strong
           reason for holding that it is proportionate to permit the  adult
           child to join his family now'.


           The Upper Tier Tribunal found in Ghising and others [2013]  UKUT
           00567 (IAC) that where it is found that  Article  8  is  engaged
           and, but for the historic wrong, the Appellant would  have  been
           settled in the UK long ago, this will ordinarily  determine  the
           outcome of the  Article  8  proportionality  assessment  in  the
           Appellant's  favour,  where  the  matters  relied  upon  by  the
           Secretary of State/entry clearance officer (ECO) consist  solely
           of the public interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy.




           If the Secretary of State/ECO can  point  to  matters  over  and
           above the public interest  in  maintaining  a  firm  immigration
           policy, which argue in favour of removal or the refusal of leave
           to enter, these matters must be given appropriate weight in  the
           balance in the Secretary of  State/ECO's  favour.  Thus,  a  bad
           immigration history  and/or  criminal  behaviour  may  still  be
           sufficient to outweigh  the  powerful  factors  bearing  on  the
           Appellant's side of the balance."

  12. On the face of Annex K, the three stages of analysis identified in Rai
      are now reduced to two stages, namely, a consideration  firstly  under
      the Immigration Rules and, secondly, under Article 8. But if there  is
      any distinction it is immaterial to this case: There is no  suggestion
      the Appellant falls within the Immigration Rules, and the approach  to
      Article 8 in Gurung and Ghising  and  others  (Gurkhas/BOCs:  historic
      wrong, weight) is expressly preserved by Annex K. The Appellant's case
      is squarely advanced on Article 8 grounds (as opposed to any  residual
      exceptionality) and neither advocate contends for anything other  than
      a conventional approach to Article 8.  The  requirement  to  take  the
      'historic  injustice'  into  account  has  always  been  part  of  the
      proportionality assessment under Article 8 and  was  not  required  as
      part of any 'exceptionality' consideration (see  Gurung  at  paragraph
      43).

  13. The approach we adopt therefore is to consider whether Article 8(1) is
      engaged by the family life the Appellant asserts he  enjoys  with  his
      elderly mother in the UK and, if it is, to consider whether,  pursuant
      to Article 8(2) the interference which would result from the Appellant
      being refused leave to remain is proportionate to the  legitimate  end
      sought to be achieved. It is as part of  that  striking  of  the  fair
      balance between the Article 8(1) right  and  the  public  interest  in
      maintaining a firm immigration policy that we must take  any  historic
      injustice into account.


   Is Article 8 engaged?

   The competing positions

  14. The Appellant gave evidence that he has always had a family life  with
      his mother: They lived together in Nepal as  a  family  unit  together
      with his own wife and children. They were mutually dependent  on  each
      other: He and his wife would provide emotional support to  his  mother
      and help her with her various ailments. He did work as a tutor but  he
      and his wife's income was very limited and the family  relied  heavily
      on his mother's pension to pay for their accommodation  and  household
      expenses. The recently served statements from Standard Chartered  Bank
      in Nepal show his mother's army widow's pension being  paid  into  the
      account and withdrawals in cash. The early withdrawals in 2015 were by
      him, and the withdrawals subsequently have been by his  wife  who  now
      relies on that  money.  In  response  to  questions  asked  in  cross-
      examination, he said that that is as far back as he was able to obtain
      electronically, and he would have to be physically present in Nepal to
      make an application for more historic statements. Asked to explain why
      his wife's letter did not mention the cash withdrawals or her reliance
      on the pension income, his evidence was that the purpose of the letter
      was to confirm she was his wife and that she understood his obligation
      to look after his mother.


  15. He and his mother both gave evidence  about  their  regular  telephone
      contact when they were living in separate countries. Since he came  to
      the United Kingdom, he has lived with his now particularly  frail  and
      elderly mother, cooked for her on a daily basis, taken her to  regular
      medical appointments and  acted  as  her  translator.  Despite  giving
      evidence through an interpreter, the Appellant provided  some  answers
      in English demonstrating a good working knowledge of the language  and
      the medical records confirm both that he acts as a translator and that
      communication had been difficult prior to his arrival. He obtains  and
      ensures she  is  able  to  take  her  medication.  He  is  financially
      dependent on his mother as he is not permitted to work in  the  United
      Kingdom. If granted leave to remain he would seek work, but in a  part
      time and flexible way to ensure he could  continue  to  care  for  his
      mother.

  16. It is said on his behalf by Ms Jaja that we should not forget that  in
      Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA  Civ
      31 the court was considering the extent to which family life  extended
      beyond cohabiting dependents where it was the norm to find  there  was
      family life. This submission was no doubt founded on Sedley LJ  citing
      with approval at paragraph 14 the Commission's observation in in  S  v
      United Kingdom (1984) 40 DR 196 to  the  effect  that  generally,  the
      protection  of  family  life  under  Article  8  involves   cohabiting
      dependents but that it may extend more widely if  there  were  further
      elements of dependence. Ms Jaja submits the Appellant's  co-habitation
      with his mother both in Nepal and the UK was and is strong evidence of
      family life and that would be the obvious conclusion that Article 8(1)
      was engaged. In any event, there was dependency in the sense of  real,
      committed, or effective support: he was financially dependent  on  his
      mother, and she was dependent  on  him  for  emotional  and  practical
      support and that was the case both in Nepal and now in the  UK.  Care,
      it  is  said,  should  be  taken  not  to   interpret   Kugathas   too
      restrictively.

  17. The Respondent did not accept, in its decision  letter,  that  Article
      8(1) was engaged 'with regard to your relationship with your mother in
      the UK'. However, at the resumed hearing, and having seen the  further
      evidence submitted for this hearing and heard the  oral  evidence,  Ms
      Cunha conceded on behalf of the Respondent that the required  standard
      of dependency is met and the Appellant does now enjoy  a  family  life
      with his mother in the UK. Article 8(1) is therefore engaged,  and  we
      must  go  on  to  consider   whether   any   interference   would   be
      proportionate. She submitted however that  whilst  the  Appellant  may
      have been cohabiting with his mother in Nepal prior to her  coming  to
      the UK in September 2014,  there  was  insufficient  evidence  of  the
      requisite dependency and, furthermore, there was no such dependency in
      the period his mother was in the UK alone between that  date  in  2014
      and the Appellant's arrival on 23rd October 2015.  This  would  be  of
      relevance, she submitted, when it  came  to  the  balancing  exercise,
      despite her concession on Article 8(1).

   The legal principles

  18. Given the procedural history to this case, and given the  approach  to
      the 'dependency' that engages Article 8(1) also has some relevance  to
      the discussion on the approach to 'historic injustice' as part of  the
      proportionality exercise under Article 8(2), it is necessary,  despite
      Ms Cunha's concession, to address our approach and  findings  on  this
      aspect of the case.


  19. The legal principles relevant to the issue of whether Article 8(1)  is
      engaged are, as noted by Lord Justice Lindblom  when  considering  the
      issue in Rai, now 'not controversial'. In Gurung, the Court  expressly
      endorsed (at paragraph 46), as 'useful' and as indicating 'the correct
      approach to be adopted', the Upper Tribunal's review of  the  relevant
      jurisprudence in paragraphs 50 to 62 of its determination  in  Ghising
      (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00377. In  Rai  (at
      paragraphs 16-20) the Court again  reviewed  the  authorities.  It  is
      unnecessary to review them in full here and it suffices  to  say  that
      they include the following key principles:

        i)  Dependency  should  be  read  as  'real'  or   'committed'   or
           'effective' support (Kugathas at paragraph 17).

       ii) Family life is not established between an adult  child  and  his
           surviving  parent  unless  something  more  exists  than  normal
           emotional ties of love and affection (Singh v Secretary of State
           for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630 at paragraph 24).

      iii) Such ties might exist if  the  appellant  is  dependent  on  his
           parent or family or vice versa (per Arden LJ at paragraph 24  of
           Kugathas).

       iv) Care must be taken not to interpret the  judgments  in  Kugathas
           too restrictively. There  is  no  requirement  for  evidence  of
           exceptional dependency (Ghising (family life - adults  -  Gurkha
           policy) at paragraph 56).

        v) The question of whether an individual enjoys family life is  one
           of fact and depends  on  a  careful  consideration  of  all  the
           relevant facts of a particular case. The issue  is  highly  fact
           sensitive and can result in different outcomes  in  cases  which
           have superficially similar features (Gurung, at  paragraphs  45-
           6).

  20. In Ganesh Pun (Nepal) & anr v The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2017] EWCA  Civ  2106,  the  Court  of  Appeal  considered
      whether, in a  case  involving  'historic  injustice'  there  was  any
      helpful distinction between 'private' and  'family'  life,  concluding
      (at paragraph 20):


           "The critical feature for the right  to  rely  on  the  historic
           injustice is dependency. Whether one categorises any  particular
           candidate for dependency as having a family life  or  a  private
           life may well  be  'arid  and  academic'  but  the  question  of
           dependency is vital."

   Findings

  21. Ms Cunha was right to concede that the Appellant does currently  enjoy
      a family life with his mother. We accept the Appellant's  evidence  as
      to the extent of the care he provides to his mother. She presented  as
      particularly frail. She will be 90 in January, is illiterate  and  has
      significant health difficulties. The Appellant's gave  clear  evidence
      as to his role in ensuring she obtains the treatment she requires  and
      his role in ensuring she obtains and  takes  the  correct  medication.
      They live together and he cooks meals for her on  a  daily  basis.  We
      accept his - and her - evidence as to the emotional support  which  he
      provides and that this,  along  with  the  practical  support  already
      mentioned, has meant her  physical  and  mental  health  has  improved
      considerably. There  is  independent  corroborative  evidence  of  the
      support he provides from members of the  community  and  the  GP,  and
      within the medical records.

  22. The Appellant is his mother's only carer. Her evidence  was  that  she
      had received some support from a friend called 'Bhim'  in  the  period
      when she was in the UK alone.  The  Appellant  explained  this  was  a
      'fellow villager' they had known for a number of years and that he had
      'helped her get stuff done'. She still spoke to 'Bhim'  and  he  would
      help her. There was no evidence that he had provided, nor was able  to
      provide, the intensity of care that  she  evidently  needs.  This  was
      clear from her evidence as to how, on  his  arrival,  the  Appellant's
      care and support resulted in marked improvements to  her  health.  The
      Appellant provides real, committed,  and  effective  support  and  his
      mother is dependent on the Appellant.

  23. The Appellant is also financially dependent on his mother. In the  UK,
      he is unable to work given the current restrictions on his ability  to
      work and they survive on the pension benefits she receives. Nationwide
      bank statements providing evidence  of  income  and  expenditure  were
      provided. The Appellant gave a  well-considered  and  sensible  answer
      about obtaining part time  work  with  flexible  shift  patterns  when
      pressed in cross-examination about whether  his  mother  would  remain
      dependent on him if he was able to work in the future.

  24. Article 8(1) is therefore  engaged.  Ms  Cunha's  submissions  on  the
      question of whether there was also family life in Nepal were  directed
      to the proportionality exercise and so we shall address this  evidence
      at that stage.


   Article 8(2): Is the interference proportionate?

  25. Once Article 8(1) is engaged, Lord Bingham in R (Razgar)  v  Secretary
      of State for the Home Department [2004]  2  AC  368  at  paragraph  17
      identified the five now familiar questions that must then be asked:


           "(1) will the proposed removal be an interference  by  a  public
           authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to  respect
           for his private or (as the case may be) family life?
           (2) If so, will such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
           gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?
           (3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
           (4) If so,  is  such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
           society in the interests of national security, public safety  or
           the economic well-being of the country, for  the  prevention  of
           disorder or crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or
           for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?
           (5) If so, is such interference proportionate to the  legitimate
           public end sought to be achieved?"

  26. If the Appellant was required to return to Nepal it would amount to an
      interference in the Article 8(1) right that has been engaged. It would
      not be reasonable to expect his mother, who is  exercising  rights  to
      settle in the UK much delayed as result of the historic injustice,  to
      leave the UK, particularly in light of her evident fragility  and  the
      extent of the treatment she is receiving. It is common ground that  it
      is the fifth of those questions on which we must focus. In  doing  so,
      we are required  by  Guring  and  Ghising  and  others  (Gurkhas/BOCs:
      historic wrong, weight) to take into account the historic injustice as
      part of the balancing exercise. We are also required to  consider  the
      public interest considerations applicable in all cases (section  117B,
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).

   The weight to be given to the historic injustice


  27. The extent to which the  historic  injustice  suffered  by  those  who
      served  with  the  Gurkha  Brigade  and  their  families  informs  the
      proportionality exercise is clear  from  Gurung,  Ghising  and  others
      (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong, weight), Jitendra Rai  and  Ganesh  Pun
      (Nepal): It is not a 'trump card' and it does not reverse  the  burden
      of proof as distinct from 'normal' Article 8 appeals. There is still a
      requirement to take into account the relevant factors, to weigh up the
      competing considerations on each side,  and  to  make  a  careful  and
      informed evaluation of the facts of a particular  case.  This  is  the
      familiar approach contended for by Lord Bingham in Huang  [2007]  UKHL
      11 and EB (Kosovo) v Home Secretary [2009] 1 AC 1159.

  28. That said, the Tribunal in Ghising and others (Gurkhas/BOCs:  historic
      wrong, weight) accepted the Appellant's submission that 'where Article
      8 is held to be engaged, and the fact that but for the historic  wrong
      the  Appellant  would  have  been  settled  in  the  UK  long  ago  is
      established,  this  will  ordinarily  determine  the  outcome  of  the
      proportionality  assessment;  and  determine  it  in  the  Appellant's
      favour'. The explanation for this was to be found in the weight to  be
      afforded to  the  historic  wrong  in  the  proportionality  balancing
      assessment:  'In  other  words,  the  historic  injustice  will  carry
      significant weight, on the Appellant's side of  the  balance,  and  is
      likely to outweigh the matters relied  on  by  the  Respondent,  where
      these consist solely of the public interest just described' [paragraph
      59]. The Tribunal concluded:

           "60.   Once  this  point  is  grasped,  it  can  immediately  be
           appreciated that there may be cases where Appellants  in  Gurkha
           cases will not succeed, even though their  family  life  engages
           Article 8(1) and the evidence shows they would have come to  the
           United Kingdom with their father, but  for  the  injustice  that
           prevented the latter from settling here  on  completion  of  his
           military service. If the Respondent can point  to  matters  over
           and  above  the  'public  interest  in  maintaining  of  a  firm
           immigration policy', which argue in favour  of  removal  or  the
           refusal of leave to  enter,  these  must  be  given  appropriate
           weight in the balance in the Respondent's favour.  Thus,  a  bad
           immigration history  and/or  criminal  behaviour  may  still  be
           sufficient to outweigh  the  powerful  factors  bearing  on  the
           Appellant's side. Being an adult child of a UK settled Gurkha ex-
           serviceman is, therefore, not a 'trump card', in the sense  that
           not every application by such a person will inevitably  succeed.
           But, if the Respondent is relying only upon the public  interest
           described by the Court of Appeal at paragraph  41  of  Gurung  ,
           then the weight to be  given  to  the  historic  injustice  will
           normally require a decision in the Appellant's favour."

   Is this a 'historic injustice' case?


  29. It is convenient  to  consider  therefore,  before  embarking  on  the
      balancing exercise, whether the Appellant can rely, as he seeks to do,
      on a compensatory approach to the historic injustice.

  30. The Appellant's mother explains in her evidence the family  sacrifices
      resulting from her husband's exemplary service in the Gurkha  Brigade;
      he was permitted only three years of accompanied service  which  meant
      they were separated for many years. She was proud of his  service  and
      her husband much admired the United Kingdom.  In evidence she explains
      the family's position thus:


           'I have taken up the right to come to the UK because my husband,
           the father of my son, never had the right to come  here.  If  he
           had, we would all be here already living together and living our
           lives.'

  31. In the absence of countervailing evidence, a statement that,  had  the
      opportunity been available, the former Gurkha would  have  settled  in
      the UK will normally be accepted (see Annex K, paragraph 17). A  delay
      between the announcement of the discretionary policy and the making of
      an application might  amount  to  such  countervailing  evidence.  The
      Appellant gave evidence that the delay between 2009 (when  the  policy
      was announced)  and  2014  (when  his  mother  arrived)  was  because,
      initially, his mother was not aware of the discretionary  policy.  She
      first heard about it by word of mouth  and  was  immediately  keen  to
      apply, but it was difficult to obtain legal advice in Nepal about  if,
      and how, she could make an application. We accept the evidence of  the
      intention to settle and the reasons for the delay. The 'but for'  test
      is therefore met.

  32. There is, however, a feature of this case that distinguishes  it  from
      Ghising and others (Gurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong,  weight)  and  the
      other authorities relating  to  former  Gurkha  soldiers  referred  to
      above. They involved dependent children whereas  the  family  life  on
      which  the  Appellant  relies  involves  a  mutual   dependency:   the
      Appellant's mother is dependent on him in terms of care and  emotional
      support, and the Appellant is dependent on her for financial  support.
      It has not been suggested to us by either advocate that this  has  any
      impact on the approach to the historic injustice, but  we  have  given
      the issue careful thought, nonetheless.

  33. Ms Jaja submits the historic injustice is the same in  both  types  of
      cases; 'but for' that injustice the Appellant's father would have come
      to the UK on discharge, the Appellant would have been born in the  UK,
      and he would now have been in a position to enjoy a family  life  with
      his mother (whether that amounted to him being dependent  on  her,  or
      she on him).

  34. The correcting of the historic injustice in Guring,  Ghising  and  Rai
      took place sufficiently  expeditiously  to  allow  the  appellants  to
      settle as dependent  adult  children.  But  how  dependency  manifests
      itself plainly can change over the  long  course  of  a  family  life.
      Depending on the date of discharge from the Gurkha Brigade,  a  family
      life now, if it exists, can be at different stages. As  we  emphasise,
      however, a compensatory approach to  the  historic  wrong  depends  on
      Article 8 having 'purchase' (per Sedley LJ at paragraph 14 of Patel  v
      Entry Clearance Officer (Mumbai) [2010] EWCA Civ 17). In  many  cases,
      as Sedley LJ recognised, the passage of time will mean it does not: if
      family life is 'only' the normal emotional ties of love and  affection
      it will not be possible to compensate for the historic injustice.  But
      where Article 8(1) rights do exist, an Appellant has a strong claim to
      have those  rights  vindicated  (Gurung,  at  paragraph  41).  If  the
      touchstone for  the  right  to  rely  on  the  historic  injustice  is
      dependency (Pun, paragraph 20), where  dependency  can  go  both  ways
      between generations (Arden LJ in Kugathas), and where that  dependency
      has been established, then we cannot see any basis on which to  divert
      from the approach in Gurung  and  Ghising  and  others  (Gurkhas/BOCs:
      historic wrong, weight).  Indeed, we did not understand  Ms  Cunha  to
      argue to the contrary.

   The balancing exercise on the particular facts of this case


  35. On behalf of the Appellant, Ms Jaja's submission is grounded firmly on
      the reasoning of the Tribunal in  Ghising  and  others  (Gurkhas/BOCs:
      historic wrong, weight) at paragraph 60. She  submits  the  Respondent
      has not pointed to any factors over and above the public  interest  in
      maintaining a firm immigration policy. There is no evidence of the bad
      immigration history or criminal behaviour that would  be  required  to
      outweigh the powerful factors bearing on the Appellant's side,  namely
      the historic injustice. In those circumstances, the weight to be given
      to the historic injustice will normally  require  a  decision  in  the
      Appellant's favour and requires one in this case.

  36. We are grateful to Ms Cunha for her careful submissions  on  what  she
      characterised as a 'finely balanced' case. She  did  not  suggest  the
      Respondent was relying on  additional  features  over  and  above  the
      importance of maintaining a firm immigration policy but  stressed  the
      importance of that policy. She also  submitted,  correctly,  that  the
      balancing exercise still needs to  be  undertaken  even  in  cases  of
      historic injustice. The features  she  submitted  meant  the  historic
      injustice should not, on the particular facts of this case, require  a
      decision in the Appellant's favour were two-fold:

  37. Firstly, Ms Cunha submitted that Annex  K  had  operated   to  address
      further the historic injustice and that whilst cases  falling  outside
      the policy could be considered under Article  8,  a  more  restrictive
      approach than adopted in Ghising and  others  (Gurkhas/BOCs:  historic
      wrong, weight) would  now  be  appropriate.  We  understood  that,  in
      effect, this meant less weight should  be  afforded  to  the  historic
      injustice.

  38. The  difficulty  with  this  submission  is  that  Annex  K  expressly
      preserves, for those not falling within the policy,  the  approach  to
      the  proportionality  exercise  in  Gurung  and  Ghising  and   others
      (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong, weight), and goes as far as to  repeat,
      in particular, the conclusions in paragraph 60 of the latter  judgment
      to which we have made reference. In those circumstances, we  take  the
      view that Annex K does not require us, or even permit us,  to  take  a
      different approach.

  39.  Secondly,  the  Appellant's  family  life,  on  her  submission,  was
      established only in the UK and at a time when the Appellant had  leave
      to remain only for a limited period. We find the Appellant has been in
      the United Kingdom lawfully. He  applied  for  Entry  Clearance  as  a
      visitor and we accept the evidence  of  both  the  Appellant  and  his
      mother that the intention at the time was for them to return  together
      to Nepal. We also accept  the  Appellant's  explanation  that  it  was
      evident to him upon arrival that his mother's poor health necessitated
      treatment and that she was not in a position to travel. Because of the
      support she received from him (as outlined above) her health improved.
      She then decided she wanted and needed to stay in the  United  Kingdom
      because of the treatment  she  was  receiving  as  well  as  financial
      benefits and  because  of  other  factors  including  a  lack  of  air
      pollution. His mother was frank in her evidence that, in addition, her
      son's then presence in the UK was also a reason why  she  changed  her
      mind.

  40. At one stage during the hearing, there  appeared  to  be  a  tentative
      suggestion from Ms Cunha that the Appellant had not in  fact  intended
      to return when applying for Entry Clearance. Mindful of  the  comments
      made by the Tribunal at paragraph 61 of Ghising, Ms Cunha was asked to
      clarify whether she was suggesting the Appellant had misled the  Entry
      Clearance Officer. She confirmed that she was not. Her submission  was
      instead that the family life he enjoys in the UK was established at  a
      time when the Appellant's immigration status  was  precarious  (albeit
      lawful) and should thus be given little weight.


  41. There was something of a paucity of evidence as to the exact nature of
      the family life in Nepal. That was no doubt because the focus  of  the
      Appellant's case was on whether Article 8(1) was engaged  now.  Having
      considered the matter carefully, we take the view it is unnecessary to
      reach any factual findings as to the position in Nepal now  more  than
      five years ago. We note that  the  appellant  in  Ghising  and  others
      (Gurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong, weight)  had  come  to  the  UK  for  a
      temporary purpose before making an application for  leave  to  remain.
      Even on the assumption that Ms  Cunha  is  correct  that  family  life
      commenced only in the UK and whilst he had limited leave, this is  not
      something that should be accorded  sufficient  weight  such  that  the
      significant weight we are required to give to the  historic  injustice
      is displaced to  the  extent  a  different  conclusion  than  the  one
      'normally require[d]' is appropriate.

  42. Of the other considerations we are required by  section  117B  of  the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to take into account,  we
      have recorded above the  Appellant's  ability  to  speak  English  and
      accept his evidence of being willing and able to obtain  work.  Whilst
      he is dependent currently on the benefits which his  mother  receives,
      that is not a factor which weighs against him as she would be entitled
      to those benefits irrespective of his presence.

  43. Having accepted this is a case in which we must take  account  of  the
      historic injustice, and having conducted the  balancing  exercise,  we
      have taken the same approach  as  the  Tribunal  in  paragraph  60  of
      Ghising  and  others  (Gurkhas/BOCs:  historic  wrong,   weight)   and
      concluded that in this case the historic  injustice  suffered  by  the
      Appellant and his mother outweighs the interests of  maintaining  firm
      immigration control and therefore the interference in the Article 8(1)
      right is disproportionate. It follows  the  Respondent's  decision  is
      unlawful as contrary to Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.


Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).





Signed      Richard Thomas

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  R  Thomas                Dated:  30th  November
2020


                                  APPENDIX

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/19459/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Tuesday 18 February 2020                   |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             THIR BAHADUR THAPA
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:  Ms R Bassi, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     Ms A Jaja, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
                 Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      BACKGROUND


    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference,
       we refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.
        The Respondent appeals against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Kimnell promulgated on  13  September  2019  ("the  Decision")
       allowing the Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds  (Article  8
       ECHR).  The Appellant is a national  of  Nepal.   His  human  rights
       claim is based on his relationship with his mother who is settled in
       the UK as the widow of a Gurkha  soldier.   The  Appellant's  father
       died in 2002.  He served in the Gurkha forces  from  1948  to  1964.
       The Appellant's mother came to the UK in 2014.


    2. The Appellant is aged fifty-two years.  He has a wife  and  children
       still living in Nepal.  He entered the UK as a family visitor on  23
       October 2015 with leave until 29 March 2016.  He applied  to  remain
       on family and private life grounds on 7 March 2016.  The  Respondent
       refused that application on 28 July 2016.  It is common ground  that
       the Appellant does not qualify on the basis of  his  status  as  the
       child of a former Gurkha soldier under the  Immigration  Directorate
       Instructions at Annex K ("the Annex K policy") as that  policy  only
       applies to applications for entry clearance and only to  those  aged
       between eighteen and thirty years.  Nonetheless, it is said  on  the
       Appellant's behalf that he qualifies for leave to  remain  based  on
       the historic wrong done to Gurkha veterans and their families.


    3. The appeal was initially determined by the First-tier Tribunal on 18
       April 2018, but that decision was set aside by  the  Upper  Tribunal
       and the appeal remitted for re-hearing.

    4.  Judge  Kimnell  accepted  that  family  life  existed  between  the
       Appellant and his mother on the basis of his mother's dependency  on
       the Appellant due to her age  and  state  of  health  ([19]  of  the
       Decision).  Having so found, the  Judge  determined  that  no  other
       issues arose  in  relation  to  proportionality  ([25]).   That  was
       notwithstanding the acceptance by the Judge at [19] of the  Decision
       that "the appellant and  his  mother  may  not  have  been  entirely
       straightforward with the Entry Clearance Officer when the visit visa
       was applied for".


    5. The Respondent challenges the Decision on two grounds.  First, it is
       said that the Judge has failed to provide any  or  adequate  reasons
       for the finding that  family  life  is  established  in  this  case.
       Second, it is said  that  the  Judge  has  failed  to  consider  the
       proportionality of the decision refusing leave to remain.


    6. Permission to appeal was granted by Resident Judge J F W Phillips on
       24 December 2019 in the following terms so far as relevant:


           "..3. So far as the first ground is concerned  in  finding  that
           family life exists between the  Appellant  and  his  mother  the
           Judge gives the reasons at paragraph 19 and to an extent in  the
           following paragraphs.  The critical sentence is 'the Appellant's
           mother is heavily dependent upon her son because of her age  and
           state  of  health'.   It  may  be  arguable  that  in  assessing
           dependency the Judge has failed to explain why the support  that
           the  Appellant's  mother  received  from  others  prior  to  the
           Appellant's arrival has been take on by the Appellant.
           4.    The stronger ground is the second one.  Having found  that
           Article 8.1 is engaged the Judge does not appear  to  deal  with
           Article 8.2 proportionality at all or  to  conduct  a  balancing
           exercise.  This is an arguable error of law.
           5.    Permission to appeal is granted."


    7. The matter  comes  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  Decision
       contains a material error of law and, if it  does,  to  re-make  the
       decision or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.


    THE EVIDENCE AND THE DECISION


    8. Before we turn to consider the grounds, it is appropriate to set out
       the relevant passages of the Decision so that the  discussion  which
       follows can be understood in context.


    9. The issues which arose based on the parties' cases  are  principally
       set out at [2], [5] and [7] of the Decision as follows:

           "2.   ...It  was  asserted  that  the  appellant  qualified  for
           indefinite leave to remain in the UK as the  adult  child  of  a
           Gurkha veteran, notwithstanding that he had a family of his  own
           who continue to reside in Nepal."
           "5.   It was accepted that the appellant's father had served  as
           a Gurkha from 1948 to 1964 and that he died in  Nepal  in  2002.
           It was accepted that the appellant's mother had been issued with
           entry clearance for settlement as a Gurkha widow on 10 July 2014
           and that she  entered  the  UK  about  two  months  later.   The
           appellant does not  qualify  for  leave  under  the  Immigration
           Directorate Instructions at Annex K.  The policy applied only to
           applications for entry clearance made from  outside  the  United
           Kingdom.  The policy applied to applicants age  between  18  and
           30, whereas  the  appellant  at  that  time  was  age  49.   The
           appellant  was  not  considered   financially   or   emotionally
           dependent on the former Gurkha, his father having  died  several
           years before.  The appellant  had  also  formed  an  independent
           family unit, having a wife and child in Nepal."
           "7.   When considering a proportionality exercise on  Article  8
           principles  outside  the  Immigration  Rules,   the   respondent
           acknowledged that where Article 8 is found  to  be  engaged  and
           where the appellant would have been settled in the UK long  ago,
           that would ordinarily determine the outcome  of  any  Article  8
           proportionality assessment in the appellant's  favour.   If  the
           Secretary of State can, however, point to matters over and above
           the public interest in maintaining  a  firm  immigration  policy
           which argue in favour of removal  or  refusal  of  leave,  those
           matters are  to  be  given  appropriate  weight.   Thus,  a  bad
           immigration  history  or  criminal  behaviour   may   still   be
           sufficient to outweigh the factors on the  appellant's  side  of
           the balance.  Since the appellant has a wife and child living in
           Nepal it was not accepted that Article 8 was engaged in relation
           to the appellant's mother in the UK.   The  appellant's  private
           and family life was firmly established in Nepal."

   10. It was common ground that  the  Appellant  is  unable  to  meet  the
       Immigration Rules ("the Rules") based on his family  life  with  his
       mother.  It is also common ground that the Appellant cannot  succeed
       under the Annex K policy.  If the Appellant is entitled  to  succeed
       in his appeal, he can do so only based  on  Article  8  outside  the
       Rules.   Having set out the competing  cases  as  above,  the  Judge
       summarised what he saw as the issues at  [18]  of  the  Decision  as
       follows:


           "...The principal issue in contention  between  the  parties  is
           whether or not there is family life  in  existence  between  the
           appellant  and  his  mother  since  both  are  adults,  and  the
           appellant has another family  unit,  i.e.  his  wife  and  child
           residing in Nepal."


   11. The evidence is set out in short summary at  [13]  to  [16]  of  the
       Decision:


           "13.  I heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  who  adopted  his
           witness statement which he had read and which he confirmed to be
           true.  The appellant's parents lived with him  in  Nepal  before
           the death of his father.  The appellant's  mother  having  heard
           about the United Kingdom from her husband wanted to come to  the
           UK.  The appellant is unable to find employment or have recourse
           to public funds because of the conditions attached to his  entry
           clearance but if the appeal is  successful,  he  will  look  for
           employment and indeed has a job offer.
           14.   The appellant gave  evidence  about  the  content  of  the
           medical documents from  page  7  of  the  bundle  onwards.   The
           records show that he has been present with his mother  when  she
           keeps medical appointments.  Before  his  arrival,  friends  and
           neighbours would accompany the appellant's  mother  to  hospital
           appointments.  Where there is reference on page 18 to a brother,
           it is in fact a neighbour.
           15.   The appellant has three brothers residing in Nepal.
           16.    I  also  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant's  mother,
           Phistimaya Thapa, who adopted her witness statement as evidence-
           in-chief."


   12. The Judge's findings then appear at [19] to [26] of the Decision  as
       follows:


           "19.  It is obvious that family  life  does  exist  between  the
           appellant and his mother on the facts of this  case.   There  is
           more than the normal emotional and practical dependence that one
           might expect to find between an adult child and a  parent.   The
           appellant and his mother have been residing together  under  the
           same  roof  for  a  period  of  almost   exactly   four   years.
           Importantly, the appellant's mother is  heavily  dependent  upon
           her son because of her age and state of health.  I am afraid the
           appellant  and  his  mother   may   not   have   been   entirely
           straightforward with the Entry Clearance Officer when the  visit
           visa was applied for because an indication was  given  that  the
           appellant's mother was unhappy with life in the  United  Kingdom
           and wished to return to Nepal  with  her  son,  whereas  in  her
           current statement at paragraph 5, Mrs Thapa says that there life
           was far better in the UK than it was in Nepal.  She does say  at
           paragraph 6 that she wanted to return to Nepal to see her family
           and at paragraph 9 that the appellant came to the UK  to  return
           to Nepal with her,  but  of  course  once  the  appellant's  son
           arrived in the United Kingdom his mother was able to  enjoy  the
           improvements in her life that her son gave her, for example, the
           practical and emotional support he gives her day by day and also
           his ability to help her with language and visits to the hospital
           and general practitioner for treatment.
           20.   The appellant's mother refers to the medication she  takes
           regularly to control her blood pressure, cholesterol  and  other
           ailments (paragraph 5).  She refers at  paragraph  8  to  having
           difficulty remembering the dates of  her  appointments  and  she
           found it hard to keep her documents in order and to  answer  the
           telephone.  Circumstances have improved now her son  resides  in
           the UK.
           21.   In her closing submission Ms Jaja drew  attention  to  the
           identity of those accompanying the appellant's mother  when  she
           kept  her  medical  appointments.   It  is  apparent  that   the
           appellant has been a constant support to his  mother  since  his
           arrival.
           22.   There is further evidence from the Musgrove  Park  Medical
           Centre at page 5 of the bundle, which is  more  or  less  up  to
           date, as to his mother's various health issues.
           23.   It is also apparent from the  documents,  for  example  at
           page 21, that without her son to help her communication  between
           Mrs Thapa and the practitioners is very difficult.
           24.   The degree of emotional and practical  dependency  on  the
           appellant is sufficient to engage Article 8 notwithstanding  the
           fact that the appellant has a wife and child  living  in  Nepal.
           It is possible to have family life with more than one person and
           in more than one place.  I find Article 8 ECHR is engaged.
           25.   As the respondent said in the refusal letter there may  be
           reasons such as criminality or a bad  immigration  history  why,
           notwithstanding the engagement of Article 8, it is proportionate
           to refuse leave, but no such consideration applies in this case.
            Therefore, the proportionality  balancing  exercise  is  to  be
           resolved in the appellant's favour.
           26.   Section 117B factors include  the  fact  that  significant
           weight attaches to the maintenance of immigration  control,  but
           that was taken  into  account  by  the  Court  of  Appeal.   The
           appellant's linguistic ability is not in  evidence,  but  he  is
           capable of maintaining himself without being a burden on  public
           funds.  There are no minor children's best interests in play  in
           this case."


       Based on that analysis, the appeal was allowed on Article 8 grounds.
       We will need to return to the Judge's findings at [19] and  [25]  of
       the Decision in particular in the discussion which follows.


   13. Before turning to the relevant law, we also need  to  say  something
       about the Respondent's decision under appeal since Ms Jaja  focussed
       much of what she said on that decision and her assertion that, as  a
       matter of natural justice,  that  should  be  our  focus  also.   In
       essence, she submitted that the Respondent's  grounds  misunderstand
       the issues in the appeal and that the Judge did  not  need  to  deal
       with any issue other than that to which he referred at [18]  of  the
       Decision.  That is because, she said,  the  other  potential  issue,
       namely the historic injustice  argument  based  on  the  Appellant's
       status as the adult dependent child of a former Gurkha soldier,  had
       been accepted in the Appellant's favour.   Once that  was  accepted,
       the only issue was whether family life existed between the Appellant
       and his mother.  Proportionality was not relevant.


   14. We begin with that part of the Respondent's  decision  dealing  with
       the Appellant's entitlement to succeed based on the Annex K  policy,
       notwithstanding that both parties accept that he cannot do so.   The
       Respondent's reasons for rejecting that entitlement appear  at  [10]
       of the Respondent's decision.  The  application  was  for  leave  to
       remain and not entry clearance.  The  Appellant  was  aged  over  30
       years at the time of the application.  The  Appellant's  father  had
       died in  2002  and  the  Appellant  could  not  be  financially  and
       emotionally dependent on him.  The Appellant had been employed as  a
       teacher in Nepal since 1989 and had his own  wife  and  children  in
       Nepal.  He had therefore formed an independent family unit.


   15. Having considered the Appellant's case under the Rules and concluded
       that he could not succeed on that basis (as is common  ground),  the
       Respondent  turned  to  consider  the   case   under   the   heading
       "Exceptional   Circumstances".   The   Respondent   set   out    her
       understanding of the Appellant's case outside  the  Rules  as  being
       that, if the Appellant's father had been able to settle  in  the  UK
       when he retired, the  Appellant  would  have  been  born  here.   In
       addition, the Appellant's mother had been supporting  the  Appellant
       financially while he had been in the UK and the Appellant wished  to
       remain living with her.

   16. The Respondent then set out the case law emerging from the case of R
       (oao Gurung and others) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
       [2013] EWCA Civ 8 ("Gurung") and Ghising and others  (Ghurkhas/BOCs:
       historic  wrong;  weight)  [2013]  UKUT  00567   (IAC)   ("Ghising")
       concerning the historic injustice suffered by Gurkha  veterans.   We
       will come to that below.   The  Respondent  then  set  out  what  is
       repeated at [25] of the Decision which we have already cited.  As Ms
       Jaja pointed out,  that  is  a  citation  taken  directly  from  the
       guidance in Ghising save for the Judge's finding on the  application
       of the proposition to this case.


   17. The Respondent then continued as follows:


           "As noted above, it is  acknowledged  that  your  father  was  a
           serving Gurkha from 1948 until 1964.  He died in Nepal in  2002.
           Your mother was issued with entry clearance for settlement as  a
           Gurkha widow on  10  July  2014.   She  entered  the  UK  on  11
           September 2014.  You are currently living with your mother.
           However, you have a wife and  child  in  Nepal,  and  were  also
           employed there in a profession for over  25  years,  it  is  not
           accepted  that  Article  8  is  engaged  with  regard  to   your
           relationship with your mother in the UK.  Your  family  life  is
           clearly with your wife and children in Nepal, as is your private
           life as you are employed as a teacher there and have  spent  the
           vast majority of your life in Nepal.   Therefore,  having  taken
           into account the relevant case law, it  is  not  appropriate  to
           grant you any form of leave on an exceptional basis."
           [our emphasis]


   18. We can say now that we reject Ms Jaja's submission that the historic
       injustice issue was not in  dispute  between  the  parties.   It  is
       abundantly clear from the last sentence cited above, that it was not
       accepted that the case law in that regard entitled this Appellant to
       succeed.  However, there remains an issue whether  the  Respondent's
       conclusion in that regard was erroneous.  For that reason, before we
       turn to consider whether the Decision contains a material  error  of
       law, it is necessary to summarise the case law which deals with this
       issue.








    RELEVANT CASE LAW


   19. The way in which the  Courts  and  Tribunals  have  dealt  with  the
       historic injustice argument in Gurkha  cases  emerges  most  clearly
       from the Court of Appeal's judgment in Gurung  and  this  Tribunal's
       guidance in Ghising to which cases we have already referred as being
       those on which the Respondent relied.


   20. We begin by noting that, although the majority of the appellants  in
       Gurung were appealing against decisions of entry clearance officers,
       several were in the UK as either widows or adult dependent  children
       of former Gurkha soldiers.  The Court of Appeal  was  therefore  not
       dealing only with entry clearance cases.   We do not propose to cite
       from the judgment but instead draw the following points from it.

   21. First, the Court of Appeal upheld the entitlement of the  Respondent
       to apply her then policy which was  that  dependent  adult  children
       would "not normally  qualify"  for  leave  in  line  with  the  main
       applicant as a matter of discretion.  They were  expected  to  apply
       for leave to  enter  or  remain  under  the  Rules  based  on  their
       dependency or under Article 8 ECHR.

   22. Second, it follows from the foregoing, that the  relevant  focus  in
       relation to this aspect of the policy is the dependency of child  on
       parent and not vice versa.  That is apparent from what is said about
       the policy objective at [26] of the judgment.

   23. Third, the policy proceeded on the basis that the  consideration  of
       the weight to be given to historic injustice  properly  fell  within
       the assessment whether there were  exceptional  circumstances.   The
       Court of Appeal accepted that this was a permissible approach.    We
       also note the Court of Appeal's acceptance at [38] of  the  judgment
       that   the   historic   injustice   issue   "is   not    necessarily
       determinative".  Nonetheless, as is apparent from what  follows,  it
       is an important factor.  As the Court of Appeal said at [42] of  the
       judgment "[i]f  a  Gurkha  can  show  that,  but  for  the  historic
       injustice, he would have settled in the United  Kingdom  at  a  time
       when his dependent  (now)  adult  child  would  have  been  able  to
       accompany him as a dependent child under the age of 18,  that  is  a
       strong reason for holding that it is  proportionate  to  permit  the
       adult child to join his family now".


   24. The way in which the Court of Appeal's judgment  is  to  be  applied
       appears  from  the  Tribunal's  guidance  in  Ghising.   Since   the
       proportionality issue  is  the  focus  of  the  Respondent's  second
       ground, we have set out the guidance in full (applying our  emphasis
       to the passage which we consider to be most relevant in this case):


           "(1)  In finding that the weight to be accorded to the  historic
           wrong in Ghurkha ex-servicemen cases was not to be  regarded  as
           less than that to be accorded the  historic  wrong  suffered  by
           British Overseas citizens, the Court of  Appeal  in  Gurung  and
           others [2013] EWCA Civ 8 did not hold that, in either Gurkha  or
           BOC cases, the effect of the historic wrong  is  to  reverse  or
           otherwise alter the burden of proof that applies  in  Article  8
           proportionality assessments.
           (2)   When an Appellant has shown that there  is  family/private
           life and the decision made  by  the  Respondent  amounts  to  an
           interference with it, the burden lies  with  the  Respondent  to
           show that  a  decision  to  remove  is  proportionate  (although
           Appellants  will,  in  practice,  bear  the  responsibility   of
           adducing evidence that lies within their remit and  about  which
           the Respondent may be unaware).
           (3)   What concerned the Court in Gurung and others was not  the
           burden  of  proof  but,  rather,  the  issue  of  weight  in   a
           proportionality assessment.  The Court held that, as in the case
           of BOCs, the historic wrong  suffered  by  Gurkha  ex-servicemen
           should be given substantial weight.
           (4)   Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8  is  engaged
           and, but for the historic wrong, the Appellant would  have  been
           settled in the UK long ago, this will ordinarily  determine  the
           outcome of  the  Article  8  proportionality  assessment  in  an
           Appellant's  favour,  where  the  matters  relied  upon  by  the
           Secretary of State/entry clearance officer consist solely of the
           public interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy.
           (5)   It can therefore be seen that Appellants  in  Gurkha  (and
           BOC) cases will not necessarily succeed, even though  (i)  their
           family life engages Article 8(1); and (ii)  the  evidence  shows
           they would have come to the United Kingdom  with  their  father,
           but for the injustice that prevented the  latter  from  settling
           here earlier.  If the Respondent can point to matters  over  and
           above the public interest  in  maintaining  a  firm  immigration
           policy, which argue in favour of removal or the refusal of leave
           to enter, these matters must be given appropriate weight in  the
           balance in the Respondent's favour.   Thus,  a  bad  immigration
           history and/or criminal behaviour may  still  be  sufficient  to
           outweigh the powerful factors bearing on the Appellant's side of
           the balance."


   25.  Finally, even though it  is  accepted  that  the  Appellant  cannot
       satisfy the Annex K policy, we record Ms Jaja's submission  that  it
       is relevant to note that the Appellant can satisfy  certain  of  the
       criteria within that policy.


    DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS


   26. With that somewhat lengthy preamble, we can now  deal  more  shortly
       with our conclusion that there is an error of law in the Decision.


   27. Although the Respondent's two grounds might appear at first sight to
       be entirely separate,  we  consider  that  there  is  a  significant
       overlap and for that reason we take them together.


   28. We begin by accepting that, if this were not a Gurkha case, then the
       Judge's reasoning as to the existence of  family  life  at  date  of
       hearing may well be adequate.  Again, if  this  were  not  a  Gurkha
       case, the issue which would then arise is  whether  removal  of  the
       Appellant  would   be   proportionate.    That   would   involve   a
       consideration whether the Appellant's mother could  seek  care  from
       other quarters and whether weight should be given  to  the  need  to
       maintain immigration control in circumstances  where  the  Appellant
       came to the UK as a visitor only apparently intending  to  stay  for
       two months but has remained beyond that time and now wishes to  stay
       for a longer period.  It would be relevant for a Judge  to  consider
       whether the Appellant ever was a genuine  visitor  and  what  impact
       that finding had as to proportionality  of  removal,  the  Appellant
       having effectively formed/strengthened his family life by presenting
       the  Respondent  with  a  fait   accompli.    That   would   include
       consideration whether family life existed at the point in time  when
       the Appellant sought to enter.


   29. As this is a Gurkha case, however, the issue as to the existence  of
       family life is, we conclude, a  somewhat  different  one  from  that
       which the Judge considered.  As we have pointed out,  the  rationale
       for  the  policy  objective  behind  allowing  the  adult  dependent
       children of former Gurkhas to settle with their parents in the UK is
       because they form part of the family unit which has  transferred  to
       the UK and are dependent on that unit.  Whilst we of  course  accept
       that family life is a two-way street, the focus of the existence  of
       that family life for the purpose of the historic injustice  argument
       is based on the child's dependency on the parent and not vice versa.
        That is the relevance of paragraph 317(i)(f) of the Rules cited  in
       Gurung. That relates to the adult child's dependency on  the  parent
       and not the parent's dependency on the child.


   30. Moreover, there are, as the guidance in  Ghising,  makes  clear  two
       issues which the Appellant must establish in his favour  before  the
       historic injustice argument might entitle him to succeed.  The first
       is as to the existence of family life. The second is  to  show  that
       the Appellant's father would have settled in  the  UK  had  he  been
       permitted to do so at a relevant time when the Appellant would  have
       come with him as his dependent child.


   31. We do not need at this juncture to make any finding  as  to  whether
       the Appellant can make out his case on those two issues  as  we  are
       only dealing with whether the Decision  contains  an  error  of  law
       (although we observe that the evidence currently does not appear  to
       engage with those issues in the way in which we have set them  out).
       The difficulty we find with the Judge's reasoning  is  there  is  no
       engagement with either of those two issues in the context  in  which
       they  arise  in  this  appeal.   We  have  already   indicated   our
       disagreement with Ms Jaja's submission that the issues did not arise
       because the second, at least, was accepted by the Respondent.

   32. As such, the error is, we conclude,  the  Judge's  failure  to  make
       findings as to the two central issues which arise in a Gurkha  case,
       namely whether family life exists between the Appellant as the adult
       dependent child of the widow of a  former  Gurkha  soldier  and  his
       mother and whether, if it does, he can show that  his  father  would
       have settled in the UK had he been permitted to do so following  his
       discharge from the Gurkha army and at a time when the Appellant  was
       still  a  dependent  child.   We  note  in  this  regard  that   the
       Appellant's mother was permitted to settle in the UK  following  the
       death of his father but did not apply to do so until  several  years
       after the change to the policy which entitled her to do  so  and  we
       note (or at least assume) that the Appellant did not seek  to  enter
       the UK at that time with his mother.  We also note however that  the
       Appellant's father was discharged from the Gurkhas  in  1964  before
       the Appellant was even born.


   33. Whether the Appellant can succeed in this  regard  is  a  matter  on
       which evidence will be required.  As we observed during the hearing,
       there is no need for this appeal to be  remitted.   It  has  already
       been remitted once.  However, for those reasons  we  agree  with  Ms
       Jaja that a resumed hearing with evidence will be required  and  the
       Appellant may well wish to adduce further evidence given the  issues
       we have identified as requiring resolution. We have therefore  given
       directions to that effect below.


   34. There is one final issue which  arises  concerning  proportionality.
       As we have already noted, the Judge did not engage with  this  issue
       finding, at [25] of the Decision, in effect that his  conclusion  as
       to the existence of family life was the end of the matter.  However,
       the Judge remarked at [19] of the Decision that he was  "afraid  the
       appellant and his mother may not have been entirely  straightforward
       with the Entry Clearance Officer when the  visit  visa  was  applied
       for".  Although Ms Jaja is right to point out that, thereafter,  the
       Judge has set out the evidence of the Appellant and his mother about
       the reasons given for the visit, the Judge did not reach any finding
       on that evidence and in particular did not  engage  with  the  issue
       whether the Appellant was  a  genuine  visitor  or  whether  he  had
       intended all along to come here to remain with his mother.  That has
       an impact also on the Judge's finding as to family life because,  as
       with the position if this were  a  non-Gurkha  case,  the  essential
       question is whether that family life existed when the Appellant came
       to the UK.


   35. We have concluded, in light of what we say about  the  issues  which
       arise, that it is not appropriate to preserve any  of  the  Decision
       and therefore the Judge's observation at [19] forms no part  of  our
       future consideration of the appeal.  However, the Appellant may also
       wish to provide further evidence as to his motivation in  coming  to
       the UK and what it is said changed following his arrival in the  UK.
       The issue whether he was a genuine visitor may still be relevant  as
       part of the proportionality assessment, even if it is accepted  that
       the historic injustice argument succeeds in  this  case  bearing  in
       mind of course that the overall issue for the Tribunal to  determine
       is whether the decision refusing leave to remain is disproportionate
       and therefore a breach of the Appellant's Article 8 rights.


    CONCLUSION

   36. For the foregoing  reasons,  we  are  satisfied  that  the  Decision
       contains a material error of law.  We set aside  the  Decision.   We
       have made directions below for a resumed hearing.



DECISION

We are satisfied that the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kimnell
promulgated on 13 September 2019 discloses an error of law.   We  set  aside
that decision.  We make the following directions for a resumed hearing:
   1. Within 28 days from the date when this decision is sent, the Appellant
      shall file with the Tribunal and serve on the Respondent  any  further
      evidence on which she wishes to rely.
   2. The resumed hearing is to be relisted before UTJ Smith  on  the  first
      available date after six weeks from the date  when  this  decision  is
      sent with a time estimate of  day.  A Nepalese interpreter is  to  be
      booked for the hearing unless the Appellant indicates otherwise.




[pic]
Signed:                                      Dated: 10 March 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
