
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19316/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 September 2019                           |On 19 November 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                    H A B
                                                                   Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, instructed by Parker, Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant was born on 1 January 1950 and is  a  female  citizen  of
    Bangladesh. She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a  decision
    of the Secretary of State to refuse to grant  her  leave  remain  under
    paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 (as amended). The First-tier Tribunal, in  a
    decision promulgated on 7 February  2019,  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the judge has erred in law such that his decision falls  to
    be set aside. The judge found [23.10] that the appellant,  although  an
    adult, enjoyed family life with her son  and  daughter  in  the  United
    Kingdom (see Kugathas  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31).  However,  his  analysis
    thereafter is inadequate. The judge found that little weight should  be
    given to the  private  life  of  the  appellant  at  a  time  when  her
    immigration status is precarious. However, he failed to give any or any
    adequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's appeal in respect of her
    family life. His conclusions at [24] are,  in  reality,  no  more  than
    assertions unsupported by proper reasoning.

 3. Moreover, I agree with the appellant that the judge has failed to  give
    proper weight to the  appellant's  mental  condition  as  a  factor  in
    determining whether there  exist  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's  integration  in  Bangladesh.  It  was  apparent  from  the
    evidence that the appellant's mental problems have a very  real  effect
    upon her health and upon those seeking to offer her day-to-day personal
    care. Judge accepted the medical evidence which shows that  family  (as
    opposed to third party) assistance is essential in offering care to the
    appellant during any acute phase of her mental illness.  The  appellant
    has a fear of black  magic  and  a  paranoid  dread  of  third  parties
    attempting to poison her or 'do black magic on her.'  (son's  statement
    at [11]). However, without any reference to  the  evidence,  the  judge
    concluded that 'in a large thriving city like Dhaka there must be  many
    mature  ladies  (sic)  who  are  unemployed  and  would   welcome   the
    opportunity  to  earn  money  by  caring  for  the  appellant.  In   my
    conclusion, carers could be engaged at a  relatively  modest  cost  and
    indeed the selection and recruitment of suitable carers  could  all  be
    closely supervised by [the appellant's son].' There was no basis in the
    evidence for the judge to reach such a finding which amounts,  frankly,
    to nothing more than speculation. In any event, the finding ignores the
    evidence which indicated that the appellant would  resist  being  cared
    for by a non-family member during periods of acute mental illness.

 4. In the  light  of  the  inadequacies  in  the  analysis  which  I  have
    identified above, I set aside the decision. I  set  aside  the  judge's
    findings of fact but, like him and for the same reasons, I  accept  the
    evidence which has been provided hitherto by the  appellant's  children
    and the medical evidence of Dr Parker. Also  following  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, I accept that there is family life between the appellant  and
    her United Kingdom-based children.  I  have  proceeded  to  remake  the
    decision. As regards new evidence, I have a letter from the  consultant
    psychiatrist, Dr Michael Parker, which is dated 6 September 2019.  That
    letter indicates that the appellant 'suffering from an acute relapse of
    our recurrent psychotic depression and requires intensive treatment.' I
    have also considered the evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  from
    the family members and from Dr Parker  which  unambiguously  shows  the
    difficulty, if not impossibility, of non-family members having to  care
    of the appellant during any acute psychotic episode. I find that  there
    are, as  at  the  date  of  remaking  the  decision,  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration in Bangladesh, notwithstanding
    that that is the country of her nationality and in which she has  lived
    the greater part of her life. I accept the submissions made  behalf  of
    the appellant would not be reasonable to  expect  her  United  Kingdom-
    based family members to live with her in Bangladesh; her primary  carer
    here, a daughter, is unable to travel to Bangladesh because  she  is  a
    refugee. I find that, at the present time, it would be disproportionate
    for the appellant to  be  removed  to  Bangladesh  where,  following  a
    relapse of her psychotic depression, she  would  be  unable  to  access
    effective and adequate personal care. In the circumstances, I allow the
    appeal on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. I have remade the
    decision. The appeal is allowed on  human  rights  grounds  (Article  8
    ECHR).






Signed                              Date 30 October 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


















