
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19078/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st July 2019                     |On 23rd July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                FakhR-E Alam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION  NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Caswell, instructed by Reiss Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge  Cox  made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 10th January 2019.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 11th September 1976.  He
    entered the UK on 3rd March 2008 with  entry  clearance  as  a  student
    valid to 2009 and subsequently extended until 31st December  2011.   He
    was then granted further leave to remain as a  Tier  1  Highly  Skilled
    (Post-Study)  Migrant  until  20th  January   2014.    His   subsequent
    application for Tier 1 leave was refused  on  3rd  July  2014  and  his
    appeal rights became exhausted later that  year.   He  made  a  further
    application for Tier 1 leave in August 2015 which was  refused  and  on
    16th May 2016 he was served with removal papers.

 3. On 6th April 2018 he applied for leave to remain on the  basis  of  his
    private life in the UK, and it  was  this  refusal  which  led  to  the
    decision before the Immigration Judge.

 4. The appellant has three children, the eldest born on  12th  April  2006
    and the second born on 19th July 2008.  They joined him in  the  UK  in
    May 2011 and a third child was subsequently born here in March 2012.

 5. The appellant has obtained an MBA in innovative management and  planned
    to set up a  consultancy  business  in  human  resource  and  strategic
    management.  He worked as a manager for a 99p store until 2014 but  has
    not been able to work since.

 6. This appeal turned on the issue of the appellant's older two  children.



 7. The judge set out the relevant case law and said at paragraph 40

         "Clearly it is in the children's best interests that they live with
         their parents.  As such my starting  point  is  that  the  children
         should leave the UK with the appellant and their mother."

 8. He considered the situation to which they  would  be  returning  to  in
    Pakistan and at paragraph 53 said

         "On the totality of the evidence I accept that  the  children  have
         inevitably established some ties to the UK but in  the  absence  of
         any cogent evidence to show that their welfare  or  development  is
         likely to be significantly harmed if they return to Pakistan, I  am
         driven to conclude that  the  appellant  failed  to  discharge  the
         burden  of  proof.   On  balance  I  find  that  the  children  can
         reasonably be expected to leave the UK.  As such they do  not  meet
         the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  and  are  not  qualifying
         children for the purposes of Section 117B(6)."

 9. On that basis he dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal, in essence, on  the  grounds
    that the judge had approached  the  question  of  the  children's  best
    interests from the wrong perspective, a line of argument  developed  by
    Mr Caswell at the hearing.

11. Permission to appeal  was  initially  refused  in  the  First-tier  but
    subsequently granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle  on  2nd  May
    2019.





Submissions

12. Mr Caswell submitted that the judge  had  approached  the  question  of
    whether it was reasonable for the children to return to Pakistan  quite
    wrongly, having concluded that their father should go to  Pakistan,  it
    was therefore in the best interests of the children to  go  there  with
    him.  He had therefore diminished their Section 55 rights. He ought  to
    have decided whether their best interests lay in remaining  in  the  UK
    and, if they did, to then decide  whether  those  best  interests  were
    outweighed by any other factors.  He had also made an error in  stating
    that the children were not qualifying children when they clearly  were.



13. Mr Diwnycz did not seek to defend this determination and did  not  make
    any submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State on  the  merits  of
    this case.

Consideration as to Whether There is a Material Error of Law

14. The judge erred in law in his assessment of the best interests  of  the
    children, for the reasons set out above, and made a  factual  error  in
    stating that they were not qualifying children  when  they  were.   His
    decision is set aside.

Findings and Conclusions

15. I am required to apply Section 117B of the 2002 Act which sets out  the
    public interest considerations applicable to all cases.

16. The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
    interests.  The appellant has not had leave to remain in the  UK  since
    2014 but which is clearly a strong argument in favour of his removal.

17. Section 117B(2) states that it is in the public interests that  persons
    who seek to enter or remain in the UK are able to speak  English.   The
    appellant's ability to do so is not disputed.

18. Section 117B(3) states that it  is  in  the  public  interests  and  in
    particular in the interests of the economic wellbeing of  the  UK  that
    persons who  seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  UK  are  financially
    independent.  The appellant worked in the  UK  between  2011  and  2014
    after he obtained his MBA as a shop manager.  He has not  been  allowed
    to work since and the family have been  in  receipt  of  public  funds.
    However Mr Diwnycz did not seek to argue that the appellant  would  not
    be able to support the family since  he  is  highly  qualified  with  a
    masters degree in innovative management and hopes to  set  up  his  own
    consultancy business.

19. His status has always been precarious and, in recent years unlawful.

20. The real issue here is paragraph 117B(6) which states that in the  case
    of a person who is not liable to deportation the public  interest  does
    not require the person's removal where

    (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
         a qualifying child; and

    (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

21. In this case there are two qualifying children now aged 13 and 10.  The
    family come from a Pashtu speaking area, which borders Afghanistan  and
    the schools use either Urdu or Pashtu until a child is 15  or  16  when
    they are taught in English.  It was accepted that whilst  the  children
    can speak Pashtu they can neither read nor write in it and do not speak
    Urdu.

22. The children are doing well in school in the UK.  Their school  reports
    are exemplary.  The oldest child in particular is at an important stage
    of his education, having completed two  years  of  secondary  education
    here.  His best interests clearly are served by remaining in school  in
    the UK and his education would be significantly disrupted if he had  to
    return to Pakistan.  The evidence, which is not disputed,  is  that  he
    cannot read or write the language in which he would be educated in  the
    Khyber area which is his home province.  Whilst he spent  his  earliest
    years in Pakistan his  formative  years  have  been  in  the  UK.   His
    education would be significantly disrupted by his inability to read and
    write  in  the  language  in  which  he  would  be   taught.    It   is
    overwhelmingly in his best interests that he  should  not  return.  The
    same is true of his younger brother, who is also a qualifying child.

23. The appellant's immigration history is flawed, in that he  should  have
    left the UK when he was served with a notice of removal  in  2016.   On
    the other hand he did come to the  UK  lawfully,  as  did  his  family,
    complied with the terms of his student visa, in that  he  obtained  his
    MBA and subsequently worked as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur).  Accordingly  I
    conclude that the best interests of the  qualifying  children  in  this
    case tip the balance in favour of the appellant being granted leave  to
    remain.  Indeed Mr Diwnycz did not seek to argue otherwise.

Decision

24. The original judge erred in law.  His decision is  set  aside.   It  is
    remade as follows.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 13 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
