
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19891/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 23 January 2019                     |On 20 February 2019                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     SK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Charlton, of Messrs Bhogal Partners Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In a decision and reasons  dated  6  November  2018  I  set  aside  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wylie  who  had  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal for leave to remain on human rights grounds.   I
    wrote:-

         "1.  The appellant appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
             Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wylie who in a  determination
             promulgated on  22 January  2018  dismissed  the  appellant's
             appeal for leave to remain on human rights grounds.


         2.   The appellant is a citizen of India born on  27  August  1990.
             He had entered Britain in October 2010 with entry clearance as
             a student valid until 26 January 2014.  On 20  July  2013  he
             married an Indian citizen who had indefinite leave to  remain.
             In January 2014 he made an application for leave to remain  as
             a Tier 4 (General) Student which was refused on 27 March 2014.
              He appealed that decision  and  his  appeal  was  allowed  in
             November 2014  on  the  basis  that  the  Secretary  of  State
             reconsider the decision.  On reconsideration  the  application
             was refused with no right of  appeal.   On  24  December  2014
             before the application  had  been  reconsidered,  he  made  an
             application for leave to remain as the  spouse  of  a  settled
             person.  That application was however voided  on  15  February
             2015.  In December 2015 he was served with RED.0001  notifying
             him of his  liability  to  be  administratively  removed  from
             Britain.


         3.   On 16 January 2016 he made  a  human  rights  claim.   He  was
             refused on 2 August 2016 on the basis that he did not meet the
             suitability requirement for leave to remain as a spouse as  it
             was not accepted the relationship was genuine  and  subsisting
             and furthermore that  the  appellant  had  submitted  a  TOEIC
             certificate from ETS with  his  application  for  the  student
             extension dated 26 January 2014 which had been  concluded  had
             been  fraudulently  obtained  and  therefore   he   had   used
             deception.  It was determined that therefore his  presence  in
             the United Kingdom was not conducive to the public good as his
             conduct made it undesirable to allow  him  to  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom. The appellant stated at appeal that he  wished
             to remain in Britain with his wife and that they  had   a  son
             born on 19 January 2016.  The appellant's  wife,  who  entered
             Britain in 2010,  had been granted indefinite leave to  remain
             in 2011 as a victim of domestic violence. The appellant's  son
             is therefore British.


         4.   The appellant gave evidence regarding his  attendance  at  the
             test centre and what had happened when he took the  test.   He
             also said that he had taken a further test  in  December  2014
             because he had heard there was a problem with TOEIC tests  and
             that they were not being accepted.  He did this as his Tier  4
             application for which he had  sent  the  certificate  for  the
             earlier test had  been  refused  and  he  was  appealing  that
             decision.


         5.   The judge in paragraphs 22 onwards of  the  determination  set
             out her findings of fact and  conclusions.   She  referred  to
             relevant case law  stating  that  it  was  accepted  that  the
             evidence provided by the Secretary of State was sufficient  to
             pass the evidential burden to  the  appellant  of  raising  an
             innocent  application.   The  judge  did  properly  take  into
             account the report of Professor French  and  information  from
             Project Fa�ade - the criminal enquiry  into  abuse  of  TOEIC
             relating  to  the  Premier  Language  Training  Centre's  test
             centre - which the appellant had attended.  It was noted that
             that enquiry showed that out of 5,055 TOEIC tests  3,780  were
             invalid and 1,275 were questionable.  The judge also  had  the
             look up tool showing tests taken in the morning of 14  January
             2014 when the appellant had attended which indicated  that one
             test was questionable and 13 were invalid.


         6.   The judge took into account the decision in MA  (ETS  -  TOEIC
             testing) [2016] UKUT 00450 (IAC) where findings had been  made
             about the look up tool and ETS source data and stated that the
             appellant's evidence about sitting the test was vague and that
             he had not given any explanation as to why he had  chosen  the
             test centre in Barking when he lived in Hounslow, when  he had
             taken the second test at the Computer  Learning  Centre  which
             was in Hounslow.  The judge applied the  various  factors  set
             out by the Upper Tribunal in SM and Qadir (ETS  -  evidence  -
             Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 and noted that the  appellant
             had spoken English sufficiently  fluently  to  enable  him  to
             proceed with the hearing without an interpreter but said  that
             in any event that was four years after the test and  therefore
             she placed little weight on that as  the  appellant  had  been
             living and working part-time in the United Kingdom since 2010.
              She noted that he had not attended college since  2011.   She
             placed weight on the fact that  the  original  scores  of  the
             appellant in the first test had been  190  out  of  200,  with
             speaking proficiency at level 8 - the highest level - and said
             that although  she  concluded  that  she  could  not  say  the
             appellant would not have passed the test in January and it was
             possible that he would have done it was unlikely that he would
             have attained a score of 190 out of 200.


         7.   The judge noted that the appellant said that he had taken  the
             second test in December 2014 because he had seen in  the  news
             that the Home Office were refusing  everyone  who  had  sat  a
             TOEIC test,  but stated that her conclusion was that  he  took
             that test in the knowledge that  his  certificate  in  January
             2014 had been obtained dishonestly.  She  concluded  that  she
             did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  had   discharged   the
             evidential burden upon him to provide an innocent explanation.
             .


         8.   The judge, therefore, having found that the appellant did  not
             meet the suitability requirement for leave to  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom  then  considered  the  appellant's  Article  8
             rights outside the Immigration Rules.   She  referred  to  the
             test set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 24 and Section 117B of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  She  noted  the
             fact that the appellant's wife was an Indian national and  had
             indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom and that they
             had lived together since 2013.  The judge  accepted  that  the
             marriage was genuine and subsisting and that they  had  family
             life together with their son who was aged 2.   She  considered
             that the reasons given as to why the appellant  and  his  wife
             said they could not go to  live  in  India  -   they  were  of
             different castes and the appellant's wife said that her family
             were not happy with the  marriage  (although  the   could  not
             describe why) - the judge concluded there was  no  information
             as to the problems they would have in India because  of  their
             marriage and went on to consider whether or not the  appellant
             and his wife could return to India and continue  their  family
             life there.


         9.   In paragraph 51 the judge stated that she  took  into  account
             Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
             2009 which requires the respondent should  take  into  account
             the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of  children  in
             the United Kingdom the judge stated that that  was  a  primary
             consideration rather than a paramount one.  The judge took the
             view that the child was very young and his interests would  be
             to continue in the care of both his parents.  The judge  noted
             in passing that the child was a British citizen but stated  in
             her view his interests would be  safeguarded  if  he  went  to
             India with his parents.  The judge concluded  that  Article  8
             would not be  engaged  the  family  could  enjoy  family  life
             together in India however in the alternative the judge went on
             to consider the proportionality of the decision  stating  that
             the maintenance of effective immigration control  was  in  the
             public interest.  She took into  account  the  fact  that  the
             appellant's  family  life  was  established  and  whilst   his
             immigration status was at  best  precarious  noting  that  the
             appellant's son was a British citizen she stated that  at  his
             age he would be focussed on his parents and had yet to develop
             any independent life, it is  accepted  that  he  had  extended
             family members in India  and  that  he  would  be  brought  up
             accustomed to aspects of Indian culture in the United Kingdom.
              The judge stated briefly that she could only conclude that it
             was not disproportionate to require the appellant to leave.


         10.  The appellant  appealed,   referring  to  the  conclusions  of
             Beatson LJ in Majumder and Qadir  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  1167  and
             arguing   that  the  findings  of  the  judge  regarding   the
             appellant's TOEIC test were neither reasonable or sustainable.
              The grounds referred to the various  positive  factors  which
             would indicate that the appellant would have no reason to  use
             a proxy test taker and that he had given a sensible reason for
             taking the second test.


         11.  With regard to the issue of the best interests of the child it
             was  argued  that  the  judge  erred  when  saying  that   the
             appellant's immigration status was at best precarious and that
             she was wrong to insinuate that he had a  dubious  immigration
             history when that was not the case.  The grounds  also  argued
             that no detailed assessment had been made of the situation  of
             the child, who was British and what was best  for  him  beyond
             stating that he would be with his parents when  they  went  to
             India. It was argued that was insufficient and merely paid lip
             service to the relevant test as set out that in JO and  Others
             (Section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC).   Similarly
             the grounds referred to the decision in Kaur (children's  best
             interests/public interest interface) [2017] UKUT 00014 (IAC).


         12.  At the hearing of the appeal before me Ms Charlton  relied  on
             the grounds of appeal and asserted that the assessment of  the
             TOEIC certificate was flawed.  She said  that the judge should
             not  have  rejected  the  appellant's  evidence   particularly
             because  the  appellant  had  remained   consistent   in   his
             narrative.  Moreover,  she emphasised that the judge  had  not
             taken into account  the  witness  statements  with  regard  to
             reasons as to why this family could not return to India.


         13.  In reply Mr Duffy stated that the judge had  properly  engaged
             with the TOEIC issue and gave detailed reasons as  to  why  it
             was not accepted that the appellant had discharged the  burden
             of proof which lay upon him.  Mr Duffy stated that the judge's
             conclusions were not open to challenge.  With  regard  to  the
             issue of the reasonableness of the appellant being expected to
             leave when his son was British he stated that  the  judge  had
             considered that issue, he accepted that the reasoning  of  the
             judge was slim and that he had to accept that  the  judge  had
             erred in not weighing up all relevant factors.  In that regard
             he stated it would be appropriate that the  appeal  should  be
             adjourned.


         Discussion


         14.  I have considered in some detail the conclusions of the  judge
             with regard to the validity of the TOEIC  certificate.   I  do
             consider that the judge was correct to find that the Secretary
             of State had discharged the burden of proof  upon  her  and  I
             consider that detailed reasons were given for that  conclusion
             in paragraphs 22 onwards of the  determination.   In  reaching
             her conclusion the judge referred to relevant case law  and  I
             consider  that  she  was  entitled  to  place  weight  on  the
             documentary evidence before her which included the report from
             Professor French and the look up tool.   With  regard  to  the
             reasons for the appellant taking the second  test  I  consider
             that the judge was entitled to be sceptical about  those.   In
             all I can only conclude that the decision  of  the  judge  was
             open to her with regard to her conclusion that  the  appellant
             had not discharged the evidential burden on him to provide  an
             innocent explanation and therefore to find  that  he  did  not
             meet the suitability requirement for leave to  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom.


         15.  I note that Mr Duffy conceded that the judge had not  properly
             or  in  sufficient  detail  considered  the  relevant  factors
             regarding the British child going to India with  his  parents.
             Mr Duffy had conceded that there was an error of  law  therein
             and I consider that he was correct to accept that that was the
             case.  The appeal will therefore proceed to a further  hearing
             in  the  Upper  Tribunal  solely   on   the   issue   of   the
             reasonableness of the qualifying child being expected to go to
             India with his parents.  I adjourn this appeal as Ms  Charlton
             indicated that there was further evidence that she would  wish
             to put in before the hearing of this issue.


         Directions


             The appeal will proceed to a hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
             solely on the issue of the reasonableness of  the  appellant's
             removal to India given that he has a  qualifying  child  here.
             The findings of the First-tier Judge regarding the TOEIC  test
             and the appellant's suitability under the Rules shall stand.


             I make an anonymity direction in  this  case  given  that  the
             appellant's child is a minor.


         Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


         Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their
         family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and  to  the
         respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings."

2.   As it will be seen from my decision, I found that  the  judge  had  not
    made any  error  of  law  when  considering  the  allegation  that  the
    appellant had used deception when obtaining his TOEIC certificate.  The
    decision was set aside on the limited ground that it was agreed by  the
    Presenting Officer that the judge  had  not  considered  in  sufficient
    detail the rights of the appellant's child.  That  child  was  born  in
    Britain on 19 January 2016.  As his mother had indefinite leave when he
    was born the appellant's child is British.

3.   The relevant facts therefore are that it is now for me to consider  the
    rights of this British child on the basis that he is now 3.  His mother
    was born in India and did not come to Britain  until  she  entered  for
    marriage in  2010  and  therefore  both  that  child's  parents  -  the
    appellant and his wife - are nationals of India who have lived the vast
    majority of their lives there.  There is nothing to indicate that  they
    would have any difficulty in re-integrating into life in India or  that
    it would be unreasonable to expect them to return.  The  child  who  is
    just 3 will have as his focus his parents and will not yet  have  built
    up ties outside his  immediate  family.   The  test  before  me  is  to
    consider whether or not it might be reasonable to expect that child  to
    leave Britain with his parents or, if his mother wishes to remain,  for
    him to stay with her here while his father returns to India.

4.   The appeal was adjourned so that all factors  could  be  considered  in
    this exercise, and it was indicated to me at the  hearing  in  November
    that further evidence would be put forward. That  further  evidence  is
    that the appellant's son  is  suffering  from  ichthyosis  which  is  a
    condition that causes widespread and persistent thick, dry "fish scale"
    skin.  There is no cure for that disease but it is said in  the  papers
    before me that a "daily skincare routine  usually  keeps  the  symptoms
    mild and manageable".  Although the condition can vary in  seriousness,
    it appears that the appellant's son has a relatively mild variation  of
    the illness and that he  has  been  prescribed  a  cream  to  ease  the
    condition.  There is nothing before me to indicate that  he  could  not
    continue to receive treatment by use of a skin  cream  if  he  were  in
    India.

5.   The second further factor that was placed  before  me  was  related  to
    speech and language difficulties which the child has.   A  report  from
    Hounslow and  Richmond  Committee  Healthcare  NHS  Trust  contains  an
    initial  assessment  report  which  states  that  he  has   severe   to
    significant difficulties in attention and listening, some  difficulties
    in play  and  understanding  and  severe  significant  difficulties  in
    expression.  His social communication is difficult.  Targets  were  set
    by the Trust to help him ameliorate those problems.   Again  there  was
    nothing in the report to indicate that such assistance,  which  appears
    to be given by the mother, should not continue in India.

6.   I consider that it would not be unreasonable to expect  this  child  to
    go to India with both his parents as a family unit should  his  parents
    decide that they wish to return to India  together.   As  I  have  said
    above the child has not built up  any  significant  relationships  here
    and, sadly, from the papers it appears that he might have difficulty in
    doing so.  Alternatively should the decision be made that  the  child's
    mother remains in Britain as she is entitled to  do,  the  child  could
    live with her.  In these circumstances, it would not be unreasonable to
    consider that the appellant could return to India on his own.  I  would
    add that there was nothing before me to  indicate  that  the  appellant
    would be able to meet the requirements of the Rules for leave to  enter
    or remain as a spouse.

7.   For the above reasons I consider that the decision of the Secretary  of
    State to refuse to grant the appellant  leave  to  remain  is  entirely
    reasonable and therefore if I have set aside in part  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Judge I remake the decision and dismiss this appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: [pic]                       Date: 9 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy






















