
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/19951/2016
                                                               HU/19952/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 December 2017                           |                              |
|                                              |On 24 January 2018            |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [c g]
                                    [s g]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A O'Callaghan, Counsel instructed by N C
Brothers & Co     Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant (hereafter the Entry Clearance Officer or ECO)  brings  a
    challenge to the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham  sent  on
    26 September 2017  allowing  the  appeal  against  the  ECO's  decision
    refusing to grant entry clearance as a child under para EC-C.1.1(d)  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The respondent  (hereafter  the  claimant)  had
    applied to join his mother who had been  issued  with  a  spouse  entry
    clearance in July 2015 as the spouse of the claimant's father  who  has
    now become a British citizen.  The claimant is currently aged 12.   The
    ECO was not satisfied that the claimant was related to the sponsors  in
    the UK as claimed and did  not  consider  there  were  any  exceptional
    circumstances warranting a grant of entry clearance.

2.   By the time of  the  hearing  before  Judge  Graham  the  claimant  had
    obtained DNA evidence establishing that the claimant was the  child  of
    the sponsor father and mother.  At the hearing  the  judge  also  heard
    evidence  from  the  parents.   During  submissions  the  Home   Office
    Presenting Officer  stated  that  whilst  the  ECO  accepted  that  the
    sponsors were the biological parents  of  the  claimant  he  wished  to
    pursue the issue under para E-ECC.1.6(b) of sole  responsibility.   The
    judge refused  to  allow  the  ECO  to  introduce  the  issue  of  sole
    responsibility at the hearing.  The judge concluded at para 14:-

         "In order  to  determine  whether  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
         decision amounts to a  disproportionate  interference  with  family
         life I have conducted a balancing act weighing on the one side  the
         factors in support of  entry  clearance  and  the  public  interest
         grounds as set out in section 117B of the Immigration Act  2014  on
         the other side.  As the Appellants relationship with  the  sponsors
         is established and the Appellants meet the  Immigration  Rules  for
         the reasons set out,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  public  interest
         grounds in refusing entry clearance are minimal and the decision to
         refuse entry clearance represents a  disproportionate  interference
         with Article 8 ECHR."

3.   The ECO's grounds restate the same  submissions  of  the  HOPO  stating
    that whilst it was now accepted the claimant and sponsors were  related
    as claimed, the judge erred in failing to consider the  issue  of  sole
    responsibility.  The grounds cited RM (Kwok On Tong: HC 395  para  320)
    India [2006] UKAIT 00039 and submitted that in light  of  this  failing
    there had not been adequate reasons given for allowing the appeal.

4.   I am unpersuaded by the ECO's grounds.  The  relevant  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules are set out by the judge at para 2 as follows:-

         "The requirements to be met for entry clearance as a child are  set
         out in -

             EC.C: Entry clearance as a child and state;

             a)   the applicant must be outside the UK;

             b)   the applicant must have  made  a  valid  application  for
                  entry clearance as a child;

             c)   the applicant must not fall for refusal under any of  the
                  grounds in section S-EC: suitability for entry  clearance;
                  and

             d)   the applicant  must  meet  all  of  the  requirements  in
                  section E-ECC: Eligibility for entry clearance as a child.

             Relationship requirements

             E.ECC.1.2     The applicant must be under the age of 18 at the
                        date of application.

             E.ECC.1.3     The applicant must not be married or in a  civil
                        partnership.

             E.ECC.1.4      The  applicant  must   not   have   formed   an
                        independent family unit.

             E.ECC.1.5     The applicant must not be leading an independent
                        life.

             E.ECC.1.6     One of the applicant's parents must be in the UK
                        with limited leave  to  enter  or  remain,  will  be
                        applying, or have applied,  entry  clearance,  as  a
                        partner or a parent under this Appendix (referred to
                        in this section as the "applicant's parent"), and

                        (a)      the  applicant's  parents   partner   under
                            Appendix FM is also a parent of the  applicant;
                            or

                        b) the applicant's parent has had and  continues  to
                            have  sole  responsibility  for   the   child's
                            upbringing; or

                        (c)     there are serious and compelling  family  or
                            other considerations which  make  exclusion  of
                            the child undesirable and suitable arrangements
                            have been made for the child's care."

5.    On  my  plain  reading  E.ECC.1.6(a),  (b)  and  (c)  sets  out  three
    alternative conditions.  The claimant  did  not  need  to  satisfy  (b)
    because his parents have  joint  responsibility  for  him.   The  ECO's
    grounds fail to identify, any other provision of  the  Rules  that  the
    claimant did not meet.

6.   In such circumstances the ECO's grounds cannot succeed.   The  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge allowing the appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds is upheld.


Signed:  [pic]                      Date: 21 January 2018

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
