
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20505/2019 (R)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Remote Hearing by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th September 2020               |On 20th October 2020                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                MR TAYYIB [G]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss L Mair, Counsel instructed by Scarsdale
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (R)

 1. The hearing before me on 29th September 2020 took the form of a remote
    hearing using skype for business. Neither party objected.  At the
    outset, I was informed by Miss Mair that the appellant did not intend
    to join the hearing. Miss Mair confirmed the appellant is happy for the
    hearing to proceed in his absence. I sat at the Birmingham Civil
    Justice Centre and the hearing room and building were open to the
    public. I was addressed by the representatives in exactly the same way
    as I would have been if the parties had attended the hearing together.
    I was satisfied: that this constituted a hearing in open court; that
    the open justice principle has been secured; that no party has been
    prejudiced; and that, insofar as there has been any restriction on a
    right or interest, it is justified as necessary and proportionate.  I
    was satisfied that it was in the interests of justice and in accordance
    with the overriding objective to proceed with a remote hearing because
    of the present need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19,
    and to avoid delay.  I was satisfied that a remote hearing would ensure
    the matter is dealt with fairly and justly in a way that is
    proportionate to the importance of the case, the complexity of the
    issues that arise, and the anticipated costs and resources of the
    parties.  At the end of the hearing I was satisfied that both parties
    had been able to participate fully in the proceedings.


 2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He appealed the  decision  of
    the respondent made on 28th November 2019 to refuse his application for
    leave to remain in the UK that was based on his relationship  with  his
    partner, who I shall refer to as NA in this decision, and  the  private
    life that he claims to have established in the UK since  arriving  here
    in 2012.  The appeal was dismissed for reasons set out in the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge McAll promulgated on 10th March 2020.


 3. It is  uncontroversial  that  the  appellant  cannot  satisfy  all  the
    requirements of Section E-LTRP; Eligibility for leave to  remain  as  a
    partner set out in Appendix FM of the immigration rules.  In  order  to
    succeed in an application for leave to remain as a  partner  under  the
    immigration rules, the appellant must therefore establish he  does  not
    fall  for  refusal  on  grounds  of  suitability,  that  he  meets  the
    requirements of paragraphs  E-LTRP.1.2  -  1.12,  and,  paragraph  EX.1
    applies.  That is, he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
    partner who is in the UK and  is  a  British  citizen,  and  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life with  that  partner  continuing
    outside the UK.


 4. The respondent accepted that the appellant's application did  not  fall
    for refusal on grounds of suitability and,  insofar  as  the  appellant
    relied upon his family  life  with  his  partner,  that  he  meets  the
    eligibility relationship requirement set out in paragraphs E-LTRP.1.2 -
    1.12 of Appendix FM.  The issue was whether  there  are  insurmountable
    obstacles to  family  life  with  the  appellant's  partner  continuing
    outside the UK.  Insofar as the appellant relied upon the private  life
    that he has established in the UK, the  respondent  was  not  satisfied
    that the requirements for leave to remain on private life  grounds  set
    out in paragraph 276ADE  of  the  immigration  rules  are  met  by  the
    appellant. The respondent was not satisfied that there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into  Pakistan  if
    he is required to leave the UK.


 5. In support of his claim that  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life with NA continuing outside the  UK,  the  appellant  relied
    upon two matters.  First, the appellant and NA have  been  approved  by
    the NHS for funding for IVF Treatment, and that treatment  is  ongoing.
    Second, NA is also being treated for mental health issues and requiring
    her to leave the UK to continue their family life outside the UK  would
    impact  upon  the  treatment  that  she  is  receiving  and  would   be
    detrimental to her mental health.


 6. At paragraph [10] of his decision, Judge McAll states:


         "Before hearing from the appellant Miss  Mair  explained  that  the
         appellant's partner [NA] was prevented from attending  the  hearing
         as she had been taken to hospital by  the  appellant  on  the  12th
         February 2020 and was currently sectioned under the  Mental  Health
         Act 1983 (MHA) and is an inpatient on the "Saxon Ward" at her local
         hospital. Miss Mair explained that due to NA's unusual behaviour on
         the 12th February 2020, the appellant taken her to hospital and the
         doctors who examined her were unable to discharge her and she still
         remains there. Miss Mair explained that the evidence shows that  NA
         has previously been sectioned under the MHA  in  August,  September
         and October 2019 so the hospital and doctor admitting her are aware
         of NA's mental health issues and have been treating her. Given  the
         absence of a statement from NA in the bundle  (which  I  noted  had
         been served on the 6th February 2020) I asked whether the appellant
         had ever intended to call NA and Miss Mair informed me she was  not
         aware of any intention to call NA and therefore it did not  prevent
         the appellant continuing with his appeal. There was no  application
         to adjourn the hearing."


 7. The appellant's immigration history and  the  matters  relied  upon  in
    support of his application for leave to remain in the UK are summarised
    at paragraphs [13] to [21] of the decision.  Judge McAll heard evidence
    from the appellant, his sister and the appellant's brother-in-law.   It
    is convenient to set  out  the  treatment  being  received  by  NA,  as
    recorded in paragraphs [19] and [20] of the decision of Judge McAll:


         "19. The appellant and NA are trying for  a  child  and  they  made
         their application for fertility treatment to the NHS  around  April
         2018..... They have been approved by the NHS for  funding  for  IVF
         treatment.  They were  approved  for  their  current  treatment  in
         November 2018 as there is a letter in the  respondent's  bundle  at
         C39 confirming they met the criteria  for  donor  eggs  with  "CARE
         Fertility".  The treatment they are currently undergoing is set out
         in detail in the papers which is a matter of record and I will  not
         repeat  it  here,  however  to  summarise,  it   involves   medical
         implantation  of  frozen  "embryos"  using  donor  eggs  and   that
         procedure was  successfully  completed  in  late  2019.  Sadly,  NA
         miscarried on 23rd December 2019. The couple still have two further
         frozen embryos remaining for  another  attempted  implant  and  the
         appellant stated at the  hearing  that  they  have  funding  for  a
         further round of treatment and that could result in  another  eight
         eggs or four further attempts to implant embryos at a later date.


         20.  In addition to this  fertility  treatment  NA  is  also  being
         treated for mental health issues. The  NHS  report  of  Dr  Babiker
         dated 26th September 2019 at page 407  of  the  Appellant's  bundle
         explains that NA was admitted and detained at  her  local  hospital
         under Section 2 MHA on the 21st August 2019 and  remained  detained
         in their care to the 29th August 2019 and prior to that she had had
         no contact with mental health services at  all.  The  diagnosis  at
         that time was "acute stress reaction".  This  detention  under  the
         MHA coincided with the appellant's  arrest  immigration  detention.
         Since the initial section 2 MHA detention in August,  NA  has  been
         sectioned in September and October 2019 and now again  in  February
         2020."


 8. At paragraph [21] of his decision, Judge McAll referred  to  an  expert
    report relied upon by the appellant and said:


         "The appellant has produced an expert report from Dr Waquas  Waheed
         Consultant Psychiatrist to support  his  claims  that  NA  will  be
         ostracised in Pakistan because of her mental health and she will be
         unable to obtain appropriate treatment there  that  will  meet  her
         needs."


 9. There was other evidence before the FtT regarding the mental health  of
    NA, from Dr Babiker, together with evidence from Dr  Amir  Hannan,  her
    GP, regarding NA's admission and  detention  under  the  MHA,  and  the
    treatment received.  Judge McAll addressed the medical evidence  before
    the Tribunal, including the expert report of Dr Waheed commissioned  by
    the appellant,  at  paragraphs  [38]  to  [45]  of  his  decision.   At
    paragraph [43], he said:


         "Taking all of the evidence in the round I am  not  satisfied  that
         the report of Dr Waheed is reliable. I find information that he has
         been provided with from the appellant, NA and NA's brother  is  not
         reliable and he has based  his  prognosis,  diagnosis  and  opinion
         largely on misinformation."


10. Judge McAll accepted at paragraph [35] that the appellant and NA are in
    a valid and genuine marriage.  He noted that there is no statement from
    NA  before  the  Tribunal,  and  he  found  there  is  no  satisfactory
    explanation for the absence of  a  statement  from  her.   Although  he
    expressed some surprise that NA is undergoing NHS funded IVF  treatment
    given the evidence regarding her mental health, at  paragraph  [37]  of
    his decision, Judge McAll  accepted  that  NA  is  currently  receiving
    fertility treatment and that she is also currently receiving  treatment
    for her mental health.  At paragraph [48] he said:


         "I find that there are no financial social insurmountable obstacles
         to this couple settling in Pakistan if that  is  where  they  would
         choose to settle. I have considered whether the  medical  treatment
         that NA is receiving amounts to an insurmountable obstacle and I am
         satisfied that it is not. The respondent is not preventing NA  from
         continuing with her fertility treatment if that is the course  that
         she wishes to pursue, and the NHS are willing to continue with  it.
         The appellant's presence in the  UK  is  not  essential  true  that
         treatment. The fertility treatment is not required to  maintain  or
         improve NA's health, it is voluntary treatment undertaken in  order
         to have a family.  Miss Mair argues that the respondent is  obliged
         to promote family ties which as a general statement I find that she
         should, however in the context of Miss Mair's argument I find  that
         there is no burden on the  respondent  to  allow  an  appellant  to
         remain in the UK in order to promote a couple  conceiving  a  child
         through fertility treatment, particularly when one of  the  parties
         has no leave to be in the UK. I find that where one of the  parties
         to a marriage does not have leave to be in the UK the mere fact  of
         marriage and the desire to have children here in the UK does not on
         its own bestow on a couple a legitimate right or expectation to  be
         allowed by the respondent to remain together here."


11. Judge McAll found the medical evidence relied upon  to  be  conflicting
    and  in  parts,  unreliable.  Nevertheless,  he  accepted  that  NA  is
    currently undergoing a mental health assessment and that  she  receives
    medication for her mental health issues. He also accepted that the  NHS
    is funding fertility treatment.  He noted that Dr Waheed  accepts  that
    treatment  for  the  appellant's  mental  health  condition  is  widely
    available in Pakistan, and he rejected the  claim  that  the  appellant
    will face social stigma in Pakistan because of her mental  health.   At
    paragraph [49] he concluded:


         "49. ... I am being asked by the appellant to find that NA would be
         deprived of the treatment she is receiving in the UK if she was  to
         go to Pakistan. On the evidence before me I am satisfied  that  the
         mental health treatment is available to NA in Pakistan. I also find
         that the appellant has not established that NA would  be  prevented
         from accessing fertility treatment in Pakistan should she  wish  to
         continue with that treatment which is voluntary in  nature  and  is
         not required in order to maintain or improve her health."


12. At paragraphs [50] and [51] of his decision, Judge McAll said:


         "50. When she entered into the relationship with the  appellant  NA
         knew the appellant's immigration status was precarious as he had no
         leave to remain here and had held no leave since 2014. In terms  of
         the fertility treatment that she  is  receiving  that  is  again  a
         matter for NA.  She has been attempting to have a child  since  she
         married her first husband in 2008 and she has been  undergoing  NHS
         funded fertility treatment since 2013, sadly without  success,  and
         it appears she will continue to try which is a matter for  her  and
         the doctors advising her and facilitating the treatment.  There  is
         no satisfactory evidence before  me  that  such  treatment  is  not
         available to her in Pakistan, the argument is that it is costly and
         she should not be required to give that treatment up as  a  British
         citizen. I accept that any treatment in Pakistan will  not  be  NHS
         funded but it is available, and these two families are not families
         without means should they wish to support her. There  is  also  the
         possibility of NA continuing with the treatment in the UK with  the
         appellant in Pakistan and her joining him at a  later  date.  There
         are therefore obstacles to their relationship continuing,  however,
         I do not accept they are insurmountable obstacles.


         51.  I am not satisfied that  the  appellant  faces  insurmountable
         obstacles to returning to Pakistan. He has  strong  family,  social
         and cultural ties there having left at the age of 22 years  old.  I
         do not accept his  claim  that  NA  is  unable  to  follow  him  to
         Pakistan. NA came to the UK in 2012 and she also has strong family,
         social and cultural ties to Pakistan. They are both from  the  same
         village, the families know each other. Dr Waheed states that if  NA
         remains in the UK or if she goes to Pakistan, she needs to follow a
         prescribed mental health medication which is "widely available"  in
         Pakistan. From the evidence before me I am satisfied that it  is  a
         matter of choice for NA whether she continues with that  medication
         and treatment here in the UK whether she goes to  Pakistan,  it  is
         available to her in both countries. I find the appellant  does  not
         meet the requirements of EX.1"


13. Judge McAll was satisfied that the appellant has a family  and  private
    life in the UK. As to whether respondent's decision would be in  breach
    of the appellant's right to respect for private and family  life  under
    Article 8, Judge McAll concluded at paragraph [62]:


         "I have found the appellant and NA have strong  family  social  and
         cultural ties in Pakistan. I have not accepted the claims that  the
         appellant's family will be in some way hostile towards  her  should
         they return to Pakistan as a couple. The respondent is in any event
         not requiring NA to leave and that  is  a  matter  for  her.  I  am
         satisfied medical treatment is  available  for  the  mental  health
         issues that have arisen since August 2019 and they can  be  treated
         here or in Pakistan and NA will have access to  such  treatment.  I
         have made a similar finding in regard to the fertility treatment. I
         have considered whether it is reasonable to expect NA to  join  her
         husband in Pakistan and for the reasons that I have  given  I  find
         that it is (MA Pakistan v SSHD [2009]  EWCA  Civ  953  considered).
         After careful consideration of the appellants claim I am  satisfied
         that the respondent's decision is proportionate and does not breach
         Article 8."


The appeal before me


14. The appellant  claims  Judge  McAll  made  perverse  findings  when  he
    considered whether there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life
    between  the  appellant  and  NA  continuing   outside   the   UK,   or
    alternatively, in reaching his decision, he  failed  to  take  relevant
    evidence into account without cogent reasons, took irrelevant  evidence
    into account, and, applied the incorrect test.


15. The appellant claims it is perverse to  suggest  that  the  appellant's
    presence would not be required in the UK for  the  couple  to  continue
    with their fertility treatment. It is said that any  future  rounds  of
    fertility treatment will require the appellant's sperm as well  as  the
    donor eggs, to create new embryos and it is impossible to see how  this
    could occur without the appellant's presence in the UK.   NA  would  be
    unable to avail herself of the further rounds of IVF treatment that she
    has been offered with the donor eggs in the UK if the couple  were  not
    both present in the UK.  Furthermore it is impossible  to  see  how  NA
    could be implanted with the two extant frozen embryos in the UK without
    her being physically present  here  in  the  UK.   Miss  Mair  submits,
    relying upon the judgement of Lord Reed in Agyarko,  that  Judge  McAll
    failed to apply the correct test and consider what  the  practical  and
    realistic barriers would be for the  on-going  fertility  treatment  to
    continue if the couple were in Pakistan.


16. The appellant claims it was equally perverse for Judge  McAll  to  find
    that NA would not be deprived of the treatment she is receiving in  the
    UK for her mental health if she were to go to Pakistan. She  would  not
    continue to receive the  continuity  of  the  treatment  that  she  has
    received on "Saxon Ward", where she was at the date of the hearing  and
    where she had been  hospitalised  on  three  previous  occasions  since
    August 2019. She could not benefit from the treatment received from her
    treating psychiatrist and her extant medical team.  It is said that  in
    reaching his decision Judge McAll relied upon the comment  made  by  Dr
    Waheed that the mental health medication required is "widely available"
    in Pakistan, having previously found that his report is unreliable.  In
    any event, since Dr Waheed is not a country expert,  it  was  incumbent
    upon Judge McAll to consider the policy/country evidence  submitted  by
    the appellant in support of the appeal.   The appellant refers  to  the
    respondent's "Family Policy" dated 10th  December  2019  in  which  the
    respondent expressly recognises that the impact of a mental or physical
    disability or of a  serious  illness  which  requires  ongoing  medical
    treatment, could amount to an insurmountable obstacle. Furthermore, the
    appellant refers  to  the  respondent's  CPIN,  Pakistan:  Medical  and
    healthcare issues Version 2.0 August 2018, and  the  EASO  "Country  of
    Origin Report" regarding the provision of health care in  Pakistan  and
    the social stigma associated with mental disorders.


17. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Scott
    Baker on 12th May 2020.


18. Before me, Miss Mair adopted the grounds of appeal and submits that the
    over-arching ground is that the 'insurmountable obstacles' test was not
    properly applied by Judge McAll and the  material  findings  made,  are
    perverse.  She  submits  Judge  McAll  accepts  that  NA  is  receiving
    fertility treatment.  He accepts they have funding for access to  donor
    eggs and that a number of embryo's are in  storage.   NA  sadly  had  a
    miscarriage in December  2019.   Currently,  there  are  two  remaining
    frozen embryos, and it is perverse for the Judge to conclude  that  the
    fertility treatment could continue without both the appellant and NA in
    the UK.  Miss Mair submits the test is whether there are insurmountable
    obstacles to the family life of the appellant and NA continuing outside
    the UK.  She accepts that the appellant would not need to be in the  UK
    for the implantation of the two frozen embryos  currently  in  storage,
    but both the appellant and NA would have to remain in the  UK  for  any
    further fertility treatment using donor eggs.  She submits there is the
    added complication of a high risk pregnancy for  which  NA  would  need
    monitoring and the  assistance  and  support  of  the  appellant.   She
    submits NA would undoubtedly have to remain in the UK to continue  with
    the fertility treatment and  a  short  term  separation  would  not  be
    possible because it would be a high risk pregnancy and the  removal  of
    the appellant would have an adverse impact upon the  mental  health  of
    NA.


19. Miss Mair submits NA has already been admitted and detained  under  the
    Mental Health Act and the question is not whether there is  any  mental
    health treatment  available  in  Pakistan,  but  whether  it  would  be
    unjustifiably harsh for NA not to be able to access the treatment  that
    she  is  already  receiving.   She  submits,  the  combination  of  the
    fertility treatment and the treatment being  received  by  NA  for  her
    mental health, called for a  careful  analysis  of  whether  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing  in  Pakistan.   She
    submits that in practice, Judge McAll did not apply  the  correct  test
    but focussed instead on it being a  matter  of  choice  for  NA  as  to
    whether she continues with her medication and treatment here in the  UK
    or whether she goes to Pakistan.  It was perverse to conclude that  the
    treatment currently being received would be available to  her  in  both
    countries.   She  submits  that  in  considering  whether   there   are
    insurmountable obstacles, Judge McAll also refers, at  paragraph  [50],
    to the fact that  when  NA  entered  into  the  relationship  with  the
    appellant, she knew the appellant's immigration history was  precarious
    as he had no leave to remain and had held no leave since 2014. That  is
    entirely irrelevant  because  the  exceptions  to  certain  eligibility
    requirements for leave to remain as a partner set out in  Section  EX.1
    only apply where all the eligibility requirements cannot be met.


20. Miss Mair submits that what was required was a practical and  realistic
    analysis and if Judge McAll had applied the correct test,  the  outcome
    of the appeal may very well have been  different.   She  submits  Judge
    McAll failed to consider matters relevant to even a short separation so
    that the embryos now available can be implanted, the  risks  associated
    with any pregnancy and the impact that even a short  separation  during
    this difficult period would have upon the mental health of NA.


21. In reply, Mrs Aboni submits there is no material error of  law  in  the
    decision  of  the  FtT.   She  submits  the  Judge   directed   himself
    appropriately, and reached conclusions that were open  to  him  on  the
    evidence before the Tribunal.  The Judge accepted that NA is  receiving
    treatment in the UK, and she submits, it was open  to  Judge  McAll  to
    find that the appellant's presence in the  UK  is  not  required.   She
    submits NA could continue the fertility treatment that she is currently
    receiving in the UK, and could then join the appellant in Pakistan once
    the embryos have been implanted.  When pressed, she accepted that Judge
    McAll does not appear to address what the impact of a short  separation
    might be, upon NA and her mental health.  Mrs Aboni submits it was open
    to Judge McAll to find that neither the  fertility  treatment  nor  the
    mental health of NA amount to insurmountable obstacles to  family  life
    continuing outside the UK.  She submits the failure  to  refer  to  the
    respondent's policy is not material and there was  no  evidence  before
    the FtT that there is a lack of any treatment required, in Pakistan.


Discussion


22. The appellant had to rely upon Section EX.1.(b) and to establish  there
    are insurmountable obstacles to family life with NA continuing  outside
    the UK.  EX. 2 of Appendix FM states:


         "For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) 'insurmountable  obstacles'
         means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be  overcome  all  would  entail
         very serious hardship the applicant or their partner."


23. In R (Agyarko) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11, Lord  Reed  confirmed  the  words
    'insurmountable obstacles'  mean  not  only  obstacles  which  make  it
    literally impossible  for  a  family  to  live  together  in  the  non-
    national's country of origin, but were to be understood in a  practical
    and realistic sense, as a stringent test. The definition of the test in
    EX.2 of Appendix FM is consistent with Strasbourg case law.  The  Rules
    and associated instructions represent the respondent's policy which had
    been endorsed by Parliament and fell within the margin of appreciation.
    They were  designed  to  be  compatible  with  Article  8  in  all  but
    exceptional cases. Accordingly, leave to remain would not  normally  be
    granted where  the  applicant  or  their  partner  were  in  breach  of
    immigration laws unless insurmountable obstacles would  prevent  family
    life outside the UK. He said:


         "43.  It  appears  that  the  European  court  intends  the   words
         "insurmountable obstacles" to be  understood  in  a  practical  and
         realistic sense, rather than as referring solely to obstacles which
         make it literally impossible for the family to live together in the
         country of origin of the non-national concerned....


         44. Domestically, the expression "insurmountable obstacles" appears
         in paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix FM to the Rules. As  explained  in
         para 15 above, that paragraph applies in cases where  an  applicant
         for leave to remain under the partner route is in the UK in  breach
         of  immigration  laws,  and   requires   that   there   should   be
         insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life   with   that   partner
         continuing  outside  the   UK.   The   expression   "insurmountable
         obstacles" is now  defined  by  paragraph  EX.2  as  meaning  "very
         significant difficulties which would be faced by the  applicant  or
         their partner in continuing their family life together outside  the
         UK and which could not be overcome or  would  entail  very  serious
         hardship for the  applicant  or  their  partner."  That  definition
         appears to me to be  consistent  with  the  meaning  which  can  be
         derived from the Strasbourg case law....


         ....


         48. The Secretary of State's view that the public interest  in  the
         removal of persons who are in the UK in breach of immigration  laws
         is, in all but exceptional circumstances,  sufficiently  compelling
         to outweigh the individual's interest in family life with a partner
         in the UK, unless there are insurmountable obstacles to family life
         with that partner continuing outside the UK, is challenged in these
         proceedings as being too stringent to be compatible with article  8
         .  It  is  argued  that  the  Secretary  of   State   has   treated
         "insurmountable obstacles" as a test applicable to persons  in  the
         UK in breach of immigration laws, whereas the European court treats
         it as a relevant factor in relation to non-settled  migrants.  That
         is true, but it does not mean that the Secretary of State's test is
         incompatible with article 8 . As has been explained, the Rules  are
         not a summary of the European court's case law, but a statement  of
         the Secretary of State's policy. That policy is  qualified  by  the
         scope allowed for leave to remain to be granted outside the  Rules.
         If the applicant or his or her partner would face very  significant
         difficulties in continuing their family life together  outside  the
         UK, which could not  be  overcome  or  would  entail  very  serious
         hardship, then the "insurmountable obstacles" test will be met, and
         leave will be granted under the Rules. If that test is not met, but
         the refusal of the application would result in unjustifiably  harsh
         consequences, such that refusal would not  be  proportionate,  then
         leave will be granted outside the Rules on the basis that there are
         "exceptional   circumstances".   In   the   absence    of    either
         "insurmountable  obstacles"  or  "exceptional   circumstances"   as
         defined, however, it is not apparent why it should be  incompatible
         with article 8 for leave to be refused. The Rules and  Instructions
         are therefore compatible with article 8. That is not, of course, to
         say  that  decisions  applying  the  Rules  and   Instructions   in
         individual cases will necessarily be compatible with  article  8  :
         that is a question which, if a  decision  is  challenged,  must  be
         determined independently by the court or tribunal in the  light  of
         the particular circumstances of each case."


24. In my judgment, the decision of Judge McAll is vitiated by  a  material
    error of law.  I accept, as Miss Mair submits that Judge McAll did  not
    properly apply  the  'insurmountable  obstacles'  test  and  failed  to
    properly address the claim made by  the  appellant.   He  accepted  the
    appellant is currently undergoing a mental health assessment  and  that
    she receives medication for her mental health issues. He also  accepted
    the NHS is funding fertility treatment.


25. Taken in isolation, it was in my judgement open to Judge McAll to  find
    there are no financial or social obstacles  to  the  appellant  and  NA
    continuing their family  life  together  in  Pakistan.  It  was  in  my
    judgement open to the Judge to find that NA will not  face  any  social
    stigma because of her mental  health.  Although  there  was  some  very
    limited background material before the FtT around stigma  about  mental
    disorders, Judge McAll noted that here,  NA  has  the  support  of  her
    family, she has only been ill for a short period of time  since  August
    2019  and  there  is  evidence  that  if  she  follows  her  prescribed
    medication, that is available in Pakistan, there is no good reasons  to
    expect there to be a re-occurrence.   Furthermore,  the  "acute  stress
    reaction" diagnosed from her previous detention under the  MHA  appears
    to  have  coincided  with  the  appellant's  arrest   and   immigration
    detention.  In Pakistan, the appellant and NA would be living  together
    with the support of each other and their families, who live in the same
    area.


26. I reject the claim that it was perverse for  Judge  McAll  to  conclude
    that the appellant's presence in the UK would not be required  for  the
    couple to continue with their  fertility  treatment.   The  appellant's
    presence in the UK is not required for the two embryos that are already
    available, to be implanted.  It was therefore open to  Judge  McAll  to
    find at paragraph [50], that the appellant's presence in the UK is  not
    essential to the current  treatment.   As  to  the  availability  of  a
    further round of treatment with the use  of  donor  eggs,  Judge  McAll
    found that there is no burden on the respondent to allow  an  appellant
    to remain in the UK in order to promote a  couple  conceiving  a  child
    through fertility treatment, particularly when one of the  parties  has
    no leave to be in the UK.


27. I also reject the claim that it was perverse for Judge  McAll  to  find
    that NA would not be deprived of the treatment she is receiving for her
    mental health if she were to go to Pakistan.  It  is  obvious  that  NA
    would not continue to be treated at the "Saxon Ward", as she is now, by
    the same clinicians.  That is not  what  is  required.  It  was  in  my
    judgement open to Judge  McAll  to  conclude  that  the  mental  health
    treatment required by NA, would be available to her in Pakistan,  based
    upon the limited evidence in that regard that was before the First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appellant's own expert offered the opinion  that  if  NA
    goes to Pakistan, she needs to  follow  her  prescribed  mental  health
    medication which is widely available in Pakistan.


28. However, Judge McAll repeatedly refers to there being a choice for  the
    appellant's partner to remain in the UK, to continue with her fertility
    treatment or to join the appellant in Pakistan.  At paragraphs [48]  of
    his decision, Judge McAll said:


         "... The respondent is not preventing NA from continuing  with  her
         fertility treatment if that is the course that she wishes to pursue
         and the NHS are willing  to  continue  with  it.   The  appellant's
         presence in the UK is not essential to that treatment...".


29. At paragraphs [50] and [51] he said:


         "50. ... There is also the possibility of NA  continuing  with  the
         treatment in the UK with the appellant in Pakistan and her  joining
         him at a later date...


         51.  ... From the evidence before me I am satisfied that  it  is  a
         matter of choice for NA whether she continues with that  medication
         and treatment [referring to NA's mental health] here in the  UK  or
         whether she goes to Pakistan,  it  is  available  to  her  in  both
         countries..."


30. The test for 'insurmountable obstacles' is set out in  paragraph  EX.2,
    and required the appellant  to  establish  that  there  would  be  very
    significant  difficulties  faced  by  the  appellant  or  his   partner
    continuing their family life together outside the UK  and  which  could
    not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the appellant
    or his partner.


31. The question to be determined was not whether NA could remain in the UK
    to continue her treatment, separated from the  appellant,  but  whether
    there are 'insurmountable obstacles' to their  family  life  continuing
    outside the UK.  Although  one  might  read  in  to  what  is  said  at
    paragraph [50], that Judge McAll was considering whether separation for
    a short period would amount to very significant difficulties  faced  by
    the appellant and NA in continuing their family life  together  outside
    the UK, which could not  be  overcome  or  would  entail  very  serious
    hardship for the appellant or NA, in my judgement the  difficulty  with
    that is Judge McAll does not address whether it would be  a  short-term
    separation or the impact that a short separation  may  have  upon  NA's
    mental health.


32. It is, as Miss Mair submits, the combination of the fertility treatment
    and NA's mental health that the appellant relies  upon.   The  question
    was whether  there  would  be  very  significant  difficulties  to  the
    appellant and NA continuing their family life together outside the  UK,
    taking into account the fertility treatment  being  received  and  NA's
    mental health, which could not be overcome or would entail very serious
    hardship for the appellant or NA. In my judgment, that question is  not
    properly addressed by Judge McAll.


33. In my judgement although it might be open to a judge to  conclude  that
    the appellant's presence in the UK is not required  and  the  appellant
    and his partner could live together in Pakistan once the  embryos  that
    are currently available  have  been  implanted,  Judge  McAll  did  not
    consider what the impact of that might be upon the appellant's  partner
    who has previously undergone a  miscarriage,  and  has  been  sectioned
    under the Mental Health Act.  I accept, as Mrs Aboni submits  that  the
    medical evidence before the Tribunal was  lacking  and  unsatisfactory,
    but I am persuaded that in  the  end,  Judge  McAll  did  not  properly
    consider the question that arises under Section EX.1.(b) of Appendix FM
    and his decision must be set aside.


34. As to disposal, I agree with the parties that the appropriate course is
    for the matter to be remitted to the FtT for hearing de  novo  with  no
    findings preserved.  I have decided that it  is  appropriate  to  remit
    this  appeal  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  having   considered
    paragraph 7.2 of the Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  of  25th
    September 2012.  In my view, in determining the appeal, the nature  and
    extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive.


35. The parties will be advised of the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


36. The appeal is allowed and the decision of FtT Judge  McAll  promulgated
    on 10th March 2020 is set aside.


37. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh  hearing  of  the  appeal
    with no findings preserved.

Signed   V. Mandalia                    Date     15th October 2020

       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
