
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20684/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 February 2020                  |On 10 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                           NATALIE KAPINGA NTUMBA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   The ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Bader, Counsel, instructed by Iras & Co
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. These are a written record of the oral reasons given for our decision  at
   the hearing.

Introduction

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Clapham (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 16 August  2019,  by
    which he dismissed her  appeal against the respondent's refusal  on  19
    April 2018 of her application for entry clearance to  settle  with  her
    partner, Mr Mutshipay, (the 'Sponsor'), a DRC national  with  leave  to
    remain as a refugee in  the  UK.   For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  the
    appellant did not seek reunification under the applicable provisions of
    the Immigration Rules, as the appellant and the Sponsor met, after  his
    grant of asylum, in a third country, Zambia, following which  they  had
    married by proxy.

 3. The respondent rejected the application on  the  basis  that  that  she
    failed to meet the English language requirements for  entry  clearance,
    and refusal of entry  clearance  would  not  have  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the couple.

 4. In her appeal to the FtT, the appellant sought to rely on an  exception
    to  the  English  language  requirements  of  the   Immigration   Rules
    (paragraph E.ECP4.2(c))  on  the  basis  that  there  were  no  English
    language test centres or learning centres in the DRC and it  would  not
    be reasonable and would be disproportionate to  expect  her  to  access
    education and take a test in a neighbouring country.

 5. In essence, the appellant's claims involved the following  issues:  (1)
    whether she could rely on paragraph E-ECP.4.2(c) within the Immigration
    Rules; and (2) whether  her  application  should  succeed  on  a  wider
    analysis under article 8 of the  ECHR,  including  whether  there  were
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for the couple of the refusal of entry
    clearance.

The FtT's decision

 6. The FtT was not impressed by the fact that the applicant  had  in  fact
    taken an English language test in a  third  country,  Zambia,  but  had
    failed the test. She therefore had no difficulties in taking  the  test
    in Zambia. Health issues were raised by the appellant, but  no  further
    details were provided to the  FtT.  The  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph E-ECP.4.2(c). The FtT concluded that  was  no
    need to consider the appeal outside the Immigration  Rules  because  it
    was possible to consider the application within the rules by  reference
    to 'exceptional circumstances'. The expense of  travelling  to  another
    country to take the  English  language  test  was  not  an  exceptional
    circumstance and the FtT dismissed the appeal on that basis.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal which are that the Sponsor could
    not be expected to return to the DRC as he was a refugee; and  the  FtT
    had failed to consider the proportionality  of  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance outside the Immigration Rules for the purpose of his  article
    8 rights.

 8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Gumsley granted  permission  on  16  December
    2019, regarding it as arguable that the FtT's  analysis  of  article  8
    rights was inadequate. The grant of permission was not limited  in  its
    scope.

The hearing before us

The appellant's submissions

 9. In relation to ground (1), while Mr Bader  made  no  formal  concession
    that the appellant failed to meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  E-
    ECP.4.2.(c) he indicated that he was not pursuing ground (1)  with  any
    vigour, noting the FtT's finding that the appellant had  been  able  to
    take an English language in Zambia, but had failed the test.

10. The focus of Mr Bader's submissions was  in  relation  to  ground  (2),
    namely the FtT's article 8 analysis.  He referred to the brevity of the
    FtT's analysis at [38] and [39], in contrast to the Court  of  Appeal's
    identification in GM (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA  Civ  1630  of  the
    need for an assessment outside the Immigration Rules requiring  a  fair
    balance between competing public and private  interests,  which  was  a
    proportionality test and was, by its nature, fact-sensitive.   In  that
    regard we also referred the representatives to the recent  example,  in
    KF and others (entry clearance, relatives  of  refugees)  Syria  [2019]
    UKUT 413, in which the  Upper  Tribunal  undertook  a  'balance  sheet'
    analysis in relation to proportionality, also  relating  to  an  appeal
    against the refusal of entry clearance.

The respondent's submissions

11. In relation to ground  (1),  Mr  Melvin  submitted  that  the  FtT  had
    considered the evidence before him in relation to the appellant  taking
    the English language test and failing it; and the lack of  any  further
    evidence about the lack of availability of test centres and educational
    provisions within the DRC, where she lived.  Those were  findings  that
    were open to the FtT to make.  The burden was on the appellant to  show
    the lack of access to educational provision and test  centres  and  she
    had not done so.

12. In relation to ground (2), the FtT was entitled  to  apply  a  test  of
    exceptionality, the support for which was the Court of Appeal  case  of
    TZ (Pakistan) and PG (India) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 118.

Discussion and conclusions - error of law

Ground (1)

13. We conclude that the FtT was entitled to reach the conclusion that  the
    appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  the  exception  under  E-
    ECP.4.2.(c), in  relation  to  exceptional  circumstances  which  would
    justify her not  needing  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  English
    language test.  The FtT had clearly considered the distinction  between
    the  absence  of  test  centres,  as  distinct  from  the  absence   of
    educational facilities in the DRC, with an analysis at  [24]  to  [27].
    The fact that the appellant adduced no further evidence on the point is
    not one for which the FtT can be criticised and the FtT was entitled to
    take into account the fact that the  appellant  had  taken  a  test  in
    Zambia and had failed it.  In essence, the FtT's findings  in  relation
    to the appellant not meeting E-ECP.4.2(c) do not disclose an  error  of
    law and the appeal fails on that ground.

Ground (2)

14. We conclude that the FtT did err in law in his article 8  analysis.  We
    do not accept Mr Melvin's submission that a reference, brief as it was,
    at [38] and [39] to exceptionality, by reference to the authority of TZ
    (Pakistan) was sufficient for  the  purposes  of  an  analysis  of  the
    appellant's article 8 rights; either within the Immigration  Rules  for
    the purposes of GEN.3.2. of Appendix  FM,  namely  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences for the couple of the refusal of entry clearance; or  more
    widely, as a freestanding article 8 analysis  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The fact-sensitive nature of such an  analysis  was  emphasised
    not only in GM, but also in TZ (Pakistan), which reaffirmed a 'balance-
    sheet' analysis as recommended by Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016]  UKSC
    60.  The  FtT's  brief  reference  to  the  absence   of   'exceptional
    circumstances' cannot, in our view, be an appropriate substitution  for
    a fact-sensitive analysis of balanced proportionality.

Conclusion on error of law

15. In the circumstances, the FtT erred in his failure  to  carry  out  the
    necessary fact-finding and  the  subsequent  analysis  in  relation  to
    article 8.  That failure amounts to an error  of  law,  such  that  the
    decision of the FtT cannot stand and must be set aside.  In  doing  so,
    we preserve the findings and the conclusion of the FtT that:

   1.   the  applicant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  'exceptional
      circumstances' as referred to in E-ECP.4.2.(c), but noting that those
      exceptional circumstances applied to an inability to take an  English
      language  test,  not  a  wider  assessment  of  'exceptionality'   as
      understood in relation to article 8;

   2. the applicant and the Sponsor have a genuine family life together, as
      found by the FtT at [29].

Disposal

16. Given the narrowness of the factual and legal issues which needed to be
    remade, we regarded it as appropriate and in accordance  paragraph  7.2
    of the Senior President's Practice Statements that the  Upper  Tribunal
    remakes the decision on the appellant's appeal.

Remaking decision

17. In considering remaking the decision on the appellant's appeal, we were
    conscious of the authorities to which we have  already  been  referred;
    paragraph  GEN.3.2.  of  Appendix  FM,  which  refers  to  there  being
    'unjustifiably harsh consequences' as a result of the refusal of  entry
    clearance;  as well as a wider assessment outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules by reference to article 8 of the ECHR and in particular, sections
    117A and B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

18. In referring ourselves to these provisions, we reminded ourselves  that
    a proportionality assessment is fact-sensitive, and we have adopted the
    "balance-sheet" approach, to which we have already referred.

19. In  reaching  our  decision,  we  recite  briefly  the  Sponsor's  oral
    evidence, which  he  gave  in  addition  to  a  brief  written  witness
    statement which he adopted before us.  He was also cross-examined by Mr
    Melvin.  In making our findings, we believe it  is  important  to  note
    that we found the Sponsor to be an honest witness, albeit  we  did  not
    necessarily accept the reliability of some of his assertions, which  we
    will set out below.

The Sponsor's evidence

20. The Sponsor has lived in the UK for 20 years.  He  does  not  have  any
    relatives in the UK, and he described, in simple terms, his  loneliness
    in returning from work to a home without his wife,  with  whom  he  has
    been married since December 2016.  He had relatives in  the  DRC  (four
    brothers, with his parents having deceased) but could not return to the
    DRC for the same reasons that he had been recognised as a refugee.

21. The appellant also had family in the  DRC  and  lived  there  with  her
    mother and 15-year old sister.  She had travelled to Zambia  where  she
    had taken the English language  test  in  2017,  although  the  sponsor
    described his unease and worry about her travelling alone in future, or
    to live there for any extended period of time, to retake the  test.  He
    had visited her on four occasions in Zambia leading up to and following
    their marriage and these visits are evidenced in stamps in his passport
    which is included in the appellant's bundle.

22. Prior to getting married, the Sponsor had been unaware of the necessity
    of an English language test and had only discovered this  on  reviewing
    the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.   He  had  paid  for  the
    appellant to receive informal private tuition to learn English  in  the
    DRC for a six-month period, but she had  not  successfully  passed  the
    test, having received that private tuition.  He believed that were  she
    permitted to come to an anglophone country such as the  UK,  she  would
    more readily learn English, whereas  the  difficulty  in  the  DRC  was
    because it was a francophone country.

23. The appellant had not attempted to retake the test since taking  it  on
    the one occasion in 2017.  The Sponsor referred  to  the  appellant  as
    suffering from depression, or something of the equivalent, although  he
    did not suggest that any health  issues  impacted  on  the  appellant's
    ability to learn English. In her words, when she tried to learn English
    in the DRC, she became too "excited".

24. The Sponsor had delayed making the application for entry clearance,  on
    the appellant's behalf, for around eighteen  months  after  the  couple
    were married, in order to allow the Sponsor time  to  prepare  for  the
    appellant to come over to the UK.  He asserted, albeit we do  not  find
    this to be reliable evidence, that there was nowhere in the  DRC  where
    alternative English language education would be available.  When  asked
    what research he had done in connection with his assertion,  he  stated
    that he knew this as he was from the DRC.  When it was pointed out that
    he hadn't lived in the DRC for 20  years,  he  suggested  that  if  the
    appellant had been aware of where to learn English  in  the  DRC  other
    than via the informal tutoring he had paid for, she would have accessed
    that alternative language tuition.  She had not, so  it  followed  that
    there was no alternative provision available.





The respondent's closing submissions

25. Mr Melvin challenged the reliability of the  Sponsor's  assertion  that
    English language tuition was not available in the DRC.  The Sponsor had
    previously obtained it in the DRC for the appellant and the  fact  that
    she had not passed the test first time did not mean that she could  not
    do so in the future.  No research had been done by the  couple  on  the
    availability of tuition and the Sponsor had not visited the DRC  in  20
    years.  There was no other evidence produced by  the  appellant  before
    the respondent or the FtT.  There was  no  medical  evidence  that  the
    applicant could not access tuition or take a language  test  in  Zambia
    because of any medical condition.

26. In terms of the wider article 8 analysis, the appellant lived  at  home
    with her mother and younger sister, and whilst she may miss the Sponsor
    and it may be very distressing,  nevertheless  she  did  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules and such  distress  could  not  outweigh  the  public
    interest in her meeting the Immigration Rules  when  it  was  simply  a
    question of her retaking the test.

The appellant's submissions

27. Mr Bader asked us  to  consider  that  the  appellant  was  a  credible
    witness, who, for example, had candidly admitted to  having  family  in
    the  DRC.   In  the  proportionality  assessment,  Mr  Bader  initially
    suggested that we should attach little weight  to  the  requirement  of
    English language proficiency, although when we explored this  with  him
    further he accepted he  had  no  authority  for  that  proposition  and
    further accepted that the requirement to speak English was not  only  a
    requirement of the Immigration Rules, but also referred to  in  section
    117B of the 2002 Act.  He accepted that  we  should  attach  weight  to
    English language proficiency, but we should consider the countervailing
    weight that  the  Sponsor  was  in  a  genuine  relationship  with  the
    appellant, which he wished to continue in the UK.

28. The couple could not continue their relationship in  the  DRC,  and  it
    would be disproportionate to expect them to continue that  family  life
    in  a  third  country  such  as  Zambia,  where  neither  had   settled
    previously.  We should instead take a  holistic  view  in  relation  to
    family and private life.  Where the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  was
    based solely on the fact that the  appellant  had  failed  the  English
    language  test,  when  considering  the  couple's  circumstances,  that
    refusal was disproportionate.

Discussion on remaking

29. We  have  adopted  a  'balance  sheet'  analysis  on  the  question  of
    proportionality, which feeds into the requirement under GEN.3.2. of the
    Immigration Rules and also the  wider  assessment  by  reference  to  a
    freestanding right under article 8.

Factors in the appellant's favour

30. First, is the fact that the couple are in  a  genuine  relationship,  a
    finding made by the FtT and a finding that we have preserved.

31. Second, we also accept that the refusal of  entry  clearance  is  based
    solely on the appellant's failure to pass the English language test and
    while there is no 'near miss' principle, the narrow,  albeit  important
    ground on which the appellant failed to meet the Immigration Rules,  is
    a factor in her favour, in an holistic assessment of proportionality.

32. Third, is the fact that the Sponsor cannot return to the DRC, where  he
    has relatives and where the appellant lives with her family, by  virtue
    of his refugee status.

33. Fourth, we accept that weight should be attached,  in  the  appellant's
    favour, to the fact that an alternative option (but  by  no  means  the
    alternative option) of the appellant and the Sponsor living together in
    a third country, Zambia, would represent  a  substantial  upheaval  for
    both, noting that neither of them has  lived  permanently  in  a  third
    country and the appellant's  trips  to  Zambia  have  been  limited  to
    meeting the Sponsor on four occasions,  including  when  the  appellant
    took the English language test.

34. Fifth, we attached weight to the Sponsor's concerns about the safety of
    the appellant living alone in Zambia,  while  she  retook  the  English
    language test.  She currently lives with her family in the DRC.  In the
    circumstances, to allay these concerns while the appellant  retook  the
    test would require the Sponsor or  a  family  member  to  meet  her  in
    Zambia, with the consequential costs, as they did on the first occasion
    that he took the test.

35. Sixth, and linked in with the fourth point, we noted the fact that  the
    Sponsor has spent a significant period of time in the UK, namely twenty
    years, and he would effectively be asked to give up his  private  life,
    including his job, in relocating to a third-country such as Zambia.

36. Finally, we accept as genuine the obvious  distress  that  the  Sponsor
    conveyed to us which has been caused by the  couple's  separation,  and
    the limited ability of the couple to see one  another  because  of  the
    costs of his travelling to see her in Zambia frequently.

Factors weighing against the appellant

37. First,  we  noted  that  proficiency  in  the  English  language  is  a
    requirement that is central to the Immigration Rules;  and  as  clearly
    set out in section 117B of the 2002 Act, the maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest (see  section  117B(1)).
    We are fortified  in  that  conclusion,  noting  that  section  117B(2)
    explains why it is in the public interest that those seeking  to  enter
    or remain in the UK can speak English, as they are less likely to be  a
    burden on taxpayers and are better able to integrate into society.   We
    therefore apply significant weight to  that  public  interest.  To  the
    extent that Mr Bader initially suggested that  we  should  only  attach
    limited weight to that interest, albeit a suggestion he then retracted,
    we were referred to no authority for that proposition, which we reject.

38. Second, we attached significant weight to the fact that the Sponsor was
    able to arrange private tutoring for the appellant in the DRC for a six-
    month period; the appellant was able to take the English language  test
    in Zambia; and she had only attempted to take  the  test  on  a  single
    occasion, and had not attempted to retake it, nor, do we find, has  she
    satisfied us that there is any practical barrier to her  continuing  to
    improve her English in the DRC and to retake the test.  Whilst  it  may
    be that the quality of private tuition in the DRC is not as high as  an
    Anglophone country, we do not accept the Sponsor's assertion that  with
    extra tuition, from the same source, it is not viable for the appellant
    to successfully pass the test.  The Sponsor has not explained  how  the
    previous tuition  was  deficient,  as  opposed  to  the  appellant  not
    applying herself sufficiently.  Even had we concluded that the  current
    source of private tuition was not of sufficient quality (and we do  not
    accept that assertion as reliable), we  do  not  accept  the  Sponsor's
    assertion, given his lack of knowledge in the DRC and lack of research,
    that alternative tuition could not be found in the DRC. In reality,  we
    find that no attempt has been  made  to  seek  alternative  sources  of
    tuition and note the absence of evidence  which  could  otherwise  have
    been presented by the Sponsor of his searches for private tuition  via,
    for example, the internet.

39. Third, the Sponsor's alternative assertion that to  study  further  and
    travel to retake the test in Zambia would incur further expense was not
    a factor in the appellant's favour, noting  that  since  the  appellant
    failed the test in 2017, the  Sponsor  has  sufficient  funds  to  have
    travelled to visit the appellant in Zambia and stayed there  with  her.
    There is no explanation for why some of these funds could not have been
    used for tuition and retaking the test, and the availability  of  funds
    is a factor weighing against the appellant.

40. Fourth, there is no suggestion or evidence that the  appellant  suffers
    from a medical condition which might  prevent  her  from  reaching  the
    required level of proficiency in English.

41. Tying together the factors weighing against the appellant, we find that
    a viable option remains open to the appellant  to  study  further;  and
    retake the test.  She has the access to tuition of  sufficient  quality
    and the ability to travel  re-take  the  test,  with  accompaniment  by
    family members or the Sponsor, to the Zambia; and the financial support
    from the Sponsor to do so.

Conclusions

42. Considering the factors that support the appellant; and  weighing  them
    against the factors which count against the appellant, first of all  by
    reference to GEN.3.2., whilst we do  regard  the  consequences  of  the
    refusal of entry clearance as harsh, we do not regard that harshness as
    unjustifiable,  particularly  where,  as  here,  the  impact   of   the
    appellant's previous failure to successfully take the English  language
    test can be mitigated simply by her retaking the test and there are  no
    real barriers to her doing so, aside from inconvenience, application in
    her studies, and expense. The reason for the refusal of entry clearance
    is on a narrow ground, but a very weighty one.   The  couple  need  not
    relocate to Zambia permanently and the Sponsor can meet  the  appellant
    in Zambia to ensure her safety, on a temporary basis, as  he  has  done
    previously.  In the circumstances, we conclude that the appellant  does
    not begin to meet the high threshold of GEN.3.2

43. In relation to the wider article 8 assessment by reference to the well-
    known five-stage test in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27, on the one hand,
    we accept that the Sponsor has  established  a  family  life  with  the
    appellant.   We  also  accept,  given  the  genuine  distress  of   the
    continuing separation, that the refusal of entry clearance does  amount
    to interference with that family  life  of  sufficient  seriousness  to
    engage article 8.  On the other hand, the refusal  of  entry  clearance
    was for a legitimate aim, namely the maintenance of immigration control
    and was in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

44.  That  leaves  the  final  question  of   whether   the   refusal   was
    proportionate.  We have no doubt that the separation between the couple
    is distressing.  The couple cannot live in the DRC and the  expectation
    that they live in Zambia, when the Sponsor has lived in the UK  for  20
    years, amounts to a significant  upheaval.   Nevertheless,  aside  from
    expense and inconvenience, the impact  on  the  couple  can  be  wholly
    mitigated by the appellant simply studying  further  and  retaking  the
    test, which she has only  taken  on  a  single  occasion  before.   The
    importance of the appellant  passing  that  test  is,  in  the  current
    circumstances, more weighty than the effect of the  continuing,  albeit
    potentially temporary, separation of the couple. The refusal  of  entry
    clearance is proportionate.

Notice of remaking decision

45. In the circumstances, we remake the  FtT's  decision  by  refusing  the
    appellant's appeal on human rights grounds. Her appeal therefore  fails
    and is dismissed.

46. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed J Keith                  Date: 26 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has failed and so there is no fee award.


Signed J Keith                  Date: 26 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
