
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20001/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 December 2019                  |On 9 January 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Mair instructed by ASR Advantage Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge O R Williams promulgated on 9 July 2019 in which the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal has been granted  by  a  judge  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal on a renewed application for the following reasons:


                  i. I remind myself that the test for  'arguable'  is  low.
                     The appellant is a national  of  Pakistan  who  asserts
                     that he is a victim  of  domestic  violence.  He  seeks
                     leave  to  remain  in  this  country  on  human  rights
                     grounds.
                 ii. It  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  of  the  First-Tier
                     Tribunal has made several errors of  fact  as  to  oral
                     evidence presented at the hearing. It is also  arguable
                     that  the  decision  was  subject  to  speculation  and
                     selective consideration of  evidence.  It  is  arguable
                     that these  errors  infected  the  overall  credibility
                     assessment.
                iii. I am not presently satisfied that Ground 4 is arguable.
                     However, it is appropriate that the Tribunal is able to
                     consider matters in the round at an oral hearing and so
                     I grant permission on all grounds. The  appellant  will
                     be  required  to  establish  the  materiality  of   the
                     purported errors of fact in law.



Error of law


     3. The appellant relied on a number of  grounds  the  first  of  which
        asserts  the  Judge  failed  to  properly  take   the   appellant's
        vulnerability into account. It was accepted the appellant should be
        treated as a vulnerable witness but argued there is  no  indication
        in the determination in which the  Judge  was  satisfied  that  the
        appellant's account was "vague and  riddled  with  inconsistencies"
        such that little weight could be placed upon the same  [12]  or  in
        the paragraphs that followed that the Judge had paid any regard  to
        the  appellant's  vulnerability  when  assessing   credibility   in
        accordance  with  the  Practice  Statement   regarding   vulnerable
        witnesses.
     4. Ground 2 asserts the Judge made  a  material  error  of  fact  with
        regard to the appellant's evidence concerning a  trip  to  Pakistan
        failing, when determining that the appellant had given  conflicting
        accounts about travel plans to Pakistan, to have regard to the fact
        that the appellant's clear evidence was that he was discussing  two
        different trips and not one trip. The first trip was only  for  the
        appellant's wife and mother-in-law in October 2014 with the  second
        trip in March  2016  being  the  trip  in  relation  to  which  the
        appellant claimed his mother-in-law took his passport and booked  a
        ticket against his  wish  and  later  demanded  repayment  for  the
        ticket. The grounds assert had the Judge  considered  the  evidence
        correctly it was not contradictory but rather related to  different
        occasions. It is said this  error  also  infects  the  finding  the
        appellant's wife and mother-in-law travelled  to  Pakistan  without
        the appellant's prior knowledge for which the correct reference  is
        to the October 2014 trip but not the 2016 journey.  The appellant's
        claim he did not want to go to Pakistan because he  could  not  get
        time off work or afford the trip was correct  in  relation  to  the
        2016  journey.  The  grounds  assert   the   Judge's   finding   of
        inconsistency is material as it gives rise to the question  whether
        the Judge considered the  evidence  with  the  required  degree  of
        anxious  scrutiny  in  the  round.  It  is  also  asserted  it  was
        procedurally unfair  that  these  issues  were  never  put  to  the
        appellant despite the fact  in  re-examination  the  appellant  was
        asked and confirmed there were two different  trips  and  what  his
        evidence was in regard to each.
     5. The Grounds also assert the Judge impermissibly speculated and made
        selective references  to  the  evidence,  failed  to  consider  the
        evidence in the round, and failed to apply the required  degree  of
        anxious scrutiny to aspects of the evidence. A  transcript  of  the
        oral evidence has been  provided  which  supports  the  appellant's
        assertion. Whilst the Judge is not required to set out findings  in
        relation to each and every aspect of the evidence it  is  important
        that the totality  of  the  evidence  is  taken  into  account  and
        factored into the decision-making process  which  clearly  did  not
        occur in relation to this matter.
     6. There is criticism of the Judge for the finding at [16] where it is
        stated  the  appellant  created  evidence   regarding   significant
        incidents in his oral  evidence  which  the  Judge  found  was  the
        appellant bolstering his case  'on the spot' in such evidence, when
        it is clear from reading the transcript that  the  first  time  the
        appellant was asked in any details about the physical violence  was
        in his oral evidence to which the response was given. The Judge  is
        also  criticised  for   failing   to   consider   the   appellant's
        vulnerability in failing to put  to  him  that  this  evidence  was
        manufactured or to give  the  appellant  or  his  representative  a
        chance to respond.
     7. It is also stated there are factual  inaccuracies  in  the  Judge's
        findings at [17 - 18] for the reasons pleaded.
     8. Ground 4 asserted a lack of procedural fairness in the hearing.
     9. The Court of Appeal in ML (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 844 found  that
        where there were serious errors in the judge's record of the  facts
        there was an error of law even though there were sound reasons  for
        dismissing the appeal because the errors effectively negated a fair
        hearing.
    10.  Ground  4  relating  to  fairness  is   important   for   although
        individually some of the matters pleaded against the Judge may  not
        amount to material errors of law  taken  cumulatively  the  grounds
        establish that it is arguable  the  Judge  had  not  carefully  and
        conscientiously considered the arguments and evidence provided both
        for and against the appellant's case.
    11. Mr McVeety, having considered the matters, accepted  the  appellant
        had made out his case and that the extent of the concerns are  such
        that the determination cannot stand.
    12. I find the appellant has established material legal  error  in  the
        determination under challenge in relation to both the treatment  of
        the appellant as a vulnerable witness and the errors identified  in
        the Grounds.  I  find  that  the  errors  seriously  undermine  the
        question of whether the appellant received a fair hearing and/or  a
        fair assessment of the evidence. Accordingly the determination must
        be set aside with there being no preserved findings.
    13. Having considered the Presidential  Guidance  concerning  remitting
        appeals and in light of the fact that  a  full  rehearing  of  this
        matter is required with  fresh  findings  of  fact  being  made  by
        another  judge  who  has  considers  the  evidence  afresh,  it  is
        appropriate in all the circumstances for the appeal to be  remitted
        to be heard by a judge other than Judge Williams.
    14. Directions:


        a. The determination of Judge O R Williams shall be set aside.
        b. There shall be no preserved findings.
        c. The appeal shall be remitted to the Bradford Hearing  Centre  to
           be heard by a judge other than Judge O R Williams on a  date  to
           be  allocated  in   accordance   with   Bradford's   operational
           requirements.
        d. Further case management directions shall be  given  by  Bradford
           upon receipt of the file.

Decision

        e. The First-Tier Tribunal Judge materially erred  in  law.  I  set
           aside the decision of the original Judge. I remit  the  decision
           to the Bradford Hearing Centre in accordance with the directions
           set out above.

   Anonymity.


The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure    (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 19 December 2019












