
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  HU/20550/2016
                                                               HU/20554/2016
                                                               HU/20560/2016
                                                               HU/20565/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision Promulgated
On 29th March 2019     On 2 April 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                OLALEKAN [B]
                                 ATINUKE [B]
                                   [O A B]
                                    [O B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by Peer and Co.
                    (Birmingham)
For the respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The 1st 2 appellants are husband and wife. The 3rd and 4th
         appellants are their daughters, born on 6 April 2010 and 24 July
         2012. All are nationals of Nigeria.

      2. The 1st appellant came to the United Kingdom on 10 July 2007 with
         leave as a student. His wife joined him on 19 March 2009.  Their
         children were born in the United Kingdom. On various occasions he
         extended his leave on as a student until May 2016. On 4 May 2016 he
         made an in time application for leave to remain on the basis of
         family and private life. It also expressed the fear that his
         daughters would be subjected to female genital mutilation if they
         had to return to Nigeria.

      3. His application was refused on 17 August 2016.In terms of appendix
         FM he could not meet the eligibility requirements in relation to
         his children because of his immigration status. In terms of his
         private life he had not been here the necessary 20 years under
         paragraph 276 ADE(vi) and the respondent did not see any
         significant obstacles to his reintegration. Similar considerations
         were advanced in respect of his wife's application. The children's
         applications failed on the basis of eligibility relating to their
         parents immigration status. No exceptional circumstances were
         identified.

      4. The appeal was heard by first-tier Tribunal judge Grimmett at
         Birmingham on 12 December 2017. In a decision promulgated on 9
         January 2018 the appeals were dismissed. The judge dealt with the
         suggestion of a risk from FGM and concluded there would be adequate
         protection against this in Nigeria. In terms of family and private
         life the judge acknowledged the length of time the family had been
         here but made the point that their parents entry to the United
         Kingdom had been on a temporary footing. The judge felt the
         children could continue their education in Nigeria and that would
         be reasonable for them to leave. Reference was made in a general
         sense to section 117 with the comment being that their leave had
         been precarious.

The Upper Tribunal

      5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis there was a failure
         to consider whether the 1st appellant met paragraph 276 B,10 years
         lawful residence, at the date of hearing. It was also arguable that
         the judge failed to have regard to the respondent's published
         position and the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in MA
         (Pakistan) & Ors, R (on the application of) [2016] EWA Civ 705. The
         Court of Appeal there indicated that for a child to have resided in
         the United Kingdom for 7 years represented a factor of some weight,
         leaning in favour of leave to remain being granted. The report
         referred to the need for strong reasons for refusing leave in such
         cases. After 7 years the child will have put down roots and
         developed social, cultural and educational links and it was likely
         to be highly disruptive if they are required to leave.it was
         pointed out there was no reference to section 117 B(6) by the
         judge.

      6. The appellant's representative made the point that the 1st
         appellant's leave expired on 5 May 2016 and an application for
         further leave to remain was made on 4 May 2016. He suggested
         therefore that the 1st appellant and now been in the United Kingdom
         in excess of 10 years with leave. The presenting officer
         acknowledged that the reference to the families presence being
         precarious as not adequately reflect the fact that they were always
         here lawfully.

      7. The presenting officer accepted that there was force in the points
         made. The reference to the family's permission to be here being
         precarious was perhaps misleading in that they were always here
         lawfully. In the circumstances he was prepared to concede there was
         a material error of law in the decision.

      8. In the absence of a significant factual dispute the parties were in
         agreement to my remaking the decision.

      9. It is accepted that the 1st appellant has been here lawfully. This
         continued to be the position after his leave expired and pending
         the final determination of his subsequent application. On this
         basis I find he now satisfies the 10 year lawful residence
         requirements. I am obliged to the appellant's representative for
         providing me with the decision of OA and others( human rights; 'new
         matter'; section 120 Nigeria [2019]UK 65.In the present instance
         ,if a fresh application were made on this ground I can see no
         reason in terms of lawful residence  why it would not succeed.

     10. In relation to his children further guidance has now been given in
         the decision of KO (Nigeria) and Others (Appellants) v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53. This was
         published after the impugned decision but nevertheless the law must
         be applied as it is now understood. The respondent's published
         guidance on this issue has been amended in light of this decision.
         In the circumstance it would not be reasonable to expect them to
         leave. Consequently, this is an additional ground in support of
         allowing the appeal.

     11. On the basis of what has been agreed between the parties no further
         written reasons are required. The requirements of subparagraph
         40(3)(a) and (b) of the Upper Tribunal procedural rules are met. I
         therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and
         remake it, allowing the appeals.

Decision.

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett materially errs in law
and is set aside. I remake the decision allowing the appeals under article
8.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.

29th March 2019

