
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
HU/20426/2016

                                                    HU/20432/2016

                                                    HU/20435/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30th November 2018                    | On 1st February 2019              |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                      (1)  Mr S A
                      (2)  Mrs J K A
                      (3)  MiSTER M A I (a minor)
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Mustafa (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Malik, promulgated on 13th July  2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester  on  28th  June  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the  appeal  of  the  Appellants,  whereupon  the  Appellants
    subsequently applied for, and were granted, permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are all nationals of Bangladesh.  The first  and  second
    Appellants  are  husband  and  wife,  and  the  parents  of  the  third
    Appellant, who was born in 2003.  They appealed against a  decision  of
    the Respondent dated 20th July  2016  refusing  their  application  for
    leave to remain in the UK.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The essence of the first Appellant's claim is that he and his wife came
    to the UK in December 2009, together with his son, and they did this on
    a visit visa which was valid until 8th June 2010.  Further applications
    for leave to remain were rejected by the  Secretary  of  State.   There
    were appeals made to the Tribunals.  The  first  Appellant  now  claims
    that he has been living in the UK for eight  years,  has  made  friends
    here,  and  has  been  involved  in  the  community  and  with  charity
    organisations.  In the time that he has been living here, he has  cared
    for his 89 year old mother, who is permanently settled here.   She  has
    Type 2 diabetes, hypertension, high cholesterol, and  senile  dementia.
    Her care needs are high.  He and his wife help  in  her  daily  living.
    Their son came to the UK at the age of 6 and has been attending school.
     Both parents maintain  that  his  first  language  is  English.   They
    believe that the son should be granted leave to remain under  paragraph
    276ADE(1) because he has been in the UK for over  seven  years.   There
    will be "social stigma" on the son if he were to be  returned  back  to
    Bangladesh (paragraph 11).  As against this, the  first  Appellant  had
    eight children in total, and the remaining  ones  were  in  Bangladesh,
    with the eldest son being over 18.  His son in the UK was now 14  years
    of age and his other children were older.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that the  first  Appellant  and  his  family  could  not
    succeed, and that there would be no obstacles to their integration were
    they to return to Bangladesh.   As  the  judge  observed,  "essentially
    these appeals are predicated on their son having  been  in  the  UK  in
    excess of eight years".  Their son had not been in  the  UK  for  seven
    years at the time of application and/or decision and so too he did  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), as the  judge  stated
    at paragraph 23 of the determination.  In fact, the minor Appellant had
    seven siblings in Bangladesh, some  of  whom  were  married,  and  with
    children.  His mother denied in evidence before  the  judge  that  this
    minor Appellant was in contact with his siblings in Bangladesh, but the
    judge did not find her account to be credible that there was no contact
    with the other children and grandchildren in Bangladesh (paragraph 28).
     The judge gave weight to Section 117B of the 2002 Act  and  held  that
    the maintenance of effective immigration  control  was  in  the  public
    interest so that it had to be given controlling weight (paragraph 34).

 5. The appeal was dismissed.



Grounds of Application

 6.  The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    consideration of the  third  Appellant's  case  in  the  light  of  the
    decision in MT and  ET  (child's  best  interests:  ex  tempore  pilot)
    Nigeria [2018] UKUT 88.  In that case, it was said that there  need  to
    be "powerful reasons" for why a  child  who  had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for over ten  years should be removed (paragraph 33).  In  that
    case it was held that,

         "There are no such powerful reasons.  Of  course,  public  interest
         lies  in  removing  a  person  such  as  MT,  who  has  abused  the
         immigration laws of the  United Kingdom ... but, given the strength
         of ET's case, MT's conduct in  our  view  comes  nowhere  close  to
         requiring the Respondent to succeed  ...  the  point  is  that  her
         immigration history is not so bad as  to  constitute  the  kind  of
         'powerful' reason that would render reasonable the removal of ET to
         Nigeria" (paragraph 34).

 7. On 25th  September  2018  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the
    Tribunal.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me,  Mr  Mustafa,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants, made the following submissions.  First, although the  judge
    had considered (at paragraph 21) the third Appellant's age  and  length
    of residence in the UK,  he  failed  to  consider  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had spent important years of his life in the UK,  which  were
    above the age of 4 years, given that the third Appellant had arrived in
    the country at the age of 6.  Second, the  judge  overlooked  the  fact
    that the third Appellant would start his GCSEs in  September  2018  and
    was at a crucial stage of his education  (paragraph  30).   Third,  the
    judge's finding (at paragraph 29) that the  third  Appellant  would  be
    able to resume education in Bangladesh was predicated  on  the  finding
    that he is able to speak Bengali.  However, the third  Appellant  would
    also need to be able to read and write Bengali and yet the judge  makes
    no finding on this pertinent point.  Fourth, the judge finds  that  (at
    paragraph 30) there is no specific evidence of "any social contacts  of
    any significance" but this is a mistake of fact as a  letter  from  the
    third Appellant's school  (see  the  Appellant's  bundle  at  page  21)
    confirms that he has a good number of friends  in  this  country.   The
    judge failed to recognise that the third Appellant's removal  would  be
    unreasonable.   Finally,  whether  or  not  there  was  a   functioning
    education system in Bangladesh, was not relevant to the fact  that  the
    third Appellant had no direct experience of Bangladesh.

 9. Insofar as the public interest in removal was concerned  under  Section
    117B(6), this was a case  where  the  Appellants  were  not  liable  to
    deportation,  where  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
    relationship with a qualifying child between the adults; and  where  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the qualifying  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

10. Accordingly, submitted Mr Mustafa, the decision of the judge could  not
    be held on the basis of proportionality and on the basis of his  having
    misconstrued the meaning of "powerful reasons".

11. Finally, Mr Mustafa also handed up the recent Supreme Court judgment in
    KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.  He submitted that this  case  raised  the
    question of what is "reasonable" for the child, and  pointed  out  that
    "there is nothing in the  subsection  to  import  a  reference  to  the
    conduct of the child" (paragraph 17), when regard  is  had  to  Section
    117B(6).

12. For his part, Mr McVeety submitted that KO  (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  53
    does not assist the Appellant because it makes it clear that one has to
    look at the position in the real world.  If the parents do not have the
    right to remain here then neither does their minor  son.   As  for  the
    decision in MT and ET [2018] UKUT 88, this has been rejected insofar as
    it states that the immigration status of persons does not  matter.   In
    reply, Mr Mustafa submitted that KO (Nigeria) was relevant and this  is
    clear from paragraph 19 of the judgment.  The fact that the parents  do
    not have leave to remain was only one factor.  Ultimately, there has to
    be a balancing exercise.  This was a case where there was no  deception
    exercised by the parents.  The status  of  the  parents  was  only  one
    factor.  Judge Malik had misconstrued the role of "powerful reasons" in
    the decision making process, when he concluded that there  was  nothing
    to suggest that it was not in the third Appellant's best  interests  to
    continue to live with his parents and that, "I find it is in  his  best
    interest to do so and that,  as  set  out  above,  there  are  powerful
    reasons - and that it would not be unreasonable for him  to  return  to
    Bangladesh to enjoy  a  family  and  private  life  with  his  parents,
    siblings and other family members" (paragraph 33).

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

14. First, in employing the language of "powerful reasons", the  judge  was
    not inverting the expression of that term as used in MT and  ET  [2018]
    UKUT 88, which stated that, "we need to look for 'powerful reasons' why
    a child who has been in the United Kingdom for over ten years should be
    removed ..." (paragraph 33).  What the judge had done  was  to  explain
    why it would not be contrary to the best interests of the  minor  child
    "to continue to live with his parents".

15. The judge was clear that, "I find it is in his best interest to do so".
     He was clear that,

         "It would not be unreasonable for him to return  to  Bangladesh  to
         enjoy a family and private life  with  his  parents,  siblings  and
         other family members; nor do I find in doing so would  it  lead  to
         unjustifiably harsh consequences for the minor Appellant,  nor  his
         parents".

    It was in this respect that the judge observed that "there are powerful
    reasons" (paragraph 33).

16. Second, this appeal by the Appellants is in any event not helped by the
    decision in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53, which implied that it would be
    unreasonable to expect a child to follow a parent, after  a  period  of
    time  in  the  UK,  because  that  would  violate  the  child's   "best
    interests".  What the  Supreme  Court  now  makes  clear  is  that  the
    question of "reasonableness" is to be assessed "in the  real  world  in
    which the children find themselves" (paragraph 19).  What this means is
    that, "if neither parent has the  right  to  remain,  then  that  is  a
    background against which the assessment is conducted".

17. This is as distinct from a situation where one parent has the right  to
    remain but the other does not.  In  this  case,  as  the  judge  found,
    neither parent had the right to remain here, and this is the context in
    which the "reasonableness" of requiring the third Appellant to go  with
    them to Bangladesh, had to be assessed because this was "the real world
    in which the  children  find  themselves"  in  this  case.   The  third
    Appellant also had seven of his siblings in Bangladesh.  The judge  did
    not accept that there was no contact with these children  or  that  the
    third Appellant did not speak his own language.  Accordingly, there  is
    no error of law.

Notice of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law.  The decision shall stand.

19. An anonymity direction is made.

20. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 15th January 2019
