
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Numbers:
HU/20860/2018

                                               HU/20863/2018

                                               HU/20865/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 August 2019                        |On 10 September 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                        mrs i kAUR (first appellant)
                        Mr singh r (second appellant)
                         ms k kaur (third appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr T Richardson, Counsel, instructed by LP Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is a challenge by the three Appellants  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hatton ("the judge"), promulgated on  22  May
    2019, in which he dismissed  their  appeals  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 4 October 2018, which in turn had refused their  respective
    human rights claims.  These claims were based on Article 8 and asserted
    that the three Appellants, together with Mr J Singh, the husband of the
    first Appellant and father of the other two, maintained family life  in
    the United Kingdom and that at least in respect of the second and third
    Appellants, they also enjoyed private lives here.  The second Appellant
    was born on 22 October 1997, and the third on 25 December  1996.   Both
    were adults at the time of the human rights claims.

 2.  In  refusing  the  claims,  the  Respondent  accepted   the   familial
    relationships as between the Appellants themselves and with  Mr  Singh.
    The  Respondent  concluded  that  there  would  be  no   insurmountable
    obstacles to Mr Singh going to live in India  with  his  wife  and  two
    adult children.  It was also concluded that there were  no  exceptional
    circumstances.

The judge's decision

 3. The judge accepted that there was a family life as between the  members
    of the family unit.  He accepted that the second and  third  Appellants
    also enjoyed private lives in the United Kingdom.

 4. In summary, the judge concluded that family life could be maintained if
    the Appellants were to return to India  and  notwithstanding  the  fact
    that Mr Singh may decide to remain in this  country.   This  conclusion
    was essentially based on the family unit's history.  Whilst they had in
    the past lived together in India, Mr Singh had chosen to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom and he eventually obtained indefinite  leave  to  remain
    here.  The Appellants had also resided in this country from an  unknown
    date until 2011, when they returned to India.  They then re-entered the
    United Kingdom lawfully in June of 2015  and  had  remained  here  ever
    since.  During the periods of separation, Mr Singh made regular  visits
    to his family and provided financial support.  It was the judge's  view
    that the previous arrangements during the periods of separation between
    the Appellants and Mr Singh could be re-established.

 5. The judge considered the situation of the second and third  Appellants,
    concluding that there were no factors that would lead to  a  breach  of
    Article 8 rights.  In respect of the  third  Appellant,  there  was  an
    acknowledgement that she suffered from specific cognitive  difficulties
    ("mild to moderate" learning difficulties).  The  judge  noted  various
    aspects of the medical evidence and the high threshold applicable to  a
    claim involving assertions that a removal from the United Kingdom would
    breach Article 8 due to a lack of appropriate treatment in the  country
    of origin.

 6. In referring to the third Appellant's depression, the judge formed  the
    view that she was, at least at the date of  the  hearing,  "happy"  and
    that as a result she had no form of depressive illness.

 7. The appeals were duly dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 8. Three grounds of appeal have been put forward: first,  that  the  judge
    failed to undertake any consideration of Mr Singh's rights; second that
    the consideration of the Article 8 claims  in  more  general  terms  is
    flawed because the judge failed to  address  the  issue  of  separation
    adequately or at all; third, that the judge was simply  wrong  to  have
    concluded that the third Appellant  did  not  suffer  from  any  mental
    health conditions.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird on 3
    July 2019.

The hearing

10. For the Appellants, Mr Richardson relied on the grounds.  He emphasised
    the significance of Mr Singh having to make a choice as to  whether  he
    remained in the United Kingdom or went to India with the  other  family
    members.   Given that Mr Singh was settled in this country,  the  issue
    of choice represented a severe interference with  his  rights  and  the
    judge has simply failed to factor this  into  his  overall  assessment.
    The issue of separation, submitted Mr Richardson, was crucial  in  this
    case.  It remained  a  material  factor  notwithstanding  the  previous
    periods of separation.  It was the case that they had all been together
    since 2015 and matters had developed since then.

11. In respect of the third Appellant's depression, the judge  was  clearly
    wrong to have concluded as he did.

12. Mr Richardson submitted that it was a cumulation of  the  three  errors
    which rendered the judge's decision materially flawed.

13. Ms Everett submitted that there were no errors, or at least no material
    errors.  She emphasised the brevity of Mr Singh's evidence  in  respect
    of his situation and  any  difficulties  that  may  be  caused  by  him
    choosing to leave this country.  She submitted that the  family  unit's
    previous arrangements were properly accounted for  by  the  judge  when
    considering the situation as at the date  of  hearing.   She  submitted
    that whilst there may be an interference with family life,  this  would
    not, on the evidence in these cases, be disproportionate.

14. In  reply,  Mr  Richardson  essentially  emphasised  a  number  of  the
    submissions previously made.

Decision on error of law

15. Cases such as these are always highly fact-specific.  In light of  this
    truism and bearing in mind  the  need  to  show  that  any  errors  are
    material, I conclude that the judge's decision should not be set aside.



16. It is right that the judge  does  not  make  reference  to  Beoku-Betts
    [2008]  3  WLR  166,  or  deal  explicitly  with  Mr  Singh's  specific
    circumstances in the United Kingdom.  However, it is clearly  the  case
    that he was well aware of Mr Singh's status in  this  country  and  the
    family unit's history, which in my view was a relevant factor that  the
    judge was entitled to take into account of.  Mr  Singh  had  chosen  to
    come to the United Kingdom initially and then to remain in this country
    when the other members of his family had returned  to  India  in  2011.
    Between that point and when the family came back to the United  Kingdom
    in 2015, he had made regular trips back to India.  In addition,  having
    looked at Mr Singh's witness statement, I agree with Ms Everett that it
    is, to say the least, brief  and  lacking  in  detail  as  regards  any
    specific reasons as to why a choice (albeit quite possibly a  difficult
    one) by him to relocate back to India would even arguably  represent  a
    "severe"  interference  with  his  own  rights,  as  contended  by   Mr
    Richardson.

17. In this regard I also note the fact that in refusing the  human  rights
    claims,  the  Respondent  had  stated  in  terms  that  there  were  no
    insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  family  unit  returning  to   India
    together.  Whilst the judge does not make specific reference  to  this,
    it was nonetheless an underlying issue that the Respondent had  raised,
    and it is the case that the simple fact of  having  settled  status  in
    this country did not, in and of itself, represent a  factor  so  strong
    that it would necessarily be disproportionate for  that  individual  to
    make a difficult choice to leave together with the other members of his
    family.

18. Mr Richardson relied on paras. 19-20 of AB (Jamaica) [2008] 1 WLR 1893.
    It is of course right that the "choice" of a person with settled status
    in the United Kingdom between leaving with family members or  remaining
    here and being separated from them can be very difficult.  Having  said
    that, the Court itself recognised that much, if not all, will depend on
    the particular facts of the case.  Here, the underlying facts  included
    previous separation by choice, regular direct contact  through  visits,
    and, on the evidence, very little indeed to indicate  precisely  why  a
    choice would be particularly hard.

19. In light of the above, there is no error as to ground 1.   Even  if  it
    could be said that the judge did err by failing to set out an  explicit
    consideration of Mr Singh's rights, in my view this was not material to
    the outcome, having regard to the discretion under section 12(1)(a)  of
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.  In other words,  I  do
    not accept that it could have made a material difference to the result,
    even if taken together with other matters complained of.

20. In respect of the separation point, which in a sense is linked  to  the
    first ground of challenge, the judge was, as I  have  said  previously,
    entitled to take account of the family  unit's  previous  arrangements:
    there had been a choice in the past as to separation.  It was  open  to
    the judge to find that family  life  had  been  maintained  during  the
    periods of separation.  This was based on more than  financial  support
    because Mr Singh had made regular visits  back  to  see  his  wife  and
    children.  I appreciate Mr Richardson's point that the family unit  had
    then come back together again in this country as of 2015, but, at least
    on the evidence before the judge, it is  very  difficult  to  see  what
    material changes there were in the family unit's  circumstances  during
    the course of the period together such as to render another  separation
    disproportionate.

21. It may well be that another separation would amount to an  interference
    in the family life, but it does not follow that this course  of  action
    would be disproportionate.  It is well-settled as a matter of law  that
    in relation to spouses, there is no right  to  choose  where  a  couple
    resides.  There was no evidence before the judge  to  suggest  that  Mr
    Singh could not continue to make the regular visits that he had done in
    the past.  In any event, I come back to the point about the absence  of
    insurmountable obstacles: on the evidence before the  judge  there  was
    nothing to undermine the Respondent's conclusion that  Mr  Singh  could
    accompany his family members back to India, thereby avoiding  the  need
    for any separation at all.

22. Returning to the third Appellant, it is clear that the judge was  wrong
    to have concluded that she was not suffering  from  any  mental  health
    illness.  The evidence showed that she was in remission. That means  of
    course that the underlying condition may return at some stage.

23. In my view this error is not material.  There was  no  evidence  before
    the judge to indicate that relevant treatment  for  depressive  illness
    was unavailable in India.  It is  also  the  case  that  there  was  no
    evidence to suggest that she was not appropriately cared for  her  when
    the family were separated, and there was no evidence  to  suggest  that
    the first Appellant and/or Mr  Singh  would  not  be  able  to  provide
    appropriate care for her following a return to India. In saying this, I
    do not in any way seek to diminish the third Appellant's condition  and
    the importance of the support she needs.

24. In conclusion, having considered the judge's decision holistically  and
    done the same in respect of the grounds of challenge, I  conclude  that
    the core conclusions reached are sustainable, and  in  respect  of  any
    errors identified previously,  these  were  not  material  such  as  to
    require the decision to be set aside.

25. For these reasons the Appellants' appeals to  the  Upper  Tribunal  are
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  does  not  contain  errors  of  law
requiring it to be set aside.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal therefore stands.

The Appellants' appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed.



No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]         Date: 3 September 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
