
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/20707/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 March 2021                     |On 31 March 2021                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            LINDIWE JUDITH BANDA

                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr B Chimpango, Crown & Law Solicitors



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.



1. To avoid confusion, for the purpose of  this  decision  I  have  referred
   below to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

2. The Secretary  of  State  has  appealed  with  permission  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated
   11.11.20 (Judge Malik), allowing on human rights grounds the  appellant's
   appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 27.11.19, to
   refuse leave to remain.

3. The relevant background is that the appellant is  a  national  of  Malawi
   with date of birth given as 30.11.59. She last entered the UK on  18.7.18
   on a family visit visa. Within the limit of stay of 6 months, on 28.11.18
   she applied for leave to remain on human  rights  grounds,  in  order  to
   support her partner, Mark Banda, who was  then  suffering  from  terminal
   bladder cancer. The  application  was  refused  on  the  basis  that  the
   appellant did not meet the requirements of the Rules and  there  were  no
   exceptional circumstances justifying a grant of leave outside the Rules.

4. Before the appeal could be heard (22.10.20), Mr Banda  had  passed  away,
   on 16.6.20. At the appeal  hearing,  the  appellant  explained  that  she
   nevertheless sought leave to remain for  a  short  period,  in  order  to
   finalise his pension arrangements, after which she proposed to return  to
   Malawi.

5. The grounds argue that in allowing the appeal on  private  life  grounds,
   the judge failed to give  adequate  reasons.  The  reason  given  by  the
   appellant for wanting to remain a short  period  was  an  'administrative
   process which is capable of being completed remotely and therefore it  is
   unclear why her presence in the UK is considered necessary and to find so
   is a misdirection in law."

6. The grounds further submit that once it was concluded that the  appellant
   was unable to satisfy the Rules, it was incumbent on the judge to provide
   reasons why the appellant's case was  considered  so  exceptional  as  to
   warrant a grant of leave outside the Rules. It is argued that the alleged
   inability of the appellant to pay for a return flight is insufficient  to
   displace the public interest in enforcing immigration law  and  to  allow
   the appeal on this basis borders on perversity and is a  misdirection  in
   law.

7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  on  1.12.20,  on
   the basis that the grounds as drafted were arguable and that  "Article  8
   private life considerations are limited to cases involving  physical  and
   moral integrity, Patel, and it is difficult to see  what  those  were  in
   this appeal or why the appellant's presence was required."

8. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

9. The unusual facts of this case  included  that  although  married  to  Mr
   Banda, and the respondent accepted that they had a genuine and subsisting
   relationship, the appellant did  not  normally  live  with  her  partner.
   Instead, she made a series of visits to him in  the  UK,  using  a  visit
   visa, before returning each time  to  Malawi.   The  submissions  of  her
   representative at the First-tier Tribunal  appeal  hearing  were  to  the
   effect that she did not want to stay longer in the UK than a "few months"
   and only to do so in order to 'sort out' her deceased husband's  affairs.
   It was said that  she  had  no  reason  to  stay,  "she  wanted  to  wrap
   everything up, not overstay."

10. Judge Malik allowed the appeal, stating at [33] of the decision,  "I  am
   satisfied  at  the  time  of  application  the  appellant  did  meet  the
   requirements  of  the  rules  and  whilst  finely  balanced,  given   the
   compassionate circumstances, I find Article 8 private life is engaged and
   that the respondent's decision, in the circumstances of  this  particular
   appeal, is disproportionate."

11. The Immigration  Rules  the  judge  was  referring  to  related  to  the
   application for leave to remain in the  UK  as  a  partner,  pursuant  to
   Appendix FM. At [28], the judge  found  that  there  were  insurmountable
   obstacles in accordance with EX1  as  defined  by  EX2,  "such  that  the
   parties would have faced  very  significant  difficulties  in  continuing
   their family life in Malawi - which could not be  overcome  and/or  would
   have entailed very serious hardship for them. For this reason I find  the
   appellant did then meet the requirements of the rules."

12. Although the judge found that insurmountable obstacles  were  met  under
   EX1, the appeal could not be allowed on that basis. The  only  ground  of
   appeal was on human rights, article 8 ECHR, which had to be  assessed  as
   at the date of the hearing. As the judge granting permission pointed out,
   article 8 private life can  only  be  engaged  on  grounds  of  moral  or
   physical integrity. Whilst Judge Malik had  understandable  sympathy  for
   the appellant's circumstances, nothing in the decision  demonstrated  how
   article her private life could even engage article 8,  particularly  when
   s117B of the 2002 Act is considered to  the  effect  that  little  weight
   should be given to such private life  when  her  immigration  status  was
   always temporary and precarious. Remaining to sort out her late husband's
   financial affairs does not begin to engage article 8.

13. In the premises, the appeal should have  been  dismissed.  However,  the
   fact is that the appellant has been in the UK since  her  application  in
   2018 and has now had some 9 months to sort out her husband's affairs.  Mr
   Chimpango advised me that this had now been completed and  that  she  was
   booked on a flight to return to  Malawi  on  22.4.21,  subject  to  Covid
   pandemic travel restrictions.

14. I make it clear that the appellant has exercised  her  lawful  right  to
   appeal the decision of the respondent  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
   subsequently to the Upper  Tribunal,  during  which  time  up  until  the
   promulgation of this decision she has enjoyed an extension to her  lawful
   leave. Mr Chimpango explained that the appellant wanted  to  be  able  to
   return to Malawi without any stain on her immigration history,  which  is
   understandable. I am satisfied that the respondent will  not  regard  the
   short period of time between the eventual promulgation of  this  decision
   and her departure as a stain on her character or immigration history.  Mr
   McVeety confirmed the same, pointing out that the Secretary of  State  is
   taking no action against those unable  to  leave  the  UK  due  to  Covid
   restrictions. In the circumstances, the appellant has achieved  all  that
   she could  and  nothing  in  this  decision  should  prevent  any  future
   application for a visit to the UK in the future  (she  has  other  family
   here).

15. In the circumstances and for the reasons set  out  above,  I  find  such
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so  that
   it must be set aside to be remade by dismissing the appeal.

Decision

      The appeal of the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

      I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

      I remake the decision in the human rights appeal by dismissing it.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       23 March 2021



