
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20398/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 August 2021                    |On 01 September 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                              RANGA RAO GUDURU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, Counsel instructed by Bindmans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by a citizen of India who was  born  on  14  April
       1940 and so now 81 years old, against a decision of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal dismissing his appeal against a decision of  the  Secretary
       of State on 24 September 2018 refusing him leave to remain on  human
       rights grounds.  I found that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in
       law and set aside the decision in a Reasons for Finding an Error  of
       Law dated 28 May 2021.  The decision  had  previously  been  decided
       unsatisfactorily  and  I  decided  that   the   appeal   should   be
       redetermined in the Upper Tribunal.  It came before me on 24  August
       2021.

    2. I have been considerably assisted by a skeleton argument  signed  by
       Mr Sellwood on 23 August 2021.  I have several documents in front of
       me; almost all of them  are  incorporated  into  either  the  Appeal
       Bundle or the Supplementary Bundle and I am pleased to  record  that
       both bundles are organised and the pagination is sequential.

    3. The respondent's Reasons for Refusal are dated 24 September 2018. It
       conveniently sets out the  appellant's  immigration  history  and  I
       begin by considering that document.

    4. This notes that the appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  in  July
       2017 with entry clearance as a visitor valid until May 2018.   On  7
       January 2018, that is clearly within the currency of his  leave,  he
       applied for further leave to remain on the basis of his  family  and
       private life.  The respondent noted, correctly, that this is  not  a
       marriage case.  The appellant no longer  has  a  life  partner.   He
       clearly did not qualify under the Rules unless he came within one of
       the exceptions created by the Rules.  The respondent considered  the
       possibility of there  being  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
       appellant's integration into life in India but  noted  that  he  had
       lived in India until he was 77 years old and the respondent did  not
       accept  that  there  would  be   significant,   still   less   "very
       significant" obstacles to reintegration.   The  respondent  did  not
       accept that there was  "family  life"  within  the  meaning  of  the
       Immigration Rules and, although accepting that the appellant  had  a
       son, daughter-in-law and grandson in the  United  Kingdom,  did  not
       accept that there was any special characteristic to the relationship
       that brought it within the Secretary  of  State's  understanding  of
       "family life".

    5. The respondent did not take issue with the appellant's claim  to  be
       financially independent either because of his own  resources,  which
       were not inconsiderable, or because of the support of his family but
       said that the resources could be used to support him if he  returned
       to India.  The appellant had been  able  to  organise  treatment  in
       India for his health problems and could do so again if treatment was
       needed.  He did have relatives in India who could provide some  sort
       of social network for him in the event of his return.

    6. The appellant set out his case in a document dated 15 December 2017.
        I record the points  in  that  letter  that  I  consider  the  most
       pertinent.

    7. The appellant explained that his wife died quite suddenly  in  March
       2016 when she succumbed  to  Parkinson's  disease.   They  had  been
       married for 46 years and he explained that he "had  no  clue"  about
       housekeeping and people described as the "full-time helps" taken  on
       after his wife's death left his employment because they did not like
       working for him.  His daughter-in-law and son travelled to India and
       helped him and he was much cheered by their presence and  especially
       the presence of his grandson, Taran, then aged 5.  He travelled with
       them when they returned "England" and he stayed with them for  three
       months before returning to India.  His grandson and  daughter-in-law
       stayed with him for three months to help  him  re-establish  himself
       before returning so that his grandson could start school  in  August
       2016.

    8. The appellant did not like living on his own which  became  evermore
       challenging as his hearing declined.  It is a feature  of  the  case
       that the appellant's hearing is poor.  He said  that  he  could  not
       hear the doorbell and his part-time domestic helps  either  gave  up
       trying to seek admission or went to neighbours for intervention.   A
       neighbour would help  him,  even  sending  a  text  message  to  get
       attention, but that was not a satisfactory arrangement.

    9. He listed a series of ailments from which he suffered. None of  them
       are unusual in  a  person  of  his  years  but  they  added  to  the
       difficulties he had in coping with life.  He also found it difficult
       to  managing  his  financial  affairs,  not  because  he  could  not
       understand his  money  but  because  he  was  not  comfortable  with
       technology.   He   described   his   knowledge   of   computers   as
       "rudimentary".  He was frightened that he would fall  victim  to  an
       internet scam because he did not understand  normal  procedures  and
       therefore would not be alert to the abnormal.

   10. He said that his son repeatedly asked the appellant  to  spend  time
       with him in the United Kingdom but the appellant explained that when
       he arrived at Manchester airport in July 2017 he had a return ticket
       to Chennai for travel on 13 December 2017 that he intended  to  use.
       He had left his financial documents such as  his  passbooks,  cheque
       books, debit card and pension details in his home in India.  He said
       that he had "equipped myself  with  six  months  of  travel  medical
       insurance and return ticket".

   11. His said that his intention to return to India "melted like  an  ice
       cube" after five months of bonding with his grandson and he outlined
       many appropriate and happy  dealings  with  his  grandson  including
       teaching him Telugu which he described as "our mother tongue".

   12. He had become increasingly  dependent  on  his  son  who,  with  his
       daughter-in-law, cared for him.  He said he was appreciative of  his
       daughter-in-law's support which was practical and encouraging.  Near
       the end of his statement he said:

  "Since my son is an ophthalmologist, when I die in his house,  he  is  at
  hand to fulfil my last wish of donation of my eyes.  My  soul  will  have
  the satisfaction of giving sight to someone in England, the country which
  my son lovingly adopted as his own".

   13. I think I might be permitted the observation that this was, for  me,
       a unique submission.

   14. His son, daughter-in-law and grandson were clearly, on his  account,
       very important to him and his wellbeing depended on them.

   15. Additionally he had a younger brother in the United Kingdom and they
       spoke daily.

   16. He made a statement dated 20 December 2018.  There he confirmed that
       his son in the United Kingdom is his only child.

   17. The appellant had suffered from heart disease since  1980.   He  had
       severe hearing loss and could not hear without hearing aids.  He had
       developed cataracts which would need surgery.

   18. He said a little more about his links to India.  He said  that  many
       of his friends had died or moved away to live  with  their  sons  or
       daughters elsewhere.  The appellant is one of eight  siblings.   His
       brother in Bangalore died "a long time ago", his brother's widow was
       in the care of one of her sons and they  were  short  of  money  and
       could not help him. He had two brothers living in Australia.  He had
       another brother living in the United Kingdom.  He spoke  daily  with
       that brother and visited him from time to time.  He had a sister  in
       Chennai but she died in December 2017.  He had a nephew  in  Chennai
       who suffered from arthritis, was hard of hearing and diabetic and in
       the care of his wife.  He was about an hour's travel  distance  away
       and he could not be expected  to  offer  him  support.  He  had  two
       siblings living in India but both of them  lived  a  long  way  from
       Chennai and were not able to support him at all.   One  brother  was
       the father of his daughter-in-law but he was aged 77  and  lived  in
       Hyderabad which was about 600 kilometres from Chennai.   The  other,
       his youngest sister, is now aged 70. She is a widow and has learning
       difficulties and she had suffered from a major depression.  He  said
       that he had "no relatives in India who are either able or willing to
       help me".

   19. He talked about domestic help he had  obtained  in  India.   He  had
       employed a "part-time maid" who  did  about  an  hour's  work  every
       morning.  He had never done any housework and felt he was too old to
       learn.  He spent a long time on his own and became depressed.

   20. He really did not want to displace the happy  relationships  he  had
       developed in the  United  Kingdom  with  telephone  calls  or  video
       conversations however frequent.

   21.  Presently  his   daughter-in-law   accompanies   him   to   medical
       appointments  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  "sorts   out   all   my
       prescriptions" which he had not been able to do in India.

   22. His son wanted to look after him because that was the  tradition  of
       the culture in which he was raised.

   23. Paragraph 15 of the statement is particularly pertinent and I set it
       out below:

  "I know that Kalyan [his son] feels so strongly about his duty to support
  and look after me that if I am unable to stay  here  he  will  return  to
  India with me thus giving up his job as an ophthalmologist in the NHS.  I
  do not think that Rama and Taran  [daughter-in-law  and  grandson]  would
  follow him.  7 year old Taran has lived in Bolton from birth.   He  loves
  his home and school.  Bolton and its environs is his whole universe.  Any
  attempt to transplant him would shatter him psychologically.  It would be
  devastating for me to see a close-knit family separated in this  way.   I
  hate the idea of causing Kalyan, Rama and Taran  such  trouble  and  also
  causing the NHS to lose a precious ophthalmologist".

   24. He insisted he was able to look after himself financially.   He  had
       been charged for using the health service in the United Kingdom  and
       had paid his bills.  He would not be  able  to  get  private  health
       insurance unless he had permission to remain.

   25. He made a supplementary statement dated 11 August 2021.

   26. There he explained that he is particularly concerned about returning
       to India presently because he was frightened of the impact of COVID-
       19.  He would be worried about obtaining domestic  help  because  it
       would bring with it a risk of infection and he had been  advised  by
       his neighbours in India that domestic helpers were not allowed  into
       the building,  which  had  many  floors,  because  of  the  fear  of
       spreading infection.

   27. He had mentioned in an early statement a neighbour who supported him
       but that neighbour had suffered from COVID and had been in  hospital
       as an emergency case and was at the time  of  writing  dependent  on
       oxygen.

   28. He gave evidence before me by adopting  his  statements.   Ms  Cunha
       wished to cross-examine him about his arrangements for healthcare in
       the United Kingdom.  In the  short  time  that  the  appellant  gave
       evidence it was quite obvious that he is profoundly  deaf  and  only
       assisted to a limited extent by his aids.  He was  able  to  explain
       that he did not have health insurance presently.  He had had  health
       insurance when he came as a visitor and extended that for a year but
       was not able to extend it beyond that.   It  was  his  intention  to
       obtain health insurance in the United Kingdom if he had  permission.



   29. The appellant's son Mr  Kalyan  Venkatachala  Guduru  gave  evidence
       before me. Mr Guduru is a surgeon and I apologise for  my  crassness
       in addressing him in the hearing room as "Dr Guduru".

   30. He adopted statements made previously.  He relied first on a  letter
       dated 12 December 2017 which I now consider. Much of  the  statement
       is uncontroversial or of marginal relevance or repeats  points  made
       elsewhere.  I have concentrated on the parts of the evidence that  I
       consider important to the decision that I have to make and that  are
       not supported or otherwise considered.

   31. Mr Guduru confirmed that he is a British citizen and he has lived in
       the United Kingdom since 2003.  He is married to a  British  citizen
       (also a US national) and their only child was born in  October  2011
       and so must now be approaching his 10th birthday.  Mr Guduru  is  an
       ophthalmologist and surgeon working  for  the  Bolton  Hospital  NHS
       Trust and also has a private practice.

   32. His father, the appellant, had a career as a civil servant  and  his
       mother was a microbiologist.

   33. The appellant suffered his first heart attack in 1981 when he was 40
       years old.  He had another heart attack  in  1992  and  underwent  a
       coronary bypass graft surgery.  Further similar surgery was done  in
       2000 after another "cardiac episode".

   34. The appellant's wife suffered from Parkinson's disease and  required
       carers in the latter stages of her life.  As  the  appellant  helped
       care for his wife he became increasingly withdrawn and housebound.

   35. Mr Guduru with his wife and their child spent nearly five months  in
       India with his parents in 2014 and in that time his son developed  a
       close bond with the appellant and indeed the appellant's wife.

   36. The appellant and his wife planned a visit to the United Kingdom  in
       2015 which the family hoped would give the  appellant  some  respite
       from the demands created by the appellant's wife's declining health.
        Before they arrived the appellant was rushed to hospital with chest
       pains and Mr Guduru flew to India to give the necessary consent  for
       treatment.

   37. The appellant recovered sufficiently to travel to the United Kingdom
       and the visit was a success.

   38. Mr Guduru emphasised how his son's relationship developed  with  the
       appellant and became increasingly important to the child.

   39. The appellant and his wife returned  to  India  in  accordance  with
       their obligations under their visa and Mr Guduru with his  wife  and
       son accompanied them to Chennai in November 2015 and spent  a  month
       there organising a house and arranging carers.

   40. In January 2016 the  appellant's  wife  had  a  heart  attack.   She
       recovered sufficiently to be discharged from hospital but  in  March
       2016 she died.

   41. Mr  Guduru  travelled  to  India  to  support  the  appellant.   The
       appellant returned to the United Kingdom with him and stayed for two
       months before returning to India in the company of Mr Guduru and his
       family.

   42. The appellant really had no  housekeeping  skills  and  a  maid  was
       found.

   43. The appellant was also becoming isolated because of  his  increasing
       deafness so that he frequently did not hear knocks on  the  door  or
       the telephone.

   44. Although the appellant put on a brave face Mr Guduru was  firmly  of
       the view that he was not managing and was worried about him.

   45. He knew that his father's financial circumstances were secure but he
       had not taken to managing the  internet  and  phishing  and  similar
       scams are endemic in India making it very  difficult  for  a  person
       apprehensive of the internet to develop necessary skills.

   46. Mr Guduru also noticed that the appellant was beginning to lose  his
       memory.  For example, he had left  a  side  door  unlocked  on  many
       occasions and appeared to forget quite detailed  conversations.   Mr
       Guduru said:

  "This is hopefully just part of the aging process but is worrying for  us
  when my father is living alone halfway round the  world  with  no  family
  support, cannot hear properly and has a history of heart problems."

   47. He went on to say that he and his wife decided  that  the  appellant
       should live with them in the United Kingdom where they can give  him
       emotional and practical support.  Now that  their  son  had  started
       school it was no longer practical for his wife to spend long periods
       with the appellant in India.

   48. He also explained that his son found it hard to understand  why  his
       grandfather, the appellant, could not live with them.  He  explained
       again how his son and father had a very close bond.

   49. He explained how the appellant was accommodated in the  family  home
       in the United Kingdom where he had his own bedroom and  bathroom  on
       the ground floor and how his general condition had changed  for  the
       better because he was being supported.  It was also easier  to  keep
       in contact with his brother in the United Kingdom.

   50. It disturbed him that he was not able to provide his father with the
       kind of support that he frequently saw provided  by  the  family  of
       patients who consulted him as an ophthalmologist.

   51. He concluded the letter with a paragraph beginning:

  "The presence of my father here completes my family and fills  a  gnawing
  hole not only in my life but also in that of my wife and son as well  as,
  most importantly, ensuring my father's welfare".

   52. Mr Guduru made a statement dated 20  December  2018.   Much  of  the
       statement repeats things  said  in  the  letter  but  the  statement
       emphasises the special bond between the appellant's grandson and the
       appellant.   It  also  emphasised  Mr  Guduru's  concern  about  his
       father's health and gave an example of an occasion when  his  father
       collapsed and needed emergency hospital treatment.  He wondered  how
       the appellant would have managed if he had been on his own in India.



   53. He explained how the appellant's remaining relatives in  India  were
       no longer able to offer him any kind of support because of their own
       infirmity and he emphasised the cultural tradition in which  he  was
       raised, and which he respected, that a son supported his parents  in
       their old age.

   54. At paragraph 19 he introduces the idea of going to  India  with  the
       appellant if he is not allowed to remain.  In this statement  it  is
       somewhat hypothetical. He recorded "I will feel obliged to return to
       India with him" rather than a clear  and  settled  declaration  that
       that is what would happen but he pointed out that removing to  India
       would be a significant sacrifice on his part because it would damage
       his career in the United Kingdom. It would also be very difficult in
       his own family because he did not want to remove his  son  from  the
       United Kingdom education system or indeed the United  Kingdom  where
       he is settled.

   55. He emphasised that there was not  a  tradition  of  caring  for  the
       elderly outside the family in India.  This  meant  that  people  who
       provided that kind of care were not supervised and  did  not  always
       exhibit professional standards but rather were often associated with
       exploitation or rank dishonesty.  He had looked at retirement  homes
       in Chennai but found nothing suitable.  To  live  at  such  a  place
       would require the appellant to remove to a different part of Chennai
       where he would have  no  contacts  and  where  access  to  emergency
       medical treatment  would  be  difficult  because  of  the  distances
       involved.

   56. He emphasised that his father is in good  circumstances  financially
       but he would support his father if  that  became  necessary  and  he
       would give any undertaking to that effect.

   57. He made a supplementary statement dated 12 August  2021.   There  he
       explained that  his  father's  health  was  deteriorating.   He  was
       subject to infections and was becoming more forgetful and  so  could
       not be relied upon to organise his medications or keep appointments.

   58. He also expressed the view that it would be  particularly  difficult
       for his father to return  to  India  because  of  a  risk  of  COVID
       infection even though his father was fully vaccinated.  He explained
       how in India  transport  services  and  many  restaurants'  delivery
       services had shut down because of the  risk  of  infection  and  his
       father would be very isolated with the obvious risks to  his  mental
       health.

   59. His father had been assisted  by  cataract  surgery  in  the  United
       Kingdom which would not have been  practically  available  in  India
       because of COVID restrictions. Clearly further cataract  replacement
       is unlikely but he said that the scenario indicated the kind of  the
       additional difficulty that the appellant would face in India.

   60. He explained that his aunt, that is the appellant's sister, had died
       in 2019.

   61. He then explained how the  relationship  between  his  son  and  his
       father was becoming even stronger to the point that he  believed  it
       would be like a bereavement for his son if his grandfather left.

   62. He had explained how the appellant had  become  more  lonely  as  he
       contemplated return to India and, in Mr Guduru's opinion, ever  less
       able to cope.

   63. At paragraph 10 he had "firmed up  his  position"  on  removing  and
       said:

  "For all of these reasons, if my father  is  required  to  India  I  will
  accompany him and stay there with him because I am  too  afraid  of  what
  would happen to him if he goes back alone.  My wife Rama and my son Taran
  would remain in the UK and so our family would be separated".

   64. He then went on to make the secondary but important point  that  his
       skills as an ophthalmologist are rare in the health service and that
       if he were required to leave his post  there  would  be  significant
       additional hardship in providing important medical services  in  the
       United Kingdom.

   65. He concluded that statement by explaining that he did  not  consider
       it fair for his son  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  and  establish
       himself elsewhere and particularly not in India where he would  need
       to learn a new language before there was any chance of  establishing
       himself in schools.

   66. Mr Guduru gave oral evidence.  He  adopted  his  statements  and  in
       response to additional questions explained that when his father last
       came to the United Kingdom he had the benefit  of  health  insurance
       which was extended for the maximum time permitted but it  could  not
       be further extended "from India" and was not available in the United
       Kingdom because the appellant was not settled.

   67. He emphasised that the costs that had been incurred  by  the  health
       service had been paid and that there was funding to ensure that  any
       further likely bills would be paid.

   68. Ms Cunha cross-examined  on  this  point  briefly  but  the  answers
       confirmed rather than undermined the  evidence.   He  accepted  that
       taking an unfunded person and making them a  burden  on  the  health
       service was unacceptable because of the huge pressures on the health
       service presently if for no other reason.

   69. No further oral evidence was called.

   70. Ms Cunha confirmed that she did not challenge any of  the  evidence.
       I make it plain that the evidence had been disclosed well in advance
       of the hearing and Ms Cunha's decision was considered  and  entirely
       understandable given the detailed and extensive evidence set out  in
       the statements and the supporting documentation.  It  was  a  matter
       for her but I can understand why she concluded that there really was
       no sensible basis for suggesting that the  witnesses  were  anything
       other than truthful.

   71. The appellant's daughter-in-law, Rama Guduru made a statement  dated
       20 December 2018.  She emphasised the special  relationship  between
       the appellant and his grandson.

   72. She also explained  how  she  dealt  with  all  of  the  appellant's
       financial  affairs  including  managing  his   bank   accounts   and
       investments because the appellant struggled with  the  internet  and
       particularly with retaining passwords.

   73. She explained how he was confused by his mobile phone.  He  received
       misleading and fraudulent texts and that troubled him.  She kept  an
       eye on the messages to make sure that he  had  not  missed  anything
       that mattered.

   74. She provided practical care for him. For example, she  prompted  him
       to wear his hearing aids and made sure that  his  mobile  phone  was
       fully charged.

   75. She noted a deterioration  in  his  memory  which  impacted  on  his
       personal organisation.

   76. He had been diagnosed as suffering from Type  2  diabetes.   It  was
       managed by controlling his diet.  She had  attended  a  consultation
       with him and she had found that he had not been able to  retain  the
       advice that he had been given.

   77. She gave other examples of how she helped him and  she  referred  to
       the strong cultural obligation felt by her husband  to  support  the
       appellant, his father,  and,  in  her  statement  of  December  2018
       recorded how he felt that he would have to "uproot himself from  his
       life here and return to India  with  his  father  to  care  for  him
       there".  This would split the family and cause distress.

   78. She emphasised that the appellant was financially self-sufficient.

   79. She made a supplementary statement dated 29 October 2019.  There she
       referred to the appellant "slowing down" and  losing  confidence  on
       his own.  She illustrated this by saying how he would still attend a
       table tennis club, travelling by taxi when necessary but "we put him
       in an Uber" and he was met at the end of his journey.   She  doubted
       his ability to organise a taxi or pay a fare.

   80. She emphasised how he could not manage to renew his medications  and
       she had taken on that responsibility.

   81. She returned to the theme of unhelpful messages on his Indian mobile
       phone and  said  how  he  was  "getting  increasingly  frazzled  and
       agitated" by such things.

   82. She emphasised how Taran became unsettled even  if  his  grandfather
       was away for only a short time.

   83. She explained how there was no family support in Chennai.

   84. When she  had  visited  Chennai  in  2019  she  had  spoken  to  the
       appellant's neighbour who had previously assisted  him  and  he  had
       explained how he could not provide the support he  used  to  provide
       because his own circumstances were changed and he was away from home
       for extended periods.

   85. She made a supplementary statement dated 11 August 2021.  There  she
       explained that since September 2020 she had worked full-time as part
       of a diabetic eye screening programme.  Most of the  work  was  done
       from home and that  had  enabled  her  to  continue  to  assist  the
       appellant.  She explained how he was more dependent than  before  on
       her organisational skills to  manage  his  medications  and  medical
       appointments and she also encouraged him to eat properly.

   86. His contact with his brother in London had been frustrated by  COVID
       restrictions but he had managed to see him recently and this cheered
       him.

   87. She had become closer to the appellant by  reason  of  their  living
       together.

   88. She repeated how the appellant's return to India would  involve  her
       husband going to India and that this would be a big strain.

   89. As well as the emotional support her husband provided her and  their
       son she had health problems which would be much harder to manage  if
       there was no other adult in the house to assist.

   90. She could not contemplate removing to India mainly because that  was
       not in her son's interests.

   91. The appellant's brother Dr Guduru Gopal Rao OBE had written a letter
       dated 15 December 2017 and made statements dated  20  December  2018
       and 12 August 2021.  Dr  Rao  is  a  medical  practitioner  and  his
       qualifications include Doctor of  Medicine  and  Fellowship  of  the
       Royal College of Pathologists.   He  works,  or  has  worked,  as  a
       consultant microbiologist in the National Health Service.

   92. In the letter of 15 December 2017 Dr Rao recorded his "dismay"  when
       he visited the appellant after he had been widowed.  He  found  that
       he was ill with respiratory and cardiac diseases and unable to  take
       care of himself and that he was lonely, "forlorn and depressed".

   93. He also recorded his  pleasure  in  the  special  relationship  that
       developed between the appellant and  his  grandson  in  Bolton.   He
       expressed the view that the appellant's health would deteriorate  if
       he went to live on his own in Chennai.

   94. In his statement of December  2018  he  talked  about  relationships
       within the family  and  reiterated  the  poor  state  the  appellant
       presented when he lived on his own and how different he was  in  the
       United Kingdom.

   95. He was aware of the appellant's son's plans to accompany his  father
       in the event of return  to  India  and  described  this  as  "hugely
       disruptive" for the family and also how it  would  be  "an  enormous
       loss to the NHS" to be deprived of the appellant's son's skills.

   96.  In  a  supplementary  statement  dated  12  August  2021  he  makes
       essentially the same points and expressed an even higher  degree  of
       confidence in the detrimental effect on the  appellant's  health  in
       the event of his return without his son and  the  unavailability  of
       any family support in India.

   97. He also explained how COVID had caused significant problems in India
       and how reports suggested the number  of  deaths  had  been  grossly
       underreported and the true figure may be ten times higher than  that
       acknowledged.  There were reports  of  the  health  service  failing
       because it was overloaded with the pandemic victims.

   98. There is an unsigned statement from one Deborah Kelly,  a  neighbour
       of the appellant's in Bolton.  This statement is not signed and says
       nothing of significance that is  not  said  elsewhere.   I  give  it
       minimum value but I have read it.  There is a signed letter  from  a
       Dr Thiagarajan Swaminathan.  He is a general medical practitioner in
       North Yorkshire and knows the appellant and his son.  It is a  short
       supportive letter making  points  that  have  been  made  elsewhere.
       There are financial documents giving support to  the  evidence  that
       the appellant has means and that his family  is  in  a  position  to
       support him if those means fail.

   99. There are two supporting documents from  the  appellant's  grandson,
       Taran.  They are both written in  childish  handwriting  although  I
       note the more recent one is  considerably  neater  than  anything  I
       could produce and the register suggests to me that it is the child's
       own views that are being expressed.  Plainly he  was  encouraged  to
       write the letters.  I do not see  how  else  they  would  have  been
       written but they are each about things that Taran and the  appellant
       do together and the warmth of their relationship.

  100. There is other material about Taran that I have  read.  He  has  not
       been involved inappropriately involved in proceedings.   He  is  not
       pleading for a particular position but he is explaining clearly  why
       and how much he likes his grandfather.

  101. There are letters  from  family  members  in  India  supporting  the
       contention that they are really in no position to help the appellant
       in the event of his return.

  102. I am particularly interested in letters from the  appellant's  son's
       employer.  There is a letter dated 6 December 2018  from  Dr  Jackie
       Bene OBE who is the chief executive of the  Bolton  National  Health
       Service Foundation Trust.  Dr Bene recorded in  December  2018  that
       the appellant's son was contemplating going to India to support  the
       appellant. She describes him as "a very valued and skilled member of
       the eye department here".  She went on  to  say  that  there  was  a
       "significant shortage of trained ophthalmic surgeons in the UK"  and
       she was clearly keen to keep the appellant's  son's  skills  in  the
       health service rather than in India.

  103. There  is  an  undated  supporting  letter  from  "18  Week  Support
       Ophthalmology" which I understand to  be  extra  work  done  by  the
       appellant's son arranging "out  of  hours  appointments"  to  ensure
       cases  are  processed  more  quickly  and  that  consultations   are
       available for people who  cannot  or  cannot  easily  attend  during
       ordinary working hours.  This  concludes  with  a  comment  that  Dr
       Guduru's departure would be "a great loss" to 18  Week  Support  and
       its many patients.

  104. There is a letter dated 20 December  2018  from  Mrs  C  Inkster,  a
       consultant oculoplastic surgeon and ophthalmic clinical lead at  the
       Bolton NHS Foundation Trust.  This describes Mr Guduru as "a  highly
       valued member of our senior medical team" and that he "is  genuinely
       irreplaceable".  She explained that the Trust had been "unsuccessful
       in recruiting in the area of his expertise" and continues  "I  would
       go as far as to say that losing him from our  department  would  put
       patients at  risk  from  potentially  treatable,  sight  threatening
       retinal disorders".  She also described Mr Guduru  as  an  excellent
       teacher.  She wanted him to remain to "continue providing  excellent
       care to the people of Bolton".  I note  too  evidence  from  medical
       professional magazines referring  to  shortages  in  the  supply  of
       ophthalmologists.  There is a further letter dated 11 November  2019
       from Mrs C Inkster, confirming that there is  still  a  shortage  of
       people with Mr Guduru's clinical skills and "we  would  struggle  to
       replace him if he had to leave his position".

  105. I have also seen evidence about the location of care homes in  India
       which adds substance to Mr Guduru's evidence.

  106. There is a social worker's report from Christine Brown, described as
       an independent social worker,  dated  18  January  2017.   Ms  Brown
       qualified in social work in 1986 and is experienced primarily in the
       field of childcare.

  107. Ms Brown's report looks at family  relationships  particularly  from
       the appellant's perspective but also with regard to Taran and she is
       clearly satisfied there is a particularly close relationship between
       the appellant and his grandson.  She concludes at paragraph 5.18:

  "[The appellant's] leaving would also mean that Taran has lost  the  only
  close extended family member with whom he has a close  relationship,  and
  whose addition to the family unit has made the familial grouping complete
  for Taran.  To lose his grandfather from his life at this juncture would,
  in many ways, appear akin to bereavement.  For Taran, there would be  the
  additional knowledge, as he  grew  older,  of  the  lonely  and  isolated
  circumstances in which his grandfather would be living,  only  adding  to
  Taran's distress and sense of deep loss".

  108. There is an update to Christine Brown's  report  dated  15  November
       2019.  This report comments on the strong  cultural  expectation  in
       India that elderly people are looked after  by  their  children  and
       their families and not in some kind of home.  Ms Brown expressed her
       concerns about the appellant's ability  to  manage  without  support
       outside the United Kingdom.  She also commented on the  benefits  to
       Taran of the close and "unique" relationship with  his  grandfather.
       "It reinforces his childhood experiences and development".

  109. There is also an independent social worker's report dated 10  August
       2021 prepared by Amanda De Leon Capdesuner.  Ms De  Leon  Capdesuner
       has 25 years' experience in social work and appropriate professional
       qualifications.

  110. This report also comments appreciatively of the strong  relationship
       between the appellant and his grandson.   At  paragraph  9.2  it  is
       described as "a beautiful  relationship  which  evidenced  a  strong
       attunement to each other".  I note particularly paragraph 9.17 where
       it is recorded:

  "I asked Taran what he would like the judge to know  and  his  whole-body
  language changed, and he became quieter and  looked  sad.   Taran  stated
  'taking away my grandad is like splitting up my family.  There  would  be
  no one to play with and holidays would not be as much fun.   There  would
  be no one to do anything with if you take away my grandad'".

  111. The report makes plain that Taran enjoys a healthy relationship with
       both his parents.  The appellant is not a substitute parent  but  an
       additional and important member of the nuclear family.

  112. At paragraph 9.35 the report states:

  "Should  [the  appellant]  be  removed  from  the  UK,  this  will   have
  devastating effect on Taran's emotional wellbeing and sense  of  identity
  due  to  the  level  of  attunement  and  attachment  he  has  with   his
  grandfather."

  113. Paragraph 11.2 of the report confirms the appellant's  son  reported
       an intention to return with the appellant to India if the  appellant
       had to leave.

  114. At paragraph 11.37 the  report  notes,  perhaps  unremarkably,  that
       removal of the appellant's son would impact adversely  on  Taran  by
       breaking up the relationship between son and father.   At  paragraph
       14.13  the  report  expresses  wholly  appropriate  and  predictable
       concerns about the effect on Taran if his father removed  to  India.
       In addition to the obvious difficulties to do with loss  of  contact
       with his father the report postulates concern about the child  Taran
       becoming a young carer for his mother who has health conditions that
       I have not found necessary to do more than outline but that  concern
       is noted.

  115. Section 15 of the supplementary bundle  index  contains  information
       about the management of the COVID crisis in India.   It  includes  a
       letter from a doctor Professor Deepak Rosha dated 5 July 2021 saying
       that the "COVID-19 pandemic has not been controlled in  Chennai  and
       furthermore, there is a serious threat of  a  'third  wave'  of  the
       infection due to the emergence of the Delta  Plus  variant  in  many
       parts of India".

  116. The same letter refers to health services being "severely stretched"
       and oxygen supply still being limited and generally suggesting  that
       the appellant's return would be "inadvisable".

  117. There is a similar letter from a Dr  Ajay  Sharma  dated  10  August
       2021.  Dr Sharma is identified as an  attending  consultant  in  the
       emergency department and he  writes  from  the  Asian  Institute  of
       Medical Sciences.   Dr  Sharma  refers  to  shortages  causing  real
       difficulties for elderly people who sometimes have been refused beds
       and other life-saving essentials.  This was not a particularly  rare
       event  and  was  a  consequence  of  a  sudden  demand  for  limited
       resources.  The letter concluded by saying: "Senior citizens are  at
       great risk due to age related problems and lack of medical support".

  118. There is also a UK government publication generally advising against
       travel to India and an editorial from The Lancet  magazine  dated  8
       May 2021 criticising the management of  the  crisis  by  the  Indian
       government.

  119. I confirm that I have considered all  of  the  documents  before  me
       although I have not commented on every item.

  120. This is a case where I find I have been told the  truth.   Not  only
       was the evidence not challenged which makes it hard  to  come  to  a
       contrary  finding,  it  is  a  case  where  the  evidence  has  been
       exceptionally well prepared and considered and laid  out  and  there
       was no proper basis for challenging the  gist  of  the  evidence  as
       given.

  121. I have  considered  carefully  Mr  Sellwood's  "appellant's  updated
       skeleton argument" dated 23 August 2021.

  122. Cases of this kind are not infrequently heard  before  the  Tribunal
       and are often troubling.  There is an obvious  tension  between  the
       Rules which, broadly, do nothing to encourage people who  enter  the
       United Kingdom as  visitors  to  stay  in  any  other  capacity  and
       certainly not  to  settle  and  the  very  natural  desire,  perhaps
       particularly strongly felt in people raised in the  culture  of  the
       Asian subcontinent, for children in their adult life to  look  after
       their aging parents.  I must be careful not to  be  lured  into  the
       role of writing the  Immigration  Rules  or  ignoring  the  will  of
       Parliament expressed in the Rules.

  123.  However,  certain  things  follow.   Clearly  the   appellant   has
       established a significant private and  family  life  in  the  United
       Kingdom.  I am not satisfied that he came to the United Kingdom most
       recently intending to remain.  The fact that he had a return  ticket
       does not prove a contrary intention but it is something to consider.
        He was managing on his own, albeit in a way that worried his family
       and whilst I find that they did not want him to return  he  did  not
       come with the intention of remaining.   He  intended  to  return  in
       accordance with his visa as he had done before.

  124. The private and family life he has in the  United  Kingdom  includes
       considerable emotional and practical dependency  upon  his  son  and
       daughter-in-law who are providing him with a home.  It is clear that
       when he did live on his own after many  years  of  marriage,  and  a
       marriage where his wife had played a traditional  housewifely  role,
       he was struggling to cope.  No doubt he was lonely and grieving  and
       had no experience in running a home.  He  has  no  close  family  in
       India.  I am entirely satisfied that although he has a few relatives
       remaining they all have obligations of their own and  although  none
       of them wish him any harm they live some distance away and  have  no
       ability to provide any meaningful support.  Any  suggestion  to  the
       contrary is pure speculation that is contrary to the evidence.

  125. I am also satisfied that the appellant has established a significant
       relationship with his grandson.  Relationships between grandchildren
       and their grandparents vary  greatly  in  families  and  depends  on
       circumstances.  They can be enriching and healthy and still be a lot
       less significant than the relationship that has developed.  Taran is
       the appellant's only grandchild and I accept the evidence  that  the
       grandchild and appellant get on particularly  well.   It  is  not  a
       parental role and should not be treated as if  it  were.   I  cannot
       accept that separating the appellant from his grandchild would be as
       serious as bereavement which is not quite what the  social  worker's
       report said.  It  would  be  a  very  significant  disruption  in  a
       relationship which is enriching.

  126. I also accept that the appellant has significant means  of  his  own
       and his family  have  means  to  support  him  if  those  funds  are
       inadequate.  It is entirely clear that he has made use of the health
       service and has paid his  bills  responsibly.   There  is  no  basis
       whatsoever for suspecting that this is a  person  who  has  come  to
       "milk the system".  He would prefer to be with  his  family  in  the
       United Kingdom and they want to be with him.  I accept that he has a
       meaningful relationship with his brother in London.  I do not regard
       this as "family life" in the sense that it is  a  relationship  over
       and above the ordinary relationship between adults who  are  related
       where  there  is  an  element  of  dependency  that  transforms  its
       significance.  It is  nevertheless  an  important  relationship  and
       which can prosper in the United Kingdom in a way that it  could  not
       if the appellant did not live there.

  127. I do not consider how the appellant might cope on his own  in  India
       because the evidence is that he would not go on his  own  to  India.
       The evidence is that the appellant's son would  separate  physically
       (certainly not emotionally) from his family in  the  United  Kingdom
       and support his father.  This is quite a claim to make  and  is  not
       one that should be accepted lightly.  However, there is  very  clear
       evidence of the family in the United  Kingdom  showing  considerable
       concern for the appellant.  Not only did  the  appellant's  son  try
       hard to get to India to see his mother in what proved to be her last
       illness  but  he  and  his  wife  supported  the  appellant  in  the
       appellant's own home in Chennai.

  128. The claim that the appellant's son would leave  the  United  Kingdom
       and go with his  father  is  bolstered  by  the  evidence  that  the
       appellant's son and daughter-in-law had given considerable  time  to
       supporting him.  It is also bolstered by the evidence that there  is
       a very strong sense of cultural obligation to  support  the  elderly
       relative and the fact that the appellant  and  his  son  have  taken
       steps to investigate other routes.

  129. The evidence about the suitability  of  alternative  care  homes  in
       India was equivocal.

  130. The appellant has led little evidence  to  show  that  the  possible
       nursing homes in India would be unsuitable for him except by  reason
       of requiring  him  to  move  to  a  different  area  but  as  it  is
       essentially his case that he has no friends or contacts in his  home
       area anymore that point loses force.  The point is not  whether  the
       appellant's physical needs including his organisational needs, could
       be met in India.  The point is that the appellant's family  feel  so
       strongly about their desire and cultural obligation (the points  are
       not unconnected) that they have decided that if there  is  no  other
       way the appellant's son will travel to India with him.

  131. It is not a case where the appellant's more  serious  medical  needs
       could not be met.  He has the funds and access to the health  system
       in India  and  has  benefited  from  it  including  benefiting  from
       significant surgery.  It is not  the  case  that  his  health  would
       collapse.  The  point  is  that  he  needs  day-to-day  support  and
       assistance of  a  kind  that  his  family  in  the  United  Kingdom,
       particularly his daughter-in-law, are keen to provide.   I  find  it
       inherently likely that he could probably do a little  more  to  help
       himself if he was forced to do more for himself  but  I  accept  the
       evidence that he has little practise in running  a   home  and,  and
       with respect because he is certainly not a person incapable  in  law
       of making decisions, he is finding a tendency  to  become  forgetful
       which reflects on his personal organisation skills  which  makes  it
       much harder for him to manage on his own in India.

  132. Nevertheless, this is not a case where there  are  very  significant
       obstacles in the way of integration in India  because  circumstances
       that might (I put it no higher than that) lead to such a  conclusion
       do not arise.  The appellant would not be going on his own to India.
        He would be going with his son who will assist him.

  133. I do not accept that it  is  unlawful  to  send  somebody  to  India
       because of the management of the Corona crisis or the  dangers  that
       it presents.  It is difficult to get a clear overview of  the  risks
       facing anyone in a particular part of India.  It is quite plain that
       the country is infected with the disease, as is most of the west  of
       the world, and it is quite plain that India  has  not  performed  as
       well as  some  countries  in  arranging  vaccinations  or  generally
       managing the crisis.  Of course, it is best in the short  term  that
       the appellant does not go to India.  That is clearly the advice that
       would be given any competent medical practitioner concerned for  him
       but that is not the same as saying he could not go as  a  matter  of
       law.  He would go with the benefit of  vaccination  which  offers  a
       degree of protection and, much more importantly, he  would  go  with
       the benefit of a supporting son.  Any suggestion that he  cannot  go
       to India is misconceived on the particular facts of this case.

  134. It is clear that the  relationship  between  the  grandson  and  the
       grandfather  are  particularly  strong.  It  is   plain   that   the
       appellant's removal would be contrary to the best interests  of  his
       grandson.  His best interests lie in his grandfather staying in  the
       United Kingdom where they can  continue  to  enjoy  each  other  and
       enrich each other's lives.

  135. It is therefore plain that removing the  appellant  would  interfere
       with his private and family life and the private and family life  of
       his son and daughter-in-law and grandson.

  136. I have to balance  these  things  against  the  public  interest  in
       removing the appellant.

  137. I then ask what proper purpose such removal would fulfil.   Here  Ms
       Cunha assisted the  appellant  significantly.   She  said  that  the
       public interest lay in preserving the assets of the  health  service
       and not letting the appellant be a burden on the state and she could
       not argue on the evidence that there was any such risk in this  case
       and she said that the appeal ought to be allowed.  I agree with  her
       that any argument based on the appellant becoming a  burden  on  the
       United Kingdom cannot succeed.  He has the means and has shown  that
       he has the sense of responsibility to prevent that happening.

  138. It follows that when I look at the proportionality of the decision I
       have to weigh the public interest against the  particular  facts  of
       the case.  The particular facts of the case are that there would  be
       considerable deprivation to the life  of  the  appellant's  grandson
       because  his  grandfather  would  go,  but  there  would   also   be
       considerable deprivation to the life of the grandson and the  mother
       because the father would go.  Clearly the  appellant's  son  is  not
       going to end his marriage.  This family are obviously  committed  to
       each other and have a strong sense of family responsibility but they
       all want to live as a nuclear family and if  the  appellant  has  to
       leave the United Kingdom that cannot happen.

  139. It would be a big jolt to  manage  in  the  long  term  without  the
       appellant's  son's  presence  and  would  clearly  impact   on   the
       appellant's grandson.   The  appellant's  son  has  had  to  balance
       different competing senses of responsibility  and  has  reached  the
       conclusion that he has.

  140. I also accept that the appellant's son has a significant job in  the
       health service that would be hard to replace.  The evidence is plain
       that his medical speciality is undersupplied and  he  could  not  be
       replaced.  No doubt  arrangements  would  be  made.   Advertisements
       would be placed and work would be shuffled but  it  is  quite  plain
       that there would be significant disruption to  important  healthcare
       to a large number of people if the appellant's son left the country.
       All that is left is the theoretical public  interest  in  preserving
       public funds which Ms Cunha says is not in issue in this case.  This
       appeal has been conceded by the Secretary of State and I  allow  the
       appeal.

  141. It is, I think, apparent from the above that I have  considered  the
       rules and found that the appellant does not satisfy them.

  142. I have had regard to Part 5A of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 2002. I am concerned with family rather than private life
       when I consider the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his
       relatives in the United Kingdom. The  relationship  is  closer  than
       ordinary family bonds and is characterised by considerable emotional
       dependency between the appellant and his  son,  his  daughter-in-law
       and his grandson. The appellant has never been in the United Kingdom
       unlawfully. Nevertheless I do not give these relationships  as  much
       weight as I would to relationships between life partners and parents
       and small children. Clearly there is  close  "weighty"  family  life
       between the appellant's son and daughter-in-law and between them and
       their son. The appellant speaks and understands English  to  a  high
       standard, he is financially independent and, although now tending to
       be housebound because of failing health, he has some contacts in the
       wider community. He is willing to integrate  and  is  integrated  as
       much as his health permits.

  143. Further this is a case that turns on its own facts. The appellant is
       entitled to the benefit of the constraints the places on  disrupting
       a  nuclear  family  and  the  dominant  (not  determinative)  policy
       imperatives of promoting the relationship between husband  and  wife
       and parents  and  minor  children.  Further  the  appellant's  son's
       departure would have an adverse effect on the public good because he
       has rare skill in the health service. There are an unusual number of
       factors here pointing to allowing the appeal and not  much  pointing
       the other way.

  144. For all of these reasons,  I  allow  this  appeal  on  human  rights
       grounds.

Notice of Decision

  145. This appeal is allowed.



                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 31 August 2021                 |



