
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20188/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 September 2019                 |On 27 September 2019                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                  Sule [O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms I Ramnundun, Solicitor of Rashid & Rashid
                    Solicitors (Merton High Street)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who was born  on  7  January  1971,  is  a  national  of
    Nigeria.  He entered this country pursuant to a visit  visa  issued  in
    August 2006, which was valid  until  9  February  2007  and  thereafter
    overstayed without leave.  He apparently remained outside the notice of
    the immigration authorities because the next they knew of him was  when
    on 10 February 2017 he submitted an application  for  leave  to  remain
    under Article 8 on the basis of his family and private  life  which  he
    had established while in this country unlawfully.

 2. The application which he had made was refused  by  the  respondent  who
    also certified the claim as clearly unfounded under Section 94  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the effect of  which  was
    that he would only be able to appeal against this decision after he had
    left this country.

 3. The appellant served a pre-action protocol letter in  respect  of  this
    decision, following which  the  respondent  agreed  to  reconsider  the
    decision to refuse and certify the  application,  which  he  did.   The
    decision was remade on 19 September 2018 and although the  decision  to
    refuse  the  application  was  maintained,  the  respondent  no  longer
    maintained the decision to certify the claim as clearly unfounded,  the
    consequence being that the appellant was able  to  appeal  against  the
    decision, which he did.

 4. That appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain  sitting
    at Hatton Cross on  23  April  2019  but  in  a  Decision  and  Reasons
    promulgated on 15 May 2019 Judge Hussain dismissed the appeal.

 5. The essence of  the  appellant's  claim  was  that  he  was  now  in  a
    relationship with a lady who had leave to remain in this country,  that
    she had three children who were her stepchildren, and  that  they  also
    had a young baby.  In respect of the oldest child that  child,  who  is
    now 11 years old, was then about 9 years old and having  been  born  in
    this country fell within the definition of a "qualifying child" as  set
    out within Section  117D(1)(b)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, being a person under the age of 18 who  had  lived  in
    the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years.  It was  the
    appellant's case  that  he  had  a  "genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship" with this child and that it would not  be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the United Kingdom,  as  he  was  now  at  an
    important stage of his education  and  his  mother  and  siblings  were
    established in this country.   In  these  circumstances  the  appellant
    relied upon the provisions set out within Section 117B(6) of  the  2002
    Act which provides as follows:

         "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
         cases

         ...

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)      the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)      it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom".

 6. It was, accordingly, the appellant's case that because he had a genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with children who were  qualifying
    children because they had been in this  country  for  more  than  seven
    years and it would not be reasonable to expect those children to  leave
    the United Kingdom, as provided by statute, the public interest did not
    require his removal.  In those circumstances, clearly because he had  a
    family and private life  in  this  country  and  there  was  no  public
    interest in removing him he ought to be allowed to remain.

 7. The judge at the hearing accepted that if he could  establish  that  he
    had such a relationship with his stepchildren, then the  appeal  should
    succeed, finding as follows at paragraph 22 of his decision:

         "22. I accept that if the appellant is able to prove that he has  a
             genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with   his   partner's
             qualifying children, then  [the]  public  interest  would  not
             require his expulsion from this country.".

 8. The claim nonetheless failed on the  evidence,  the  judge  finding  as
    follows in the concluding sentence of paragraph 22:

         "However, having considered the totality of the  evidence  in  this
         case, I am not satisfied that the appellant does have a genuine and
         subsisting relationship with them".

 9. It is argued in the grounds that there was a  material  error  in  this
    decision because the judge failed to have proper regard to the evidence
    which had been before him.

10. At the hearing before me, Mr Walker, representing the  respondent  very
    fairly stated as follows:

         "The respondent concedes that the judge has made a  material  error
         in his assessment of the evidence which was before  him  concerning
         whether or not there  was  a  genuine  parental  responsibility  in
         respect of the children.

         He makes criticism of the letters from the school in saying he  was
         only an emergency contact, whereas in fact the actual  letters  for
         the school (at pages 11 and 12 of the appellant's bundle) say  that
         the appellant is an actual point of contact for collection  and  in
         case of emergency.  So he is known at the  school  as  someone  who
         collects the children.

         Although the judge has said there is a lack of evidence  that  they
         share the same address, at page 18  of  the  bundle  was  a  letter
         addressed to the  appellant,  at  [~]  Wickham  Lane,  from  King's
         College NHS  Hospital,  at  page  19  a  letter  addressed  to  the
         appellant from Sky  Services  and  at  page  21  another  one  from
         Morrisons, and correspondence is also addressed to  the  mother  of
         the children at the same address.

         The omission of this evidence is a material error because the judge
         goes on  to  dismiss  the  appeal  because  of  the  lack  of  such
         evidence".

11. I agree, and this Tribunal is grateful to Mr Walker for the  very  fair
    and balanced approach  he  has  adopted  in  respect  of  this  appeal.
    Clearly, whether or not he was living as part of the same household  is
    a relevant factor when considering whether he appellant  indeed  had  a
    parental relationship with his stepchildren.  If he was and had such  a
    relationship, then the Tribunal would need to consider  the  effect  of
    Section  117B(6)  and  its  impact  on  the   Article   8   assessment.
    Accordingly, this decision will now have to be remade.

12. For the reasons which follow I am able to remake  the  decision  myself
    without hearing detailed further evidence save what is now stated.  The
    appellant's partner has (and none  of  the  facts  set  out  below  are
    disputed by the  respondent)  now  been  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.   Furthermore,  the  oldest  child  (one  of  the   appellant's
    stepchildren) is now 12 years old and is a British citizen, citizenship
    having been granted  on  9  August  2019.   Also,  which  is  extremely
    relevant, the appellant's partner's youngest child,  who  is  also  the
    appellant's natural child, who  is  now  2  years  old  has  also  been
    registered as a British citizen, so if  and  to  the  extent  that  the
    appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  that
    child (which is not disputed on behalf of the  respondent),  one  would
    have to consider the effect of Section 117B(6) in respect of this child
    as well.  Apparently the two middle children have not yet  applied  for
    British citizenship, although it is intended  that  they  will  in  the
    future, because as is well-known, the expense of doing so is  high  and
    the family will need to save more funds before these  applications  are
    made.

13. I also have now been shown a letter which has been sent signed  by  (or
    more realistically on behalf of) the four children  which  purports  to
    say how good a father the appellant is.  I have to say that on its  own
    this letter is not very convincing because it is not clear  who  signed
    it or indeed who wrote it, and it would seem to be a letter  which  was
    written on their behalf solely in order to assist the  case.   However,
    even without this letter the Tribunal now has before  it  evidence  not
    only that the appellant was living in the same household as the  mother
    of his stepchildren, but also the knowledge that their  natural  child,
    that is the 2 year old, is a British citizen and  it  is  not  disputed
    that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
    with this child.

14. The respondent does not seek to suggest that it would be reasonable for
    this child or indeed any of the other children to  leave  this  country
    now.  Certainly it would not be reasonable to expect  the  relationship
    between the youngest child and her mother to be separated  which  would
    mean that it would only be reasonable to expect  this  child  to  leave
    this country if it would be reasonable for her siblings and  mother  to
    leave as well, which it would not because they  are  all  at  sensitive
    stages of their education and have had a British upbringing.

15. It is not suggested as I have said on behalf of the respondent that  it
    would and furthermore again very responsibly Mr Walker,  on  behalf  of
    the respondent, in light of this up-to-date evidence does not  seek  to
    persuade the Tribunal that this appeal should not now be allowed.

16. Accordingly, because  the  appellant  as  I  find  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting qualifying relationship both with his stepchildren who  have
    been here over seven years and who are accordingly qualifying  children
    for this purpose, and also with his natural 2 year old  child,  and  it
    would not be reasonable to expect any of these children  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom, it follows that the public interest  does  not  require
    his removal.

17. As clearly he now has a family and private life in  this  country,  his
    appeal must in these circumstances be allowed and I will so order.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain as  containing
a material error of law and substitute the following decision:

The appellant's appeal is allowed, on human rights grounds, Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
        Dated: 20 September 2019



















