
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
HU/20817/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23rd August 2019                     |On 6th September 2019               |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                            Ian Joseph McFarlane
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Unigwe (instructed by Huka & Co Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    a judgment of First-tier Tribunal Judge  NMK  Lawrence  promulgated  on
    16th May 2019 following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 30th April 2019.

 2. The Appellant is a Jamaican national, born in 1980, who entered the  UK
    initially in February 2000 as a visitor  and  then  was  successful  in
    obtaining leave as a student on  two  occasions  until  February  2004.
    Thereafter, he made numerous unsuccessful applications  culminating  in
    the one leading to the appeal before Judge Lawrence.  That decision was
    to refuse an application to remain on the basis that he was  the  carer
    or a British national.  The application was refused  in  November  2016
    initially but then, following further submissions, there was a  further
    Decision made on 28th September 2018, again  refusing  the  application
    and that formed the basis of the appeal.

 3. The appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  proceeded  on  two  bases,
    firstly that he was the sole carer of his British national Sponsor  who
    has a number of health issues.  The judge dealt with that,  noting  the
    support plan that was in place and that there was additional assistance
    supplied by Social Services. He dismissed that part of the claim on the
    basis, as he says at paragraph 14, that in addition to  the  Appellant,
    the  Sponsor's  daughters  could  provide  care  but  additionally  the
    position is that the UK Social Services  have  a  legal  obligation  to
    provide the Sponsor with care and the judge had not been provided  with
    any evidence that it had  fallen  short.   Accordingly,  he  found  the
    balance to be favour of immigration  control  and  that  the  Sponsor's
    right to respect for her moral and  physical  integrity  would  not  be
    violated should the Appellant return to Jamaica.

 4. The grounds challenging that Decision assert that the  judge  erred  in
    failing to take proper account of the evidence regarding the amount  of
    care provided by the Appellant and not by Social Services and the grave
    affect it would have on the Sponsor if he were removed to Jamaica.

 5. However, the Upper Tribunal in the case of Ayinde and Thinjom (Carers -
    Regulation 15A - Zambrano) [2015] UKUT 00560 IAC dealt  this  point.  I
    provided a copy to Mr Unigwe.  The headnote  of  that  case  states  at
    paragraph (ii) that:

         "The provisions of Regulation  15A  of  the  Immigration  (European
         Economic Area) Regulations 2006, as amended, apply when the  effect
         of removal of the carer of a British citizen  renders  the  British
         citizen no longer able to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  or  in
         another EEA state.  This requires the carer to establish as a  fact
         that the British citizen will be forced to leave the  territory  of
         the Union".

    Before me Mr Unigwe confirmed they were not seeking to suggest that the
    Sponsor would leave the UK if the Appellant  left.   Judge  Jordan,  in
    Ayinde and Thinjom, went further than in the headnote at paragraphs  58
    and 59 where he said that:

         "If the claim is based on the British citizen being forced to leave
         the Union, the likelihood of this occurring has to be  assessed  by
         reference to the benefits the Union citizen is receiving in the  UK
         and will be entitled  to  receive  were  the  appellant  to  leave.
         Hence, if the British citizen is in  receipt  of  free  healthcare,
         subsidised accommodation (or an allowance to assist in the  payment
         of rent) and State benefits, pensions and fringe  benefits  in  the
         form of concessions available to  the  elderly,  there  will  be  a
         significant evidential hurdle in attempting to make out a case that
         the British citizen will, as a matter of  fact,  leave  the  United
         Kingdom.  In reality, if these benefits are not  available  in  the
         country to which he claims he will be forced to travel by reason of
         the refusal of a grant of a derivative residence card to his carer,
         the likelihood of his doing so is likely to be remote.   Hence  the
         Tribunal will also have to compare the conditions  that  a  British
         citizen  will  meet  on  being  forced  to  settle  elsewhere  when
         assessing whether he is being forced to leave the  United  Kingdom.
         The greater the disparity, the less likely  it  will  be  that  the
         British citizen will in fact leave  the  United  Kingdom.   A  bare
         assertion that the British citizen will  be  forced  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom is unlikely to be sufficient; all  the  more  so  if
         this has been his only home for many years".

    As I have already indicated it is not being suggested that the  Sponsor
    in this case would in fact leave, which means that the Appellant cannot
    succeed on the basis of a derivative right of residence.  Judge  Jordan
    goes on to say at paragraph 59 that:

         "Whilst these appeals were  put  on  the  basis  that  the  British
         citizen has a right to human dignity which is inviolable  and  must
         be respected and protected, (the violation of  which  acts  as  the
         spur to his claim to be at risk of  a  forced  departure  from  the
         United Kingdom), some care must be taken  before  reaching  such  a
         conclusion.  It is not enough that the British citizen would prefer
         that his carer is permitted leave to remain in the United  Kingdom.
         There is nothing intrinsically lacking in human  dignity  in  being
         offered the professional help of care workers or being placed  into
         residential accommodation with a sliding-scale of  support  ranging
         from  a  home  adapted  to  the  individual's  needs,  through   to
         accommodation with a warden, through to a residential home; through
         to full nursing care.  It would be plainly incorrect to say that it
         is a violation of an individual's rights to  human  dignity  to  be
         placed into care or to receive help  from  professional  healthcare
         workers".

    That therefore is an answer to the argument put forward that the  judge
    erred in rejecting the claim for a derivative residence card.

 6. The other ground of appeal is a criticism of the judge's  dealing  with
    the claim under paragraph 276ADE.  It is said that the  judge  has  not
    taken proper account of  the  evidence  that  the  Appellant  had  left
    Jamaica twenty years ago; that he has no home  in  Jamaica;  no  social
    support; employment prospects are low and he would therefore face  very
    significant obstacles in integrating in Jamaica.  The judge referred to
    that evidence at paragraph 15 of his Decision and then at paragraphs 20
    and 21 dealt with it.  He notes that the Appellant is almost  40  years
    of age and has no medical impediments  preventing  his  integration  in
    Jamaica.  He says that he has acquired qualifications in  the  UK  and,
    although  he  did  have  certificates,  they  are  currently  with  the
    Secretary of State but the judge found he could obtain duplicates.   He
    had not in fact made any attempt to do so.  The judge found that on the
    evidence that he had the Appellant was unlikely to face destitution  in
    Jamaica and that this Appellant has the same chance of making a  living
    in Jamaica as any other Jamaican of his age and that the Appellant  had
    therefore not demonstrated that he was likely to  face  destitution  on
    his return.  On the evidence  before  the  judge  those  were  findings
    clearly open to him.

 7. It was argued in front of me that proper account  ought  to  have  been
    taken for the length of time the  Appellant  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom and the private life he has established here.  However,  as  is
    clear from what I said at the top of this judgment, most  of  the  time
    the Appellant has been in the United Kingdom he has had  no  leave  and
    therefore little weight should be given to the private life that he has
    established.

Notice of Decision

 8. For all these reasons, even if  the  judge  may  have  given  imperfect
    reasons, the error is not material because on the evidence there is  no
    way this Appellant could have succeeded  in  the  light  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's case of Ayinde and Thinjom and on the basis of Section  117B
    of the 2002 Act.  Accordingly, the appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed [pic]                            Date 30 August 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed [pic]                            Date 30 August 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
