








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20627/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 21st August 2018              |On: 26th September 2018                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between


                          Mr George William Ansong
                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           entry clearance officer

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Daniel Acheampong appeared as sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Ghana, born on 6 July 1998. He  appeals
      with permission against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Andrew, who in a decision promulgated on 18 September 2017,  dismissed
      his appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 26 July  2016,
      to  refuse  him  entry  clearance  to  join  his  sponsor,  Mr  Daniel
      Acheampong, in the UK.

   2. Judge Andrew noted at [1] that the appellant sought to join  his  half
      brother, Mr Daniel Acheampong, although he  was  referred  to  in  the
      respondent's decision as his father.  The appellant was represented at
      the hearing but there was no attendance on behalf of the respondent.

   3. Judge Andrew stated that the issues in the  appeal  were  whether  the
      sponsor and appellant are related as claimed; whether the sponsor  has
      sole  responsibility  for  him  and  whether  there  are  serious  and
      compelling family circumstances which make the  appellant's  exclusion
      undesirable. The  latter  assertion  was  the  basis  upon  which  the
      appellant's legal representative relied in his skeleton argument [8].

   4. She noted that there was no DNA testing available to her. She did  not
      see the original of the birth certificate for the  appellant  produced
      at p. 89 of the bundle. That purported to confirm that the appellant's
      mother was Charity Hammond. It is a short form of  birth  certificate.
      It was registered on 17 August 1998 in Adjabeng Accra.

   5. She also referred a certified copy of an  entry  in  the  Register  of
      Births dated 18 August 2017 at p. 90,  showing  that  the  appellant's
      birth was registered on 31 December 2017 at Achimota Accra. There  was
      a different entry number from that produced at p. 89. She  accordingly
      gave little weight on these documents  to  show  that  his  mother  is
      Charity Hammond.

   6. She also noted that the birth of the sponsor as  shown  in  the  birth
      certificate at p. 91, was registered 23 years  after  his  birth.  The
      document at p. 92 showed different information. The  entry  number  in
      the certified copy of entry in register of births dated 30  June  2017
      at p. 93. The entry number are not the same: the Registry of births is
      not the same. She stated that this again led her to find  that  little
      weight can be placed on the certificates to show the maternity of  the
      sponsor [12]. Whilst there are several documents which  refer  to  the
      relationship between the appellant and the sponsor,  the  persons  who
      completed these documents cannot be said to be truly independent [13].

   7. Judge Andrew had regard to the evidence  of  his  sponsor,  Mr  Daniel
      Acheampong. She did not find him to be a credible witness.  There  was
      no evidence that he suffered from PTSD as claimed. She  was  thus  not
      satisfied on the evidence  before  her  that  the  appellant  and  the
      sponsor are related as claimed. She set out at [16]  fourteen  reasons
      for not finding him credible.

   8. She found that the appellant did not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
      Rules. She was 'unable to be satisfied' on the evidence that he enjoys
      family life with the sponsor. The maintenance of effective immigration
      control is in the public interest in accordance with section 117B.

   9. She considered the appeal on human rights grounds.  The  appellant  is
      now 19 years old.  Even if it did involve a  s.55  consideration,  she
      would be satisfied that it was in his  best  interests  to  remain  in
      Ghana with his family, including his  mother  and  friends  [18].  She
      found that the decision of the respondent was proportionate [19].

  10. Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce gave permission to appeal in order that the
      grounds contained in the application may be considered following  oral
      submissions.  She  observed  that  the  Tribunal  appeared   to   have
      misdirected itself inasmuch  as  the  appellant  sought  to  join  his
      brother  under  paragraph   297(i)(f),   so   the   issue   of   "sole
      responsibility" as a single parent did not arise.

  11. At the  error  hearing,  Mr  Acheampong  relied  on  the  reasons  for
      appealing which he has identified in  the  application.  He  contended
      that the Judge erred by not carrying  out  a  full  consideration  and
      application of Razgar [2004] 2AC 368 at [17].

  12. He also referred to Dasgupta (Error of Law - Proportionality - Correct
      Approach) [2016] UKUT 28.

          (i) A tribunal's failure to make clear findings about family  life
          is not per se erroneous in law where its existence  has  not  been
          contested in the Secretary of State's decision and  has  not  been
          challenged at the appeal hearing and the  tribunal's  decision  is
          not otherwise unsustainable in law.

          (ii)  The  question  of  whether  there  is  family  life   in   a
          child/grandchild context requires a finding of something over  and
          above normal emotional ties and will invariably be intensely  fact
          sensitive.

          (iii) In error of law appeals, the Upper Tribunal should apply the
          principles in Edwards v Bairstow [1956] AC 14.

          (iv) In appeals involving the proportionality of  an  interference
          with a Convention right,  the  ultimate  question  for  the  Upper
          Tribunal is whether the interference is proportionate, per Huang v
          Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] 2 AC 167.

  13. He submitted that the availability of a DNA test report,  despite  not
      being a contentious issue, was raised by the Judge. He stated that 'If
      the Judge wants a DNA test to be done, it can be done'.

  14. The  Judge  overlooked  the  fact  that  all  the  original  documents
      contained in the appellant's bundle were in the  sponsor's  possession
      at the appeal hearing. At no point were the documents  requested.  The
      appellant's counsel, who represented the  appellant  at  the  hearing,
      made it known to the Judge that the original  documents  were  in  the
      presence of the sponsor.

  15.  In  paragraph  3(b)  of  the  grounds  seeking  permission,  he  made
      submissions relating to the  registration  of  birth  certificates  in
      Accra.

  16. He submitted that "substantial weight" should have been given  to  the
      evidence produced concerning the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
      sponsor. There was no reference to the years of correspondence between
      them,  his  call  history,  money  transfer  receipts  or  independent
      evidence. There was also evidence from the school.

  17. The Judge overlooked the  sponsor's  explanation  that  the  appellant
      would accompany his mother to medical appointments historically.

  18. He submitted that the guardianship of the appellant was taken  by  Ama
      Agyemang for the purpose of living  arrangements  abroad  and  not  in
      respect of the appellant's upbringing and decision making.

  19. The Judge erred regarding the  question  of  sole  responsibility.  He
      referred to the decision in  TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e))  [2006]  UKAIT
      00049. All decisions were made by the sponsor.

  20. The Judge also misinterpreted the  medical  report  regarding  Charity
      Hammond at page 100. The statement was  not  referring  to  2016.  The
      history of her not having diabetes related to 2009.  He  also  asserts
      that the Judge refused to allow him to have a look at his copy of  the
      medical report and stated that the sponsor 'should know this meanwhile
      the Judge was misinterpreting the document'. She overlooked the report
      at p101 in which Dr Andani stated that Charity Hammond is currently on
      chronic dialysis for end state kidney disease,  possibly  requiring  a
      kidney transplant.

  21. Given the updated information in the medical letter,  the  explanation
      given by the sponsor during the appeal  hearing  and  the  failure  to
      consider both reports shows that the Judge has erred.

  22. The remaining paragraphs note that he has  visited  the  appellant  in
      Ghana. As shown in  his  current  passport,  he  visited  him  on  two
      occasions. He visited him on numerous occasions which is shown in  his
      "previous passport." That passport was lost.

  23. The Judge failed to give  the  appellant  the  benefit  of  the  doubt
      relating to money receipts from the sponsor. This showed the extent of
      his support for the appellant.  The  money  is  used  for  his  upkeep
      including medical, mental and dental healthcare.

  24. Finally, he submitted that  the  appellant's  counsel  was  inept.  He
      asserted that he complained to the solicitors about the conduct of the
      barrister at  the  hearing.  No  evidence  in  that  regard  has  been
      produced.

  25. On behalf of the entry clearance officer,  Mr  Tarlow  submitted  that
      there had been at least 14 reasons set out by the  Judge  for  finding
      that the sponsor was not credible.

  26. He accepted that there may be two errors in that analysis. The  letter
      of the Senior Medical Officer at page 98 may be ambiguous. That  is  a
      letter dated 4 May 2016 relating to the appellant. It is  stated  that
      his mother is a  known  diabetic  with  complications.  The  appellant
      presented with sleeplessness, poor appetite, loneliness  and  suicidal
      thoughts. He was referred to see a psychologist who diagnosed him with
      severe depression and suicidal tendencies. He needs a stable home  and
      close monitoring. However, there is no up to date  evidence  regarding
      the appellant's condition.

  27. Nor was the letter regarding the diabetes of his mother picked  up  at
      [16(f)].

  28. However, the  Judge  has  devoted  many  pages  setting  out  reasoned
      findings in respect of the sponsor's credibility,  all  of  which  are
      sustainable.

  29. Nor is it clear whether  the  sponsor  is  in  fact  relying  on  sole
      responsibility  or  compelling  circumstances.   If  the  latter,   he
      submitted that there clearly are no such circumstances  applicable  in
      this case.

  30. In his reply, Mr Acheampong again referred to the fact  that  the  ECO
      had a short form of the birth certificate.

      Assessment

  31. Mr Tarlow has fairly acknowledged that the Judge did not refer to some
      of the evidence relating to the history of  the  appellant's  mother's
      diabetes, having stated that she  had  no  history  of  diabetes.  The
      letter dated 4 May 2016 relating to the appellant,  asserts  that  his
      mother is a known diabetic with complications.

  32. However, the  Judge  has  given  detailed  reasons  arising  from  the
      evidence set out at [16] of the decision, in support  of  her  finding
      that the sponsor was not credible. This included the fact that he  was
      entirely unaware that the appellant's claimed  mother  had  even  been
      expecting a child.

  33. She has had regard to two letters from Dr  Andani,  referring  to  the
      appellant as suffering from severe depression [16(h)]. Despite  having
      been referred to  a  psychologist  who  made  a  diagnosis  of  severe
      depression, there was no report from a psychologist  before  her.  Nor
      was there any evidence by way  of  medical  evidence  confirming  what
      medication has been prescribed for the appellant.

  34. She also noted that there was evidence  from  the  appellant's  school
      dated 2015. The sponsor told her that he continues  to  attend  school
      and is studying for the equivalent of  A  Levels  in  Science.  If  he
      continued to be affected by mental illness as claimed, she would  have
      expected to see updated  evidence  from  the  school  he  attends,  to
      confirm this - [16(i)].

  35. Nor was there any mention by the appellant's  legal  guardian  of  any
      mental illness from which it is said the appellant suffers.

  36. She also noted that in the statutory declaration of Charity Hammond at
      p.78, there is further confirmation that the  sponsor  does  not  have
      sole responsibility for the appellant. She referred  to  a  discussion
      with the sponsor and her brother  about  the  move  to  her  brother's
      house. She goes on to effectively confirm that her brother was to be a
      father figure. Further, the mother confirmed that the appellant's move
      to Ama Agyemang was taken in conjunction with the sponsor.

  37. Other than the declaration of Ms Agyemang stating that  the  appellant
      can no longer live with her and her family, there was  nothing  before
      the Judge to show that the appellant is unable to do  so  or  that  he
      cannot live with his mother.

  38. I have considered the sponsor's assertions in  the  grounds  regarding
      the documents as to the relationship. However, he has  not  sought  to
      deal with or respond to many of the credibility findings at  paragraph
      [16] of the determination.

  39. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Bruce  noted  that  the  Judge
      appeared to have misdirected herself in respect of  Paragraph  297  as
      the appellant sought to join his brother under paragraph 297(i)(f)  of
      the Rules. However, the sponsor  has  contended  that  both  paragraph
      297(i)(e) and 297(i)(f) were in issue.

  40. The Judge has undertaken a detailed assessment of the  evidence  as  a
      whole.  She has given sustainable reasons for  her  finding  that  the
      sponsor did not have sole responsibility and that there are no serious
      and  compelling  family  circumstances  which  make  the   appellant's
      exclusion undesirable.

  41. In the circumstances, I find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal did not involve the making of any material error on  a  point
      of law.










      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      Anonymity direction not made.






      Signed                             Date 19 September 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer









