
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20395/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 June 2019                       |On 2 July 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                Harpreet [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Hoare, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Nixon  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent made on 25 September 2018 refusing her leave
    to remain on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of India born on 22 July 1985.  She came  to
    the UK on 6 October 2006 on a work permit and has remained here  since.
    She said she was subjected to servitude by her employer  who  kept  her
    wages and  passport  and  controlled  her  movements,  keeping  her  in
    unsanitary conditions until her escape in October 2007.   She  declined
    referral to the Potential Victims of Trafficking Team as  she  did  not
    wish to relive her circumstances.  Consequently, the respondent gave no
    consideration to discretionary leave for this purpose.

3.   She claimed in her  statement  dated  17  August  2018  that  when  she
    thought about her past experiences at the request of the Home Office on
    6  August  2017  she  felt  suicidal   and   resorted   to   self-harm.
    Consequently, the respondent took the opportunity to remind her of  the
    services and support that were available to her.

4.   There was no Home Office Presenting Officer at the hearing  before  the
    judge.  The appellant attended and the judge explained the procedure to
    her.  The judge informed Mr Hoare who represented  the  appellant  that
    she did not propose to ask  her  any  questions.   Mr  Hoare  therefore
    proceeded by way of submissions to the judge.

5.   The appellant's claim was that she could not return  to  India  as  she
    had no family or friends there for support and nowhere  to  live.   She
    had established a close network of friends in the UK and was integrated
    into society here.

6.   The judge found that the appellant failed to show that there  are  very
    significant obstacles to her  integration  back  into  India.   It  was
    submitted that she was  vulnerable  as  a  result  of  the  trauma  she
    sustained by being a victim of trafficking.  The  judge  found  however
    that the appellant has failed to  show  that  she  was  indeed  such  a
    victim.  She was given the opportunity of being  referred  to  the  PVT
    Team in order for those experienced in that field to assess whether she
    was treated in the manner she claimed but  declined  that  opportunity.
    The judge did not accept as plausible her explanation for  not  wanting
    to speak to them, that she did not want  to  relive  her  trauma.   The
    judge noted that she was content to give two statements on the  subject
    to her solicitor and so was clearly able to talk about it.

7.   The judge said she had seen no evidence at  all  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant was suffering from some sort of PTSD of such a level that she
    was unable to talk about it.  The  judge  had  said  she  had  seen  no
    medical/psychological evidence at all to support her claim  of  trauma.
    She rejected Mr Hoare's submission that the respondent could or  should
    have been able to make  a  decision  on  her  claim  from  her  witness
    statement.  The judge said it was clear that her claim would need to be
    tested in the sensitive manner necessary by trained  interviewers.   As
    she had declined their assistance and  to  be  interviewed,  the  judge
    found that there was no such treatment and drew  an  adverse  inference
    from the appellant's refusal.

8.   The judge noted the appellant's claim that she was able to escape  from
    her abusers in 2007.  She noted that the appellant made  no  effort  to
    regularise her status or seek assistance until her claim in 2018.   She
    found that this affected the appellant's credibility.  The  judge  held
    that whilst it may be that the appellant  was  unaware  that  her  work
    permit had not been renewed, she did not find plausible any  suggestion
    that she would have assumed that she was here legally for the following
    eleven years.  The judge said she had not been told the reason for  the
    inordinate delay and would  have  expected  her  British  friends,  two
    letters from whom she has read, to have queried her status with her.

9.   The judge noted the appellant's evidence that  she  has  no  family  or
    friends in India for support.  The judge noted that on her own account,
    the appellant lived alone and supported herself prior to coming to  the
    UK without difficulty.  The judge noted  that  the  appellant  has  now
    obtained qualifications in the beauty field which no doubt will  assist
    her in obtaining employment once again in  India  as  previously.   The
    judge said she had heard of no reason why the appellant  would  not  be
    able to obtain employment or accommodation.  She noted that her friends
    in the UK financially support her and has read nothing to suggest  that
    this could not continue if she were to return to enable her  to  settle
    and find her feet.  The judge held that the  appellant  has  lived  the
    majority of her life in India and will therefore be familiar  with  the
    culture and the language.  She concluded that there were no significant
    obstacles to the appellant's reintegration and that she had  failed  to
    meet the criteria under the Rules.

10.  The judge then considered the Razgar  criteria.   She  found  that  the
    appellant has established a private life in the UK, having been in  the
    UK for over eleven years  and  that  the  respondent's  decision  would
    interfere with that family life.  The judge said the real issue for her
    to determine was whether or not the decision was proportionate  to  the
    need for effective  immigration  control.   The  judge  relied  on  her
    previous finding that  the  appellant  will  be  able  to  re-establish
    herself in the country of origin.  She found that there were no reasons
    why she could not  maintain  contact  with  her  friends  from  abroad.
    Bearing in mind the provisions of Section 117B the judge found that the
    private life was established while the appellant  was  here  unlawfully
    and therefore attached little weight to  it.   Accordingly,  the  judge
    held that it would not be disproportionate to the  need  for  effective
    immigration control to maintain the decision.   She  found  that  there
    would not be a breach of the appellant's Article 8 rights.

11.  Mr Hoare relied on the two reasons submitted by him for  appealing  the
    judge's decision.  The first ground was based on the evidence that  the
    appellant has no ties in India; and the second ground was in respect of
    the appellant's claim to be a victim of trafficking.

12.  With regard to the first ground, Mr Hoare relied  on  the  evidence  at
    paragraph 8 of his grounds of appeal  which  gave  an  account  of  the
    appellant's family background.  Her father died on 7 August 1994.   Her
    mother remarried in  1995  and  abandoned  her  older  sister  and  the
    appellant with their  grandmother  and  her  paternal  stepgrandfather.
    They passed away on 1 November 2011 and 3 December  respectively.   Her
    mother kept a younger brother.  Her older sister  left  home  in  2003.
    The appellant lived alone in India from 2003 until she came to the  UK.
    She has no contact with anyone in India and has no home, or  source  of
    support in India.  Mr  Hoare  submitted  that  on  the  basis  of  this
    evidence the appellant satisfies paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  in  that  she
    would not be able to return to India.

13.  Mr Hoare submitted that the law applicable in this area is as  set  out
    in Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013]  UKUT  00060  (IAC).
    Mr Hoare submitted that Ogundimu considered the "no  ties  requirement"
    in an earlier version of 276ADE(1)(vi) and the Home  Office's  guidance
    as to its meaning.  The Tribunal decided that "ties" imports a  concept
    involving something more than merely remote and abstract links  to  the
    country of proposed deportation or removal.  It involves there being  a
    continued connection to life in that country.  Consideration of whether
    a person  has  "no  ties"  to  such  country  must  involve  a  rounded
    assessment of all the relevant circumstances and is not to  be  limited
    to "social, cultural and family" circumstances.

14.  Mr Hoare submitted that the guidance in  Ogundimu  is  relevant  to  an
    assessment of whether there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration.  He submitted that the judge's  conclusion  of
    no such obstacles was based on Indian birth, nationality,  culture  and
    language.  There was no, or  no  adequate  analysis  of  the  obstacles
    presented by lack of family, lack of support and length of  separation.
    This constituted making a material misdirection of law  on  a  material
    matter.

15.  Mr Hoare submitted that whilst the appellant has no family in  the  UK,
    she has a network of friends.  She has  no  continuing  ties  in  India
    other than being Indian.

16.  As to the second issue in respect of the  appellant's  claim  to  be  a
    victim of trafficking, Mr  Hoare  submitted  that  the  appellant  gave
    reasons for not attending the  interview  with  the  Home  Office.   He
    submitted that the Tribunal was still under a duty to consider  whether
    the appellant was a victim  of  trafficking.   There  was  no  adequate
    finding as to whether the appellant's testimony of being trafficked was
    credible.  This was a material error.

17.  Mr Whitwell  submitted  that  Ogundimu  was  a  former  incarnation  of
    276ADE(1)(vi) which determined the issue of "no ties".   He  said  that
    the appellant made her  application  on  27  July  2017  when  the  new
    276ADE(1)(vi) required a judge to  consider  whether  there  are  "very
    significant obstacles to integration" in  the  appellant's  country  of
    origin.

18.  Mr Whitwell relied on the decision in Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813.  Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that
    the test is whether the appellant can reintegrate his private  life  in
    the country of return.  Mr Whitwell submitted that at paragraph 18  the
    judge gave reasons why the appellant's appeal could not succeed on this
    issue.  He added that the appellant left India when she  was  21  years
    old.  The evidence was that she had lived  there  alone  in  203  until
    2006.  There was nothing more the judge could have said.  The judge was
    clear in her finding at paragraph 16 that the appellant failed to  show
    that there are very significant obstacles to her integration back  into
    India.

19.  As to the second issue, Mr Whitwell endorsed FTJ Smith's decision  when
    he granted permission.  FTJ Smith held that the judge was  entitled  to
    ascribe significance to the fact that the appellant did not engage with
    a  competent  authority  for  assessment  as  a  potential  victim   of
    trafficking.  He said that the letters from the GP did  not  support  a
    finding of the trauma claimed by the appellant.  Mr Whitwell added that
    there was no diagnosis of PTSD or trauma and eleven years elapsed  from
    the time the appellant was free from the traffickers to her application
    for leave to remain on human rights grounds.

20.  In reply Mr Hoare submitted that the appellant  only  had  recourse  to
    public benefits when the  respondent  refused  her  application.   This
    delayed her access to the NHS but the judge had to put into context the
    paucity of medical evidence.  He  said  the  medical  evidence  in  her
    bundle did confirm that the appellant had a difficult childhood and had
    depression and was awaiting a form of counselling.  Therefore,  in  his
    view the evidence  of  depression  and  trauma  related  to  her  being
    trafficked and should have been an assessment to her  reintegration  to
    life in India.

21.  I was not persuaded by Mr Hoare's arguments that the  judge  materially
    erred in law in her decision.

22.  With regard to the first issue as to whether the appellant has ties  in
    India, Mr Hoare relied on  Ogundimu  which  as  he  recognised  in  his
    grounds of appeal is an  earlier  incarnation  of  276ADE(1)(vi).   The
    current  requirement  of  276ADE(1)(vi)  is  whether  there  are   very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's  reintegration  into  life  in
    India.   In Kamara the Court of Appeal held at paragraph 14 as follows:

         "... the concept of a foreign  criminal's  "integration"  into  the
         country to which it is proposed that he be deported, as set out  in
         Section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 399A, is a broad one.  It  is  not
         confined to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life while
         living in the other country. It is not  appropriate  to  treat  the
         statutory language as subject to some gloss and it will usually  be
         sufficient for a court or tribunal simply to direct itself  in  the
         terms that Parliament has chosen to use. The idea of  "integration"
         calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether  the
         individual will be enough of an outsider in terms of  understanding
         how life in the society in that other country is carried on  and  a
         capacity  to  participate  in  it,  so  as  to  have  a  reasonable
         opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-
         day basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable  time
         a  variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to   the
         individual's private or family life."

23.  The facts in Kamara are worth noting.  Kamara came to this  country  in
    1993 as a young child, aged 6 to live with his  adult  half-sister  who
    was in the UK with indefinite leave to remain.  He was brought up here.
     On 30 August 1995 he and his sister were granted indefinite  leave  to
    remain as dependants of his half-sister.  The Tribunal  found  that  Mr
    Kamara had no ties with Sierra Leone, having lost all contact with  the
    country a long time ago.  The Upper Tribunal also found that Mr  Kamara
    was fully integrated into society in the UK.

24.  I do not accept Mr. Hoare's submission that the judge's  conclusion  of
    no obstacles was based on the appellant's  Indian  birth,  nationality,
    culture and language.  I find that the judge took into account that the
    appellant who was born in India on 22 July 1985 came to  the  UK  on  6
    October 2006 at the age of 21.  She has lived here for less than twenty
    years.  She lived in India alone for 3 years from 2003 and worked there
    until she came to the UK.  I find that applying  those  facts  and  the
    test as set out by the Court of Appeal  in  Kamara,  that  the  judge's
    decision that the appellant has failed to  show  that  there  are  very
    significant obstacles to her integration back into India  disclosed  no
    material error of law.

25.  With regard to the second issue as  to  whether  the  appellant  was  a
    victim of trafficking, again I find no error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.  The appellant was offered an avenue to establish  her  claim
    that she had been a victim  of  trafficking.   She  declined  it.   She
    claimed she did not want to relive her trauma,  but  as  noted  by  the
    judge she gave two statements on the subject to her  solicitor  and  so
    was clearly able to talk about it.  Until she brought  herself  to  the
    attention of the respondent, there was no  evidence  before  the  judge
    that in those eleven years she had required any medical intervention as
    a result of depression or self-harm.  Mr Hoare argued that it was  only
    when the appellant came to the attention of the Secretary of State that
    she was offered access to the  NHS.   Hence  the  delay  in  submitting
    medical evidence.  He said there was documentary evidence in  the  file
    that  she  was  diagnosed  as  having  depression  and   been   offered
    counselling.  There  was  no  evidence  however  to  suggest  that  her
    depression was as a result of her claim to have  been  trafficked.   Mr
    Hoare said  that  the  evidence  was  that  she  had  had  a  difficult
    childhood.  In my opinion that does not equate to evidence of trauma as
    a result of being trafficked.

26.  On this issue I also concur with FTJ Smith that the judge was  entitled
    to ascribe significance to the fact that the appellant did  not  engage
    with a competent authority for assessment  as  a  potential  victim  of
    trafficking.   Consequently,  the  judge's  failure  to  determine  for
    herself whether the appellant was indeed trafficked was not a  material
    error of law.

Notice of Decision

27.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.




Signed                                  Date:  27 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
