
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20746/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 April 2019                     |On 09 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                               SHINGARA SINGH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Solanki, Counsel instructed by Atwal Law
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is  an  appeal  from  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Grimmett which was promulgated on 1 February 2019.

2.   In short, the appellant is a citizen of  India,  was  born  on  13  May
    1975. He appealed the decision  taken  by  the  Home  Secretary  on  26
    September 2018 to refuse him leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  on
    the grounds of twenty years' residence.

3.   The grounds of appeal are somewhat lengthy but in  granting  permission
    to appeal First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith was concerned  that  none  of
    the  appellant's  witnesses  were  cross-examined  on  behalf  of   the
    respondent nor questioned  by  the  judge,  yet  the  judge  reached  a
    conclusion adverse to the appellant and contrary  to  the  unchallenged
    evidence of the witnesses.

4.   We spent a little time this morning clarifying exactly what took  place
    when this matter was before the First-tier Tribunal.  Ms Isherwood  who
    appears for the Secretary of State but did not appear in the First-tier
    Tribunal produced a short note of the representative at the time  which
    clearly states that the appellant was cross-examined but that  none  of
    the four witnesses called on his behalf  were.   Those  witnesses  were
    Miss Randhawa, Mr Kanwaljit Singh Sahi, Mr Amarjit Singh  Gura  and  Mr
    Charanjit Dosanjh.

5.   Paragraph 10 of the decision makes clear that  questions  were  put  to
    the appellant, challenging the inconsistency of his testimony  and  his
    overall credibility.  Ms Solanki accepted that she was not present  and
    therefore could not comment on the implicit suggestion in  the  written
    grounds that the appellant himself had not been cross-examined.

6.    Looking  at  the  correspondence  emanating   from   the   appellant's
    representatives, and in particular a witness statement  from  Mr  Peter
    Mark Ward of Counsel dated 26 April 2019 who  represented  him  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal, that reference to the  appellant's  witnesses  not
    giving evidence was intended to exclude the appellant himself.

7.   This appeal therefore proceeded on the basis  that  the  appellant  was
    indeed cross-examined but that the four other witnesses, whose names  I
    have given, were not.

8.   The evidence from those four witnesses took  the  form  of  very  brief
    statements,  in  letters  for,  which  were  admitted   into   evidence
    unchallenged. The judge dealt with these witnesses in  paragraph  11-13
    as follows:

         "11. The appellant's witnesses, Mr Sahi, Mr Singh, Mr Gura  and  Mr
             Dosanjh all said they first met the appellant  in  the  United
             Kingdom in 2000.  None explained how they recalled that to  be
             the  year.   I  am  not  satisfied  statements  providing   no
             explanation as to how they recall that year outweighs the lack
             of documentary evidence when the appellant was able to provide
             considerable evidence of his time in the United Kingdom.

         12.  Mr Dhariwal said he has known the appellant since 1996 but not
             when he first met him in the United Kingdom.

         13.  There is an absence of evidence to show the appellant  was  in
             the United Kingdom between April 1998 and August 2000.  I  was
             not, therefore, satisfied that he meets  the  requirements  of
             the Rules".

9.   Ms Isherwood, for the respondent, is that notwithstanding  the  absence
    of cross-examination, there was no error of law on the judge's part and
    that the decision should  not  be  interfered  with  for  a  number  of
    reasons.  First, she says  the  statements  were  all  very  brief  and
    secondly, the judge was entitled to put less weight on the  content  of
    the statements than on the absence of documentary evidence.   She  also
    makes the point, which is true, that there is a striking similarity  as
    between the words and  phraseology  used  in  those  short  statements,
    suggesting that they might have been drafted by the same hand.

10.  The issue here goes beyond the question of the relative  weight  to  be
    given to different parts of the evidence.  What in fact the  judge  was
    doing here was rejecting out of hand the  evidence  of  four  witnesses
    without cross-examination  from  the  respondent,  questions  from  the
    bench, or any indication that the  judge  intended  to  disbelieve  and
    reject it. The question of striking similarity between the  statements,
    suggestive of collaboration and/or fabrication, does not appear to have
    been raised in the First-tier Tribunal, nor was it given by  the  judge
    as a reason for question the credibility of the witnesses.

11.  I fully accept that the appellant himself was  cross-examined  but  the
    absence of cross-examination of the other four witnesses is  indicative
    of an absence of proper scrutiny and did not provide a sound foundation
    for this judge to reject the evidence wholesale as she duly did.

12.  It may well be of course that looked at afresh the same decision  might
    be reached but justice requires the appeal to be considered afresh  and
    this appeal must therefore be allowed.



Notice of decision

    1) The appeal is allowed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
       set aside;

    2) The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  afresh
       by a judge other than Judge Grimmett;

    3) No findings of fact are preserved;

    4) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     5 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
