
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20162/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 10 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                              PRISCILLA ANKOMAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - UKVS SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


             SET ASIDE DECISION AND DECISION REMAKING THE APPEAL

Decision to Set Aside

 1. The Upper Tribunal issued a decision on 3 March 2021 finding  an  error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  re-making  the
    appeal under Article 8 ECHR as refused.

 2. On 5 March  2021  Mr  Deller  of  the  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer's Unit (SHOPOU) made written submissions to the Upper  Tribunal
    requesting a set aside on the basis that a  document  relating  to  the
    proceedings was not sent to the Upper Tribunal at an  appropriate  time
    and submitting that it was in the interests of justice to set aside the
    part of the decision dated 3 March 2021 which dismissed the appeal. The
    document that had not been before the  Upper  Tribunal  was  a  written
    submission from Ms Isherwood of the SHOPOU dated 1 March 2021 which had
    conceded the appeal as the respondent had reached  the  view  that  the
    materials  provided  by  the  sponsor   showed   that   the   financial
    requirements of the Immigration Rules were met.

 3. The Upper Tribunal finds that the concession made in the submissions of
    1 March 2021 was clearly material to the outcome of the remaking of the
    appeal and should have been provided to the panel before  the  remaking
    of the appeal. The Upper Tribunal finds it to be in  the  interests  of
    justice to set aside the part of the decision of 3 March 2021 re-making
    the appeal.

Re-making of the Article 8 ECHR Appeal

 4. There is no longer a dispute as to the sponsor here  having  sufficient
    funds to meet the earnings threshold set down in the Immigration  Rules
    and the respondent has accepted  in  light  of  all  of  the  financial
    evidence provided by  the  appellant  and  sponsor  that  the  decision
    refusing entry clearance amounted to  a  disproportionate  interference
    with family life such that the appeal should be allowed under Article 8
    ECHR.

 5.  The  Upper  Tribunal  finds  that  the  respondent's   concession   is
    appropriate in the context of the earnings threshold  being  more  than
    met and the sponsor having provided all financial  documents  he  could
    given the terms of his employment.

 6. The Tribunal therefore remakes the  appeal  under  Article  8  ECHR  as
    allowed.

 7. The Tribunal is grateful to Mr Whitwell, Ms Isherwood and Mr Deller  of
    the Senior Home Office Presenting Officers Unit for  their  fair-minded
    and pragmatic approach to this appeal.

Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error of  law  and
    was set aside to be remade.

 9. The part of the Upper Tribunal decision issued  on  3  March  2021  re-
    making the appeal as refused is set aside.

10. We remake the appeal under Article 8 ECHR as allowed.


Signed: S Pitt                                        Date: 8 March 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


