
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20886/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|business                             |                                     |
|On the 29 July 2020                  |On 12 August 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                                 abrar ahmad
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting officer on behalf of
                    the Secretary of State
For the Respondent:    Mrs Masih of Counsel instructed by Wright Justice
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Joshi) (hereinafter referred to  as  the
    "FtTJ") who allowed his appeal against the decision of  the  Respondent
    dated 19 November 2019 to refuse his human rights claim.

 2. No anonymity direction was made  by  the  First  Tier-Tribunal  and  no
    application has been made on behalf of the Appellant or any grounds put
    forward to support such an application.

 3. Whilst the Secretary of  State  is  the  appellant,  for  the  sake  of
    convenience I intend to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The hearing took place on  22nd  July  2020,  by  means  of  Skype  for
    Business. which has been consented  to  and  not  objected  to  by  the
    parties. A face to face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
    practicable and both parties agreed that all issues could be determined
    in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from  court  at  Bradford
    IAC. The advocates attended remotely via video as did the appellant and
    his wife. Although there was an  intermittent  issue  regarding  sound,
    which was resolved by Mrs Masih repositioning herself,  no  substantial
    technical problems  were  encountered  during  the  hearing  and  I  am
    satisfied both advocates were able to make their  respective  cases  by
    the chosen means. I am grateful to Ms Petterson and Mrs Masih for their
    clear oral and written submissions.

The background:

 5. The appellant's immigration history is summarised in  the  decision  of
    the FtTJ at paragraphs 1-8. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  and
    arrived in the United Kingdom in January 2011 with leave to enter as  a
    student valid until 13 March 2012. He enrolled at college to study  for
    a postgraduate diploma in business management and in  2012  he  applied
    for an extension of his leave which was granted until 22 July 2013.

 6. In 2011 the appellant met his partner and she is a British  citizen  of
    Indian origin. She had converted to Islam and they married in 2012  and
    began living together as husband and wife. They  had  registered  their
    Islamic marriage the following  year  in  2013.  As  a  result  of  her
    conversion to Islam, her family had disowned her.

 7. On 16 July 2013 the appellant made an in  time  application  for  leave
    based on his family life with his spouse. He was granted leave  by  the
    respondent until 16 January 2016 under the five-year spouse route under
    Appendix FM. On 11 January 2016 he made an extension  application,  but
    it was refused on suitability grounds in a decision taken  on  9  March
    2016. The respondent alleged that the appellant had  acquired  a  TOEIC
    certificate by deception in 2011 and had used it for his further  leave
    to  remain  application  in  2012.  The  appellant  made  two   further
    applications which were refused  on  the  same  basis.  None  of  those
    decisions provided for a right of appeal.

 8. The appellant then made a human rights claim on the 25 February 2019 in
    which the appellant provided an explanation relating to the  allegation
    of deception.

 9. In a decision letter of  17  July  2019,  the  respondent  refused  his
    application but with a right of appeal. It is recorded at  paragraph  7
    of the FtTJ decision that the respondent's decision was withdrawn at an
    appeal hearing because the respondent had failed  in  the  decision  to
    rely upon the suitability ground.

10. The respondent thus made a new decision dated 19 November 2019  and  it
    was against this decision that the appellant appealed before the FtTJ.

11. The Respondent refused  the  application  on  19  November  2019  under
    paragraph R-LTRP 1.1(d) (i) because he did  not  meet  the  suitability
    requirements under S-LTR 4.2 of  Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules
    on the basis that the Appellant had,  in  an  earlier  application  for
    leave to remain as  a  student,  submitted  an  English  language  test
    certificate from ETS which was false. The Respondent  referred  to  the
    Appellant's test scores having been cancelled by ETS and in reliance on
    generic witness evidence about such fraudulent tests and was  satisfied
    that the Appellant's certificate was fraudulently obtained and that  he
    had used deception in his application on the 12 March 2012.

12. The application was also refused on the basis of  the  failure  of  the
    appellant to satisfy the eligibility  requirements  of  E-LTRP  2.1-2.2
    because he had remained in the UK since the refusal of his  application
    on the 9 March 2016 with no valid leave  to  remain  and  was  thus  in
    breach of immigration laws and could not  meet  the  requirement  as  a
    partner under Paragraph E-LTRP 2.2 of Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

13. Separately, the Respondent considered the Appellant's circumstances  on
    the basis of his family life established in United Kingdom and  whether
    he was exempt from meeting certain eligibility  requirements  under  R-
    LTRP of Appendix FM  because  paragraph  EX1  applied.  The  respondent
    accepted that the appellant had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with his British partner  and  considered  the  points  raised  in  the
    application, including his partner's family  in  the  UK,  her  medical
    conditions and that she would be  discriminated  against  in  Pakistan.
    However, it was considered that there was no evidence that  they  would
    be  insurmountable  obstacles  in  accordance  with  paragraph  EX2  of
    Appendix FM. As to the assertion that he had received  threats  on  his
    life, and would suffer persecution and discrimination in Pakistan,  the
    appellant had not made a protection claim. Consideration was  given  to
    IVF treatment, the appellant's  mental  health,  the  circumstances  of
    employment but that the respondent was not satisfied that the appellant
    and his wife would suffer any greater hardship than any other people in
    Pakistan and that the appellant's spouse if she decided  to  remain  in
    the UK could continue to access health services to  treat  her  medical
    conditions. It was therefore considered that the  appellant  failed  to
    meet the requirements of EX1 (b) of Appendix FM.

14. The application was refused on private life grounds under paragraph
    276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules on the same suitability grounds as
    above and on eligibility grounds that there were no very significant
    obstacles to his return to Pakistan where he has resided for the
    majority of his life and where he has retained knowledge of life,
    language and culture. There were no exceptional circumstances found to
    warrant a grant of leave to remain outside of the Immigration Rules.

15.  The Appellant appealed that decision and on the 27 February  2020  his
    appeal was  heard  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  a  determination
    promulgated on the 22nd April 2020 the  judge  allowed  his  appeal  on
    human rights grounds. The FtTJ began his consideration with  the  issue
    of deception raised by the respondent. At paragraphs 39 - 47  the  FtTJ
    set out his analysis of this issue and applied the three-stage approach
    as set out in the decision of SM & Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ. That involves
    considering, first, whether the Secretary of State has met  the  burden
    on her of identifying evidence that the TOEIC certificate was  obtained
    by deception; second whether  the  claimant  satisfies  the  evidential
    burden on her of raising an  innocent  explanation  for  the  suggested
    deception; and third, if so, whether the Secretary of  State  can  meet
    the legal burden of showing, on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  that
    deception in fact took place.

16. The FtTJ reached the conclusion at paragraph 40-41 that the  respondent
    had discharged the initial evidential burden. It  is  also  plain  from
    reading the evidence referred to in the decision that the appellant had
    offered an innocent explanation thus the judge was required to consider
    the evidence as a whole to consider whether the  respondent  discharged
    the burden on him to demonstrate that deception had taken place on  the
    balance of probabilities.

17. In reaching his overall conclusion, the judge  took  into  account  the
    appellant's evidence about taking the test at the college  in  December
    2011 (see paragraph [42]).

18. At paragraph [43], the judge took  into  account  his  earlier  English
    language ability as demonstrated by his University degree with  English
    as one of his compulsory subjects,  his  completion  of  a  diploma  in
    computer science in 1999, his IELTS  in band 5 in 2008 and that he  had
    completed the first part of a post graduate diploma  in  management  in
    English  and could  not continue because his college licence  had  been
    revoked. The FtTJ also noted that after the alleged  deception  he  had
    completed a city and guilds level  2  in  health  and  social  care  in
    English in March 2016. Thus, the FtTJ  reached the conclusion  that  it
    was not credible that he would use a proxy in an area of skill in which
    he was proficient.

19. In conclusion the FtTJ found that the appellant was a credible witness,
    that he had raised  an  innocent  explanation  and  having  taken  into
    account all the documentary and oral evidence the judge found that  the
    appellant had sat the test himself and that there was no reason for him
    to use a proxy test taker. The judge found that there was no individual
    evidence provided by the respondent that established that he  took  the
    test by deception and that the presenting officer accepted  that  there
    was no specific evidence relating to the appellant or specific  to  the
    college where the test took place. The  appellant  also  had  not  been
    invited to interview and no voice recording had  been  provided.  Thus,
    the judge found that the respondent failed to discharge the  burden  of
    proof to demonstrate the appellant had used deception.

20. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision and on
    the 13 May 2020 First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Garro   granted  permission
    for the following reasons:  "The judge carefully considered the correct
    evidential burden of proof and  found   that  the  Secretary  of  State
    failed to discharge the legal burden of proving dishonesty. However  it
    is arguable that in considering whether the appellant and  his  partner
    would face insurmountable obstacles if  they  moved  to  Pakistan,  the
    judge did not apply the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in Lal  v
    SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1925  and that led to the error in  his  decision.
    Permission is granted."

The grounds:

21. There were two grounds advanced on behalf  of  the  respondent  in  the
    grounds. The  first ground related to the issue of  deception  relating
    to the use of an English Language certificate to obtain  leave  (  such
    allegation was set out in the decision letter in which  it  was  stated
    that in an application made by the Appellant on the 12 March   2012  he
    had submitted a TOEIC certificate from ETS). The second ground  related
    to the issue of insurmountable obstacles.

22. However, FtTJ O'Garro upon her assessment of the  grounds  stated  that
    she found no arguable error of law on ground 1 and  granted  permission
    on ground 2 relating to  the  issue  of  insurmountable  obstacles.  Ms
    Petterson on behalf of the respondent submitted that she accepted  that
    this was a conditional grant of permission and that as  the  respondent
    had not sought at any stage to enlarge  the  grounds,  her  submissions
    were only going to be directed to ground 2.

23. Ms Petterson relied upon the written grounds. In her  oral  submissions
    she submitted that the  matters  set  out  at  paragraph  [51]  of  the
    decision may suggest there may be difficulties for the parties but that
    they did not meet the rigorous test of "insurmountable  obstacles".  In
    particular, the potential lack of employment on return  and  that  they
    may not have a place of residence, taken together  with  the  sponsor's
    health were insufficient to demonstrate "insurmountable obstacles".

24. She submitted that at paragraph [51] the FtTJ  addressed  the  question
    as to why the appellant did not claim asylum, but  the  fact  that  the
    expert  took  the  view  that  the  sponsor  faced  discrimination  was
    insufficient to demonstrate persecution and was not an " insurmountable
    obstacle."

25. As to the sponsor's different background and  religion,  she  submitted
    that as the appellant's spouse had converted to  Islam  upon  marriage,
    there was no evidence that she would face problems in Pakistan  and  as
    she would  be  accompanying  her  husband  they  would  form  a  family
    together.

26. Ms Petterson made reference to the decision in  Lal  as  cited  in  the
    grant of permission. She directed the  Tribunal  to  paragraph  40.  By
    reference to the factors in the present appeal, she submitted that they
    did not show any particular hardship. Therefore, the FtTJ erred in  law
    in allowing the appeal on this basis.

27. Mrs Masih relied upon her amended Rule 24 response which attached to it
    the skeleton argument that she had provided before  the  FtTJ.  It  was
    submitted that the FtTJ had regard to the  skeleton  argument  and  the
    case law cited therein at [25] which referred to the decision in Lal  v
    The Secretary of State for the Home Department and that contrary to the
    grounds, the FtTJ was live to and considered with  care  the  test  the
    appellant was required to discharged under EX1 as defined in EX2 (  see
    [49]).

28. She submitted that the FtTJ identified facts he considered met the test
    and the evidence before him pointing to the same at paragraphs [51-52].

29.  The written reply highlights  that  the  presenting  officer  did  not
    dispute the facts  claimed  at  [26]  including  the  difficulties  the
    sponsor would face in Pakistan ( set out at [25]) and instead  asserted
    that the test of insurmountable obstacles was not met, on the  facts  (
    see paragraph [29]).

30.  In addition, the FtTJ  had the benefit of hearing the oral evidence of
    the appellant and his partner, whom he found  credible  and  considered
    the documentary evidence in the appellant's bundles, which  included  a
    report by country expert dated 11 September  2019  (AB1  p12-37)  which
    looked at the conditions/circumstances the parties had and were  likely
    to face in Pakistan (on account of their interfaith marriage,  cultural
    and language issues, sponsor's health and accessibility  to  treatment,
    IVF  treatment  options  and  lack  of  accommodation  and   employment
    /financial  circumstances);  the  contents  of  which,  were  also  not
    challenged by the presenting officer ( see paragraph [25]).

31. Accordingly, the FtTJ was entitled to find as he did, having regard  to
    the cumulative effect of all the factors, that the test  had  been  met
    based on the degree  of  hardship  they  would  face  in  Pakistan  (at
    paragraph 53). Therefore, there was no error of law in his approach.

32. In conclusion it is submitted  that the decision of Judge Joshi read as
    whole, demonstrates that he did sufficiently  considered  the  relevant
    tests under Appendix FM and Article 8 ECHR outside the rules,  that  he
    applied the law correctly and had regard  to  the  relevant  principles
    established in case law. There is  no  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
    consideration of the tests under the Immigration Rules  and  Article  8
    ECHR.


33. She submitted that the respondent's grounds were nothing  more  than  a
    disagreement with the Judge's findings and an attempt to  re-argue  the
    case on a different  basis  to  that  which  was  put  forward  on  the
    respondent's behalf on the day of the hearing ( at [23-24]).

34. By way of response, Ms Petterson  submitted  that  notwithstanding  the
    expert  evidence,  the  evidence  did  not   satisfy   the   test   for
    "insurmountable obstacles".


Decision on error of law:

35. I have  carefully  considered  the  submissions  of  the  advocates  as
    summarised above. The written grounds assert  that  the  "Secretary  of
    State  has  not  seen  any  evidence  that  there  are   insurmountable
    obstacles in accordance with paragraph EX2 of Appendix FM  which  means
    very significant difficulties which would be faced by the appellant and
    his partner in continuing family life together outside the UK  Pakistan
    which would not be overcome or would entail very serious  hardship  for
    them both." The grounds then set out a number of statements as  to  why
    the Secretary of  State  did  not  consider  there  to  have  been  any
    insurmountable obstacles.

36. With respect to the author of the written grounds, the  issue  was  not
    whether the Secretary of State had seen any evidence  but  whether  the
    FtTJ  properly analysed the evidence provided  and  whether  the  judge
    gave adequate and sustainable reasons  for  being  satisfied  that  the
    evidence reached the threshold to demonstrate  that  he  was  satisfied
    that there were "insurmountable obstacles" on the particular  facts  of
    this appeal.

37. Ms Petterson did not direct the Tribunal to the written grounds in  her
    oral submissions and in fairness her submissions  were  to  the  effect
    that the evidence did not meet  the  threshold  of  the  rigorous  test
    applicable. In her submissions, she made reference to the  decision  of
    Lal v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1925.

38. At paragraph 35 of that decision the Court of Appeal gave its  view  as
    to the correct interpretation of insurmountable obstacles. The Court of
    Appeal indicated in paragraphs 36 and 37:

         "36. In applying this test, a logical approach is first of  all  to
             decide whether the alleged obstacle to continuing family  life
             outside the UK amounts to a very significant difficulty. If it
             meets this threshold requirement, the next question is whether
             the difficulty is one which would make it impossible  for  the
             applicant and their partner to continue family  life  together
             outside the UK. If not, the decision-maker  needs  finally  to
             consider whether, taking account  of  any  steps  which  could
             reasonably be taken to avoid or mitigate  the  difficulty,  it
             would  nevertheless  entail  very  serious  hardship  for  the
             applicant or their partner (or both).

         37. To apply the test in what Lord Reed in the Agyarko case at para
             43 called 'a practical and realistic sense',  it  is  relevant
             and necessary in addressing these questions to have regard  to
             the  particular  characteristics  and  circumstances  of   the
             individual(s) concerned. Thus, in the present  case  where  it
             was  established  by  evidence  to  the  satisfaction  of  the
             tribunal  that  the  applicant's   partner   is   particularly
             sensitive to heat, it was relevant for the  tribunal  to  take
             this fact into account in assessing the  level  of  difficulty
             which Mr Wilmshurst would face and the degree of hardship that
             would be entailed if he were required  to  move  to  India  to
             continue his relationship. We do not accept, however, that  an
             obstacle to the applicant's partner moving to India  is  shown
             to be insurmountable - in either of the ways  contemplated  by
             paragraph EX.2. - just by  establishing  that  the  individual
             concerned would perceive the difficulty as insurmountable  and
             would in fact be deterred by it from relocating to India.  The
             test  cannot,  in  our  view,  reasonably  be  understood   as
             subjective  in  that  sense.  To  treat  it  as   such   would
             substantially dilute the intended stringency of the  test  and
             give an unfair and perverse advantage to  an  applicant  whose
             partner is less resolute or committed  to  their  relationship
             over one whose partner is ready to endure greater hardship  to
             enable them to stay together".

39.  At paragraph 41 of the decision the Court of Appeal  pointed  out  that
    the question of the difficulties a person might face on relocation  did
    not necessarily require objective confirmation by third party evidence,
    stating:

         "The question is  one  of  fact  and  there  is  nothing  wrong  in
         principle with basing a finding about  a  person's  sensitivity  to
         heat on evidence given by the person concerned and members of their
         family, as the FtT judge did in this  case,  if  such  evidence  is
         regarded as sufficiently compelling".

  40.  In paragraph 45 of Lal,  the  Court  of  Appeal  also  identified  an
      assessment of whether there were insurmountable obstacles  should  not
      proceed "by considering the matters relied  on  separately  from  each
      other without also assessing their cumulative impact". In paragraph 46
      the Court of Appeal concluded that the 70 year  old  British  spouse's
      proven sensitivity to heat, the fact of his living all of his life  in
      the UK, and his ties to friends and family including his four children
      and six grandchildren, left it open as to whether an assessment  would
      lead to a finding that  he  would  face  insurmountable  obstacles  on
      relocation to India




  41. In summary ,the decision  in Lal v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1925  makes clear that it is the cumulative
      effects of the various factors which must be considered when assessing
      whether there are insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing
      in the Appellant's home country. The Court of  Appeal  also  indicated
      that one has to look at the factors relied on in  an  objective  sense
      rather than on the basis of what the appellant and/or the  appellant's
      spouse perceive to be the difficulties and that when  determining  the
      question of whether return would entail "very serious hardship"  based
      on the evidence which was before the FtTJ (see paragraph [43]  of  the
      judgment).


  42. At [49] the FtTJ began his consideration of the issue of  whether  the
      appellant and  his  spouse  would  face  insurmountable  obstacles  in
      continuing their family life outside of  the  UK  and  expressly  made
      reference to the definition provided in EX2 of Appendix FM.  The  FtTJ
      was therefore plainly aware of the test that he was to apply.


  43. The FtTJ set out his assessment of the issues at paragraphs [50]-[53].
      At paragraph [51] the FtTJ gave  his  reasons  for  finding  that  the
      parties would face insurmountable obstacles if they were  expected  to
      continue their family life in Pakistan. He began with the issue of the
      parties' interfaith marriage and stated "the sponsor is a  convert  to
      Islam from Sikhism of Indian origin. The evidence before  me  is  that
      when she visited Pakistan in 2013, she found it extremely difficult to
      adjust to the  different  culture  and  traditions  and  she  was  not
      accepted by the appellant's  family.  Her  liberal  attitude  made  it
      difficult for her to adjust to life there, she was not allowed to  sit
      together with a husband or to hold his hand, and they were not allowed
      to eat together due to cultural norms  in  Pakistan".  The  FtTJ  also
      considered the evidence in the expert report which had been summarised
      in counsel's skeleton argument at pages 9 to 15 which the judge  found
      supported  their  claim  of  fear  and  discrimination  and  potential
      persecution and return to Pakistan based on her background of being of
      Indian origin and having converted from Sikhism.




  44. At [52], the  FtTJ  turned  to  the  evidence  which  related  to  the
      sponsor's health conditions which included her epilepsy, her fertility
      treatment via IVF and  mental  health  issues.  The  judge  took  into
      account that she was a British national she was taking medication  and
      receiving treatment with the NHS and that on  return  they  would  not
      have a place of residence together and no immediate employment.




  45. Whilst the assessment of whether there were "insurmountable obstacles"
      was in succinct terms, it is important to note  that  the  FtTJ  found
      both the appellant and his spouse to have  given  consistent  evidence
      with each other and found them to be entirely credible witnesses  (see
      paragraph [50]). Furthermore,  the  FtTJ  was  entitled  to  make  his
      assessment on the unchallenged expert evidence (see [25]).


  46. I am satisfied that the assessment that he undertook was firmly  based
      on the evidence that was before the FtTJ and in particular the  expert
      evidence. The written grounds assert that  the  claim  made  that  the
      appellant's spouse would be discriminated against "does not amount  to
      insurmountable obstacles or difficulties".  There  is  no  attempt  to
      address that submission by any reference to the  factual  findings  or
      the evidence that was before the  FtTJ.  The  reference  made  to  the
      couple living in Pakistan for one month pays no regard to  the  actual
      evidence that was before the FtTJ which  underpinned  his  assessment.
      The evidence in the form of  the  expert  report  considered  how  the
      parties'  interfaith  marriage  would  be  received  in  Pakistan.  At
      paragraphs 14 - 41, the expert  report  made  reference  to  objective
      material relevant to societal attitudes, issues of discrimination  and
      stigmatisation and the lack of social acceptance. Societal harassment,
      and other issues related to the interfaith marriage such as  the  lack
      of work opportunities available to them without the  support  networks
      were also outlined in the  report.  In  addition,  the  FtTJ  had  the
      evidence of the parties concerning the experience of  the  appellant's
      spouse on a visit  to  Pakistan  in  2013.  The  judge  recorded  that
      evidence at [51] that it was extremely  difficult  to  adjust  to  the
      different culture and traditions and that she was not accepted by  the
      appellant's family. He highlighted that her liberal attitude  made  it
      difficult for her to adjust to life there; she was not allowed to  sit
      together with a husband would hold his hand, they were not allowed  to
      eat together due to cultural norms in Pakistan. It was therefore  open
      to the judge to find that the evidence given by the parties  based  on
      their actual experience was consistent with the expert evidence before
      him. Where the grounds assert that the appellant's  spouse's  lack  of
      knowledge of the culture did not amount to an insurmountable  obstacle
      as she would be relocating with the appellant who  could  support  her
      wholly fails to engage with the expert evidence and  the  evidence  of
      the parties.




47. At [52] other factors that the  FtTJ  had  considered  related  to  the
    appellant's spouse  and  her  access  to  medical  treatment  including
    fertility treatment. In relation to the latter, the expert  report  set
    out the obstacles to IVF treatment in Pakistan at paragraphs 103 -  110
    and also societal attitudes towards IVF  and  the  underlying  negative
    social attitudes to such treatment.  In  the  light  of  that  evidence
    which was unchallenged it was open to  the  judge  to  take  that  into
    account when addressing the issue of whether they were  "insurmountable
    obstacles" to family life in Pakistan.


  48. I conclude  that on the particular factors  which  the  FtTJ  properly
      considered, and addressed and when taken cumulatively, were capable of
      showing  that the appellant and his wife would face "very  significant
      difficulty" in relocating to Pakistan, that there are not  steps  that
      they can reasonably take to mitigate  that  difficulty  and  that  the
      "very serious hardship" that they would face shows that  the  test  of
      insurmountable obstacles had been met on the evidence that was  before
      the FtTJ which he plainly accepted.


  49. Even if I were wrong,  in  the  decision  of  AJ(Angola)  Sales  J  at
      paragraph 49 referred to two categories of case in which an identified
      error of law might be said to be immaterial:

      "49.There are two categories of case in which an identified error of
      law by the FTT or the Upper Tribunal might be said to be immaterial:
      if it is clear that on the materials before the tribunal any rational
      tribunal must have come to the same conclusion or if it is clear that,
      despite its failure to refer to the relevant legal instruments, the
      tribunal has in fact applied the test which it was supposed to apply
      according to those instruments."


  50. When applied to the present appeal,  I accept the submissions made  by
      Mrs Masih that the respondent had not challenged the FtT  decision  at
      [56-57] to allow the appeal on the alternative  basis  "  outside  the
      Rules" with reference to the findings made at [48]  and  the  evidence
      overall ( see paragraphs 56-57 of the FtTJ's decision. Therefore,  she
      submitted that the FtTJ's findings on exceptionality were unchallenged
      and remained undisturbed and the decision of the FtT ought to stand.


  51. Whilst the respondent challenged the FtTJ's assessment of the issue of
      whether there were " insurmountable obstacles" to satisfy EX1(b) ( see
      paragraph 8 of the grounds), there was no reference to challenging the
      decision to allow the appeal on  the  alternative  basis  set  out  at
      paragraphs [56]-[57].  Ms Petterson  submitted  that  the  failure  to
      properly deal with EX1  would undermine the decision. I  would  accept
      that  the  issue  of  insurmountable   obstacles   and   the   factual
      circumstances would be relevant to the assessment outside of the Rules
      but there was no challenge to the assessment made of paragraph 48  and
      the appellant's ability to meet the Rules on that alternative basis.


  52. Even if the grounds could be  read  as  a  challenge  to  the  overall
      decision, I am not satisfied that the FtTJ erred in  law  in  allowing
      the appeal.


  53. There is no dispute as to the applicable law. The only ground of
      appeal available to the appellant is that the respondent's decision is
      unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. If Article 8 is
      engaged, as on the facts of this appeal, the Tribunal may need to look
      at the extent to which an appellant is said to have failed to meet the
      requirements of the rules, because that may inform the proportionality
      balancing exercise that must follow.


  54. The appellant's ability to satisfy the immigration rules is not the
      question to be determined by the Tribunal, but is capable of being a
      weighty, though not determinative factor, when deciding whether such
      refusal is proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing
      immigration control.


  55. Furthermore, the judgment of the Supreme Court in Agyarko -v- SSHD
      [2017] UKSC 11 confirms that the fact that the immigration rules
      cannot be met, does not absolve decision makers from carrying out a
      full merits-based assessment outside the rules under Article 8, where
      the ultimate issue is whether a fair balance has been struck between
      the individual and public interest, giving due weight to the
      provisions of the Rules.

  56. In general terms, , the test for an assessment outside the IR is
      whether a " fair balance" is struck between competing public and
      private interests. This is a proportionality test: Agyarko (ibid)
      paragraphs [41] and [60]; see also Ali paragraphs [32], [47] - [49].
      In order to ensure that references in the IR and in policy to a case
      having to be " exceptional" before leave to remain can be granted, are
      consistent with Article 8, they must be construed as not imposing any
      incremental requirement over and above that arising out of the
      application of an Article 8 proportionality test, for instance that
      there be " some highly unusual" or "unique" factor or feature: Agyarko
      (ibid) paragraphs [56] and [60].The proportionality test is to be
      applied on the " circumstances of the individual case": Agyarko (ibid)
      paragraphs [47] and [60] applying the public interest considerations
      set out at Part 5A and s117A-B of the 2002 Act.


  57. When applying those principles to  the  assessment  of  the  evidence,
      there was no dispute that the relationship and financial  requirements
      were met as set out in the decision  at  [48].   Furthermore,  in  the
      light of the FtTJ's assessment of the issue of suitability ( "the  ETS
      point") which was in favour of the appellant, it was open to the  FtTJ
      to consider as a weighty factor, the refusal  of  the  appellant's  in
      time partner extension application of the 9 March 2016 under the  five
      year route (which carried no right of appeal and), which  resulted  in
      him becoming an overstayer. This had been based on the same  deception
      allegation which the FtTJ did not find to have been proved.

  58. Whilst the FtTJ did not make any further reference to this at [48],  I
      accept Mrs Masih's submission that the Judge's finding  is  consistent
      with the respondent's position taken in the Court of  Appeal  case  of
      Khan & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home  Department [2018]  EWCA
      Civ 1684 on TOEIC/ETS cases (cited at paragraph  9  of  the  skeleton
      argument before the FtT).  At [37] (iii) the Court stated  :  'In  all
      cases, the Respondent confirms that in making any future  decision  he
      will not hold any previous  gap  in  leave  caused  by  any  erroneous
      decision in relation to ETS against the relevant applicant,  and  will
      have to take into account all the circumstances of each case.'

  59. When applied to  this  particular  appeal,  save  for  the  period  of
      overstaying which had resulted from the erroneous ETS decision  (which
      had been found subsequently to not be made  out  by  the  FtTJ),   the
      appellant would have met the Immigration Rules, having made an in time
      extension application under the 5 year partner route made in 2016. The
      FtTJ gave consideration to this at  [56]  where  he  made  an  express
      reference to his findings at [48].  Ms  Petterson  on  behalf  of  the
      respondent accepted that the factual  circumstances  relating  to  the
      refusal of the application in 2016 were correct and that in the  light
      of the appellant's successful challenge to the ETS  issue,  she  could
      not argue that the decision in Khan ( as cited) could not apply.

  60. Thus, in the light of this, I am satisfied that the FtTJ was  entitled
      to conclude that the public interest was outweighed on the  particular
      factors of this appeal.


  61. In addition, the FtTJ was entitled to  take  account  of  the  factors
      which had identified  in  the  earlier  paragraphs,  relating  to  the
      circumstances in Pakistan for the couple.  This  included  the  likely
      conditions for the appellant's  spouse  in  that  country,  whereas  a
      British citizen of Indian  origin,  having  converted  to  Islam  from
      Sikhism, would be at risk of discrimination  and  stigmatisation.  The
      respondent did not seek to challenge the expert report found at  pages
      12-37 of the appellant's bundle which referenced a number  of  issues,
      including their inter-faith marriage and the FtTJ accepted the  expert
      evidence contained in that report (see [51]). The FtTJ  also  accepted
      the evidence of the appellant and his spouse, both of whom he found to
      be consistent and credible witnesses (see [50]).  They  had  given  an
      account in their evidence that when she visited Pakistan in 2013,  she
      found it difficult to adjust to the culture and traditions and was not
      accepted by the appellant's family. Her evidence was summarised by the
      FtTJ at [51] and he accepted that on her visit, her  liberal  attitude
      made it difficult to adjust; she was not allowed to sit together  with
      her husband or to hold his hand and they were not allowed  to  eat  to
      together. Alongside the other issues identified  in  the  report,  the
      stigmatisation, social harassment , lack of work opportunities without
      any  support  networks,  language  problems   and  the  problems  with
      accessing IVF, when taken together cumulatively, it was  open  to  the
      FtTJ to find that the public interest was outweighed on the particular
      facts of the appeal.


  62. The question whether the decision of  the  FtTJ  contains  a  material
      error of law is not whether  another  Judge  could  have  reached  the
      opposite conclusion but whether this Judge  reached  a  conclusion  by
      appropriately directing himself as to the relevant law  and  assessing
      the evidence on a rational and lawful basis.

  63. Consequently, I have reached the conclusion that the decision reached
      by the FtTJ was one reasonably open to him when assessing the evidence
      provide in this appellant's particular circumstances.


  64. For those reasons, I am not satisfied that it  has  been  demonstrated
      that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on  a
      point of law. I therefore dismiss the appeal. The decision of the FtTJ
      to allow the appeal shall stand.


Notice of Decision



The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law and therefore the decision shall stand.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated   6 August 2020



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5  working  days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days,  if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

