
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/20883/2018
                                                               HU/20880/2018
                                                               HU/20890/2018
                                                               HU/20885/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th August 2019                  |On 4th September 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                 SAFIYA [B]
                                  JOSE [B]
                                  NIYA [B]
                                    [N B]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iengar, instructed by Aston Brooke Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Safiya and Jose [B] are the mother and father respectively of  Niya
         [B] (date of birth 4th July 2000, born in India) and [NB] (date  of
         birth 13th July 2010, born in UK). Safiya [B]  entered  the  UK  on
         11th June 2006; Jose [B] entered the UK on 29th September 2009  and
         Niya [B] entered on 5th  July  2013.  Safiya's  application  for  a
         further extension of her leave as a Tier 1 general migrant with the
         other appellants as dependants, was refused on 29th November  2013.
         Their appeals against  those  decisions  were  dismissed  and  they
         became appeal rights exhausted on 14th December 2015. On 12 January
         2016,  Safiya  [B]  claimed  asylum;  her  claim  was  refused  and
         certified under s94 Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  on
         25th July  2016.  It  does  not  appear  that  she  challenged  the
         certification; her right of appeal against the refusal of asylum is
         thus  exercisable  outside  the  UK  only.  The  family  have  been
         overstayers since 14th December 2015.

      2. On 6th October 2017 human rights applications were made and refused
         by the SSHD for reasons set out in a decision dated 28th  September
         2018. Their appeal against that decision was heard and dismissed by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart for reasons  set  out  in  a
         decision promulgated on 11th June 2019.

      3. Permission to appeal was sought and granted by the  Upper  Tribunal
         on 3 grounds; ground 1: the First-tier Tribunal judge indicated  at
         the close of the hearing that she  would  be  allowing  the  appeal
         whereas the promulgated decision dismissed the appeal; ground 2: in
         reaching her decision the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  denied  the
         appellants a fair hearing in that although tendered  as  a  witness
         she was asked no questions yet the First-tier Tribunal  judge  made
         adverse findings of fact on matters that were not put;  and  ground
         3: the First-tier Tribunal judge took account  of  the  immigration
         history  of  the  parents  in  reaching  her  conclusions  on   the
         proportionality of the  decision  reusing  the  children  leave  to
         remain.

      4.  I  heard  very  brief  submissions  from  Mr  Tarlow  who   relied
         principally on a submission that although there were some errors of
         fact, these did not materially impact upon the  findings  made.  Ms
         Iengar made full and  clear  submissions.  She  expanded  upon  the
         grounds with admirable clarity, referring me to  relevant  evidence
         and paragraphs within the decision. I confirmed  on  conclusion  of
         the hearing that I would not find an error  of  law  as  argued  in
         ground 1 but reserved  my  decision  as  regards  the  remaining  2
         grounds.

         Ground 1

      5. The respondent was not represented at the hearing before the First-
         tier Tribunal. Counsel who had represented  the  appellants  before
         the First-tier Tribunal had not sworn a witness  statement  stating
         that the judge had  either  allowed  the  appeal  or  conditionally
         allowed the appeal subject to what she found  in  the  papers.  The
         record of proceedings in the Tribunal file did  not  indicate  that
         the judge had either allowed the appeal  or  conditionally  allowed
         the appeal and there was no reference to this in the decision.

      6. In the absence of witness evidence supportive of the ground raised,
         this ground of appeal must fail.




         Ground 2

      7. It is unclear why, as submitted in the grounds, being on the 'float
         list' as oppose to a substantive list rendered the hearing  unfair.
         This was not pursued but it seems that  being  on  the  float  list
         resulted in the respondent being unrepresented. The judge  did  not
         ask any questions of the appellants and did not, it seems, identify
         areas on which she had concerns over the evidence. The  grounds  go
         on to submit  that  the  judge  should  not  have  reached  adverse
         findings of fact without putting such matters that formed the basis
         of such findings to the appellant(s). The grounds do  not  identify
         what adverse findings of fact were made upon  which  the  appellant
         could have provided comment/explanation, save as referred to below.

      8. The grounds do identify matters that, it is  submitted,  are  clear
         errors of fact by the judge which, it is submitted, when considered
         holistically in the context of the evidence as a  whole,  adversely
         taint the findings made.  In  particular  the  grounds  submit  the
         judge:

           . stated the 3rd appellant  was  approaching  18  when  she  was
             actually 18.

           . stated the majority of the appellants' time in the UK had been
             without valid leave to remain whereas they had  been  lawfully
             in the UK until 14 December 2015:  almost  10  years  for  the
             first appellant, 6 years for the second  appellant,  almost  5
             years for the third appellant and  the  fourth  appellant  was
             born in the UK.

           . referred to an earlier determination rejecting  the  claim  of
             fear of persecution because of inter-caste marriage but  there
             had been no previous determination, and this was  not  put  to
             the appellants.

           . stated that the family has a  poor  immigration  history,  has
             made 'insincere' applications for asylum and has not had leave
             to remain since July 2013 whereas they were lawfully in the UK
             until December 2015, their immigration history is 'run of  the
             mill' and that if the asylum claim was insincere  this  should
             have been put to the appellants.

           . the assertion by the judge that the witness statements of  the
             children contained information that was simply untrue was both
             factually  incorrect  and  should  have  been   put   to   the
             appellants.

      9. The judge sets out in summary the reasons given by  the  respondent
         for refusing the human rights  claim  and  the  grounds  of  appeal
         relied upon. The judge set out in detail the appellants'  evidence;
         no issue is taken in the grounds that the summary  of  evidence  is
         incorrect or that significant elements of the evidence are  omitted
         from that summary. The judge set out, in summary,  the  submissions
         made on behalf of the  appellants;  no  issue  is  taken  that  the
         summary is inaccurate.

     10. The judge makes her findings from  paragraphs  22  onwards.  It  is
         correct that she states, incorrectly, that the family have not  had
         leave to remain since July 2013 and that she describes  the  eldest
         child as 'approaching 18' - although that  child  was  'approaching
         18' when the application was  made  and  was  18  at  the  date  of
         decision and date of hearing. These  errors  are  insignificant  in
         themselves in the context  of  the  judge's  consideration  of  the
         proportionality of the decision. She was clearly aware of the dates
         of birth of the children and was clearly aware that  both  children
         were 'qualifying children' for the purpose of her decision.

     11. It is also  correct  that  the  judge  incorrectly  refers  to  the
         rejection of an asylum claim and dismissal of  an  appeal,  whereas
         the correct position is that  the  asylum  claim  was  refused  and
         certified and has not, because the appellants remain in the UK, yet
         been subjected to an appeal. Nevertheless,  the  asylum  claim  has
         been  rejected  as  clearly  unfounded  and  although   the   judge
         incorrectly referred to the dismissal of  an  appeal,  the  finding
         drawn would be the same. The appellants knew the asylum  claim  had
         been rejected as clearly unfounded; they did not put evidence in to
         contradict that conclusion by the  respondent  and  the  judge  was
         entitled to conclude there was no merit to the  asylum  claim.  The
         appeal was  not  an  asylum  appeal  and,  given  the  unchallenged
         decision by the respondent that the claim was clearly unfounded the
         judge was entitled to conclude the application had been 'insincere'
         and to attach no credence to the submission by the appellants  that
         they had no contact with their respective families and to find that
         there was no subjective or objective fear of return to India.

     12. The submission that the appellants did not have a poor  immigration
         history but had a 'run of the mill' history  and  this  should  not
         have been held against them is extraordinary. It is a fact that the
         appellants have been unlawfully in the UK since December 2015, that
         a clearly unfounded asylum claim was made and  that  there  was  no
         expectation that the family would be able to remain in  the  UK  in
         the context of the previous leave that had been granted. They  have
         a poor immigration history. That other families may have a  similar
         history does not render that which is poor, not poor.  The  finding
         that there is a poor history was a finding  that  was  clearly  and
         reasonably open to the judge.

     13. In so far as the finding  that  the  witness  statements  contained
         evidence that was not true, whilst the judge did say that,  it  was
         following several paragraphs where she set out that  which  was  in
         the witness statements and  gave  reasons  for  rejecting  it.  For
         example:

           . the eldest child refers to matters that were rejected  in  the
             asylum claim; the judge gives her reasons for  rejecting  that
             because the asylum  claim  was  certified  clearly  unfounded,
             although the judge referred to it as a dismissed appeal;

           . the eldest child had spent her first 10 years  in  India;  the
             judge did not accept the evidence that  she  would  no  longer
             speak her  language  of  origin  because  she  had  previously
             attended school in Kerala,  that  her  younger  sister  speaks
             Malayalam as her main language and she remained in India for a
             year after her father left;

           . that the asylum claim was unfounded;

           . it was not plausible that the eldest child would have lost the
             ability to speak Malayalam in the short period of time she had
             been in the UK, having spent the first 10 years of her life in
             India;

           . the first two  appellants  lived,  worked,  met,  married  and
             started a family in India. There was and is  no  objective  or
             subjective fear of return to India and no obstacles  to  their
             return.

     14. Although appearing under Ground 3, the  appellants  submitted  that
         the finding by the judge that the third appellant had obtained only
         'modest' exam results was  incorrect;  the  documents  relied  upon
         showed that she had obtained distinctions and merits and that  this
         showed, if anything, exceptional results. I note that in her  Level
         3 Pearson BTEC she obtained 3 distinctions, 2 merits and a pass  in
         6 exams in July 2018. Her BTEC certificate taken the previous  year
         also showed her obtaining distinctions although  her  GCSE  results
         for 2016 and 2017 were at Grades C and D save for religious studies
         for which she obtained an A  in  June  2016.  It  is  difficult  to
         describe such results, overall, as exceptional  but  in  any  event
         even if they could be correctly classified as 'exceptional'  it  is
         unclear  how  that  could  impact  on  the  reasonableness  of  the
         decision.

     15. Ms Iengar submitted that the errors of fact  she  identified  were,
         when viewed as a whole, such as to cast significant  doubt  on  the
         sustainability of the finding that there were no obstacles  to  the
         return of the family to India or that they had not lost  ties  with
         family members and their cultural identity. Whilst I  accept  there
         are some errors, they do not  and  cannot  reasonably  be  said  to
         undermine the findings made that there are no significant obstacles
         to return. The findings made by the judge were on the basis of  the
         evidence  that  was  relied  upon  by  the  appellants.  The  judge
         disbelieved the evidence or placed little weight upon it.  She  was
         entitled to do so. The fact that the respondent was not represented
         did not mean that the judge was required to act inquisitorially and
         take the place of the respondent. That  she  did  not  say  to  the
         appellants "I do not believe your account, what do  you  say  about
         that" does not mean that she was not  entitled  to  consider  their
         witness statements in the context of the evidence they were relying
         upon as a whole.

     16. There is no error of law by the First-tier Tribunal  judge  arising
         out of the errors set out in the grounds,  such  as  would  justify
         setting aside the decision to be remade.

         Ground 3

     17.  The  grounds  submit  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal   judge   in
         considering  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  and   s117B(6)   Nationality
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 impermissibly took account  of  the
         immigration history of the parents in determining  the  outcome  of
         the appeal.

     18. The grounds also submit:

           . it could not rationally be concluded that because the youngest
             child was working below age related expectations she  was  not
             doing well; that the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  head's
             report that she would excel in year 4 and the judge has failed
             to factor this into the reasonableness assessment as required;

           . that the judge has failed to provide  reasons  for  concluding
             that the starting point was to  find  strong/powerful  reasons
             not to leave;

           . that the evidence was such that no judge could reasonably  and
             rationally have concluded  that  it  was  reasonable  for  the
             appellants to leave the UK.

     19. The core of this ground arises from the following paragraphs of the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision:

             "37. It is in the best interest of children to have  stability
                  and  continuity  of  social  and  educational   provision.
                  However in the case of the 4th appellant[1] this has  come
                  to a natural break and her younger sibling would be due to
                  change school also. The 1st and 2nd  appellant  have  poor
                  immigration histories. I accept that they have made an  in
                  time application for further leave,  but  it  remains  the
                  case that they have not had  leave  since  July  2013  and
                  after  their  appeal  was  dismissed  and  appeal   rights
                  exhausted, and insincere application made for asylum.

             38.  The present application was made  6  months  after  being
                  served with enforcement notices. Their  appeal  statements
                  including that of the children contains information  which
                  is simply untrue. There are strong reasons for removal. It
                  is not unreasonable to expect the children  to  return  to
                  India with other family  members  and  continue  life  her
                  [sic] education in the home country. I  do  not  find  the
                  circumstances of the appellants are such as to render  the
                  decision  disproportionate  and  breach  of  Article  8(1)
                  ECHR."

     20. These paragraphs cannot and should not be read  in  isolation  from
         the rest of  the  decision.  The  judge  directed  herself  to  the
         relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules and to  relevant  case
         law including Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 197,  MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]
         EWCA Civ 705, s117B(6) Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,
         JG (s117B(6): reasonable to leave UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 00072. The
         judge  specifically  considered  the  circumstances  of   the   3rd
         appellant. The judge draws from the evidence before her in terms of
         her education, that she has accepted a  place  at  University,  her
         length of residence in the UK since age 10 and has, earlier in  the
         decision accepted that the child has acquired social and other ties
         in the UK outside the confines  of  her  family  and  has  spent  a
         significant period of time in the UK and  outside  her  country  of
         nationality. The judge makes no reference in her assessment of  the
         reasonableness of the child returning to India, of  the  impact  on
         her assessment of  the  parents'  immigration  history.  The  judge
         acknowledges that it is in the best interests of children  to  have
         stability and continuity of social and educational provision.

     21. The judge considers the parents  immigration  situation  and  their
         claims. But that consideration is undertaken in the context of  the
         'real world' scenario; that the appellants are a  family  unit  and
         that each child has reached a natural break in their education.

     22. It is not always easy to separate out in  a  written  determination
         where the individual child's best interest lie as an individual and
         those best interest as part of a family unit. That is the so called
         'real world test'. In this decision  the  judge  has  set  out  the
         evidence and reached findings on where the child's interest lie but
         having assessed the best interests of both children and the  extent
         and nature of their ties and cultural links in the UK  outside  the
         confines of  the family and within the family, length of  residence
         and ties the judge reached a conclusion that was open to  her  that
         it was not unreasonable for the children to return  to  India  with
         their parents, neither of whom have leave to remain in the UK.

     23. The reference by the judge to strong reasons for removal has to  be
         read in the context of the decision and findings as a whole and  to
         relate to the parents. It cannot be said that the findings  of  the
         judge on the evidence relied upon do  not  identify  reasons  never
         mind strong reasons in connection with the parents stay/removal. It
         was open to the judge to find that there were no reasons  why  this
         family should remain in the UK and that it was not unreasonable for
         the children to return  with  their  parents  to  India.  When  the
         decision is read as a whole it cannot be concluded that  the  judge
         reached her  conclusion  on  the  reasonableness  of  the  children
         leaving  the  UK  through  or  in  consequence  of   the   parents'
         immigration status.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  stands;  the  appeal  is
    dismissed.


     Date 21st August 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1] This is probably a typo and should refer to the 3rd appellant

