
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20796/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th August and 2nd November 2018           |On 11th January 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                   md amin
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms B Jones of Counsel, instructed by City Legal
Partnership


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Harrington promulgated on 7 February 2018, in  which  Md
    Amin's  appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse  his  human   rights
    application dated 16 August 2016 was allowed.  For ease I  continue  to
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal,  with
    Md Amin as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. Further to the hearing on 6 August 2018, I found an error of law in the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Harrington and set it  aside  for
    remaking pursuant to a further hearing.  The background to this  appeal
    and reasons for the error of law found are contained  in  the  decision
    promulgated on 10 September 2018 annexed to this decision, the contents
    of which will not be repeated here.

The Respondent's decision

 3. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application on  16  August  2016
    following an assessment of his application for leave to remain  on  the
    basis of his relationship with his British  Citizen  partner,  his  son
    having not  at  that  time  born.   The  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph E-LTRP.2.2 of Appendix FM of the  Immigration
    Rules because he had no leave to remain at the time of his application,
    his leave to remain having been curtailed on 4 July 2014 to expire on 2
    September  2014  and  he  had  thus  become  an  overstayer.   In   the
    alternative the  requirements  of  paragraph  EX.1  of  the  same  were
    considered, the relationship Appellants being  accepted  but  not  that
    there were any  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing
    outside of the United Kingdom.  The Appellant spent his formative years
    in Bangladesh, had only at that time resided in the United Kingdom  for
    two years, speaks Bengali and has family residing  in  Bangladesh  such
    that he would be able to reintegrate there.   Separately,  it  was  not
    accepted that the Appellants met any of the requirements for a grant of
    leave to remain on the basis of private life under paragraph 276 ADE of
    the Immigration Rules and there were no exceptional circumstances for a
    grant of leave to remain outside of the rules.

The evidence

 4. in his written statement, the Appellant states that he never received a
    letter curtailing his leave to remain as far as he knew  who  leave  to
    remain with you with the most recent  application  in  May  2016.   The
    Appellant undertook an Islamic marriage with his partner on 29th  every
    2016 and a civil marriage on 4 March 2016 and their  son  was  born  in
    August 2017.

 5. The Appellant attended the oral  hearing,  confirmed  his  details  and
    adopted his written statement dated 16 January 2018.  He stated that he
    did not recognise the email address to which the curtailment notice was
    sent by the Respondent and believes that it may have been  created  for
    him by the student advisory service when he initially applied  for  his
    visa for entry clearance, but he was not aware of it at the  time.   He
    believes that they created the address to processes his file and he has
    used a different gmail address for all of  his  purposes,  although  he
    could not recall if he had provided his  usual  email  address  to  the
    student advisory service.

 6. The Appellant's son is now 14 months old and had  initially  made  good
    progress after problems at birth with  a  period  in  intensive/special
    care but there was concern that there may be a  developmental  problem.
    There is a medical review every 3 to 4 months and massage  therapy  has
    been recommended for delayed mobility development.

 7. In the United Kingdom, the Appellant's son has grandparents,  an  uncle
    and an auntie on his mother's side and in Bangladesh three  uncles  and
    two auntie's.   The  Appellant's  son  has  never  met  his  family  in
    Bangladesh, although the Appellant's wife has visited as  a  child  and
    again later, she has not been not since meeting the Appellant.

 8. At home, the Appellant and his wife speak English as she struggles with
    Bengali.  The Appellant does  not  speak  Bengali  to  his  son  as  he
    understands  English  better.   In  cross-examination   the   Appellant
    confirmed that he had never seen the email address on record  with  the
    Respondent before and had never used it.

 9. The Appellant's wife, [JB], attended the oral  hearing,  confirmed  her
    details and adopted her written statement signed and dated  16  January
    2018.  She confirmed that she spoke English with the Appellant and that
    all her family were  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  Appellant's  wife
    confirmed her son's developmental issues, that  he  was  a  little  bit
    behind  on  walking  and  had  only  recently  started   crawling   and
    appointment  was  awaited  the  referral  for   massage   therapy   and
    recommendations had been made for ongoing checks and  care.   The  next
    appointment is scheduled for February 2019.

Closing submissions

10. The following submissions were made on behalf of  the  Respondent.   In
    relation to the  curtailment  of  the  Appellant's  previous  leave  to
    remain, the evidence showed that the Respondent used the email  address
    provided on the Appellant's Visa application,  although  the  Appellant
    has confirmed that this was not his email address, it was created by  a
    third party and  he  never  used  it  or  received  any  email  or  the
    curtailment letter.  It was accepted  that  the  Appellant  has  always
    maintained that he never received the curtailment letter.  However, the
    Respondent's  position  was  that  there  was  valid  service  of   the
    curtailment letter in accordance with the relevant regulations, however
    it was also accepted that the Appellant was completely unaware of this.

11. When pressed, Mr Walker, somewhat reluctantly, submitted that it  would
    be reasonable for the Appellant's son to leave the United Kingdom.

12. On behalf of the Appellant, it was submitted that there was  sufficient
    evidence to show that the Appellant had never used  the  email  address
    which the Respondent had on record and it was suggested that the  email
    sent with the curtailment letter must have therefore bounced  back  and
    not been validly served.  However, there was no evidence of that,  only
    the Appellant's evidence which has been candid and consistent  that  he
    never received notice of curtailment and submitted  therefore  that  it
    was not an effective curtailment.

13. On the issue of reasonableness,  the  Appellant  did  not  deliberately
    overstay his leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  and  had  made  a
    further application for leave to remain before his original  period  of
    leave to remain had expired.  In any event that is no  longer  relevant
    as  he  relies  primarily  on  section  117B(6)  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Act  2002.   It  was  further  submitted  that  if  the
    Appellant made the same application now, he would be  able  to  satisfy
    the requirements of paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM  to  the  Immigration
    Rules, which is a matter relevant to the proportionality  exercise  for
    the purposes of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

14. In relation to whether it is reasonable  for  the  Appellant's  son  to
    leave the United Kingdom, reliance was placed on  the  Supreme  Court's
    decision in KO (Nigeria) the Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2018] UKSC 53 and in particular the reference back  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in EV (Philippines) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 854 where the situation included one  parent
    settled in the United Kingdom and one not.  In the present appeal,  the
    Appellant's wife and all of her family are in the  United  Kingdom  and
    are British citizens, as is the Appellant's son who requires continuing
    medical monitoring and services and is entitled to the  same  from  the
    NHS.  Balanced against that, it was accepted that  the  child  is  very
    young and the most likely scenario is that the  Appellant's  son  would
    remain with his mother  in  the  United  Kingdom  while  the  Appellant
    returned to make an application for entry clearance  and  reliance  was
    therefore place also on Chikwamba v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 40.

15. In conclusion, it was submitted that  the  Appellant  met  all  of  the
    requirements of paragraph EX.1(a) of Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and the proportionality balancing exercise  should  therefore  be
    resolved  in  the  Appellant's  favour,  that  removal   would   be   a
    disproportionate interference with his right to respect for private and
    family life under Article 8, as it would be of the same rights  of  his
    wife and child.

Findings and reasons

 1. The first issue in this appeal is whether the Appellant  had  leave  to
    remain at the time of his most recent application for further leave  in
    May 2016, or whether this had been curtailed to expire on  2  September
    2014.  Although the Appellant maintains, and  the  Respondent  accepts,
    that he never received the letter  curtailing  his  previous  leave  to
    remain, there was no real dispute between the parties  before  me  that
    that letter was validly served by the Respondent to  an  email  address
    provided by or on behalf of the Appellant in his application for  entry
    clearance as a student in 2013.  It was  suggested  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that as he had never used the  email  address,  any  messages
    sent to it would have bounced back, however this was  pure  speculation
    and it was accepted that there  was  no  evidence  to  support  such  a
    suggestion.  The letter of curtailment was  validly  served,  albeit  I
    accept that the Appellant was unaware of it.  At the time of  his  most
    recent application, the Appellant did not therefore have any  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom, he was an overstayer and could  not  meet
    the main provisions of Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules  for  the
    reasons given in the Respondent's initial refusal letter in relation to
    the relationship with his partner.  There is no specific reliance on or
    challenge  to  those  conclusions  in  relation  to   the   Appellant's
    relationship with his partner.

 2.  The  Appellant's  circumstances  have  however  moved  on  since   the
    Respondent's refusal, in particular that he and his partner had  a  son
    in August 2017 and it is that relationship which  is  primarily  relied
    upon in this appeal, specifically section 117B(6) of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 - that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
    expect the Appellant's son to leave the United Kingdom.   There  is  no
    dispute that the Appellant is in a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with his son, a British Citizen who is therefore a qualifying child for
    these purposes.

 3. The conclusions reached by the First-tier Tribunal in  this  appeal  in
    relation to the best interests of the Appellant's  son  have  not  been
    challenged by the Respondent and I adopt the findings and reasoning  in
    paragraphs 35 and 36 of Judge Harrington's decision on  this  point  to
    the effect that the best interests of the Appellant's son are to remain
    with his mother and father in the United Kingdom where he can  grow  up
    with access to  free  educational  facilities  and  healthcare  in  his
    country of  nationality,  including  continuing  access  to  specialist
    medical care which he is currently in receipt of.

 4. For the  purposes  of  assessing  whether  it  is  reasonable  for  the
    Appellant's son to leave  the  United  Kingdom,  as  confirmed  by  the
    Supreme Court in KO  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2018] UKSC 53, regard must only be had to the circumstances
    of the child  and  not  the  conduct  of  the  parent,  save  that  the
    assessment must be conducted in the real world in  which  the  children
    find themselves, which will inevitably include consideration of whether
    a parent or parents are expected to leave because they have no right to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

 5. In the present case, the Appellant has no right to remain in the United
    Kingdom and is therefore expected to return to Bangladesh, however  his
    partner is a British Citizen and as such has a right  to  remain  here.
    The question  is  in  this  case  whether  it  is  reasonable  for  the
    Appellant's son to follow the parent who has no right to remain here to
    Bangladesh.

 6. In the Appellant's favour, his son is  a  British  Citizen  whose  best
    interests are to remain in the United Kingdom to  continue  to  receive
    specialist medical treatment and in the future to access education  and
    the other benefits of growing up in the  country  of  his  nationality,
    together with extended family on his mother's side.   At  present,  the
    Appellant's son is spoken  to  primarily  in  English  rather  than  in
    Bengali, but given his age, of only 14 months,  this  is  a  relatively
    neutral factor given his language skills will only just be starting  to
    develop at all and there is nothing to suggest he would not be able  to
    learn another language with the assistance of the Appellant.

 7.  The  factors  which  may  suggest  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
    Appellant's son to leave the  United  Kingdom  are  that  he  would  be
    returning with a parent (or parents as his mother would also be able to
    return with them) who is able to reintegrate into Bangladesh and  other
    than a potential short-term period of disruption  following  the  move,
    there was nothing to suggest that he  would  not  be  provided  for  in
    Bangladesh, nor that there is  any  specialist  medical  care  that  he
    requires which would not be available there.  The Appellant's son is at
    an age where his only focus is  on  his  family  and  he  has  not  yet
    established any wider links or private life in the United Kingdom.

 8. The assessment of whether it is reasonable for the Appellant's  son  to
    leave the United Kingdom  is  finely  balanced  given  his  young  age,
    however taking into account all of the circumstances, I find that it is
    not reasonable to expect him to leave the United Kingdom to relocate to
    Bangladesh with his  father,  primarily  because  it  is  in  his  best
    interests to remain, he is a British Citizen (as is  his  mother),  and
    due to the ongoing specialist medical  care  he  is  receiving  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The terms  of  section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 are met on the facts  of  this  appeal,
    such  that  the  Appellant's  removal  would  be   a   disproportionate
    interference with his right to respect  for  private  and  family  life
    under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  I
    therefore allow the appeal.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons set out in my first decision, the making of the decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of a material error  of  law.
As such it was necessary to set aside the decision.

The decision is remade as follows:

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds

No anonymity direction is made.
Signed   [pic]             Date     28th December 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20796/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th August 2018                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 md al amin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Wass of Counsel, instructed by City Legal
Partnership


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Harrington promulgated on 7 February 2018, in  which  Mr
    Md Al Amin's appeal against the decision to  refuse  his  human  rights
    application dated 16 August 2016 was allowed.  For ease I  continue  to
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal,  with
    Md Al Amin  as  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on  31  December  1993,
    who entered the United Kingdom on 25 January 2014 with leave to  remain
    as a student initially granted to 31 May 2016 but which the  Respondent
    stated was curtailed on 4 July 2014 to end on 2 September  2014.   That
    curtailment was in dispute in the course of the appeal  proceedings  as
    being relevant to the refusal of the Appellant's application for  leave
    to remain on 16 August 2016.

 3. The Respondent refused the application the  basis  that  the  Appellant
    could not meet the eligibility requirements for leave to  remain  as  a
    partner under Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules  because  he  had
    overstayed his initial period of leave to remain since curtailment on 2
    September 2014 and could not in the alternative meet  the  requirements
    set out in paragraph EX.1 as there were no insurmountable obstacles  to
    family life continuing outside of the United  Kingdom.   The  Appellant
    also failed to  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules for a grant of  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of
    private life.

 4. Judge Harrington allowed the appeal in  a  decision  promulgated  on  7
    February 2018 on the basis that the Appellant's leave to remain had not
    been curtailed  (first  because  the  Appellant  did  not  receive  the
    curtailment letter and secondly, in  any  event  the  letter  contained
    numerous errors such that it did not constitute effective  curtailment)
    such that he had valid leave at the date of his application and met the
    requirements of R-LTRP.1.1(c) of Appendix FM to the  Immigration  Rules
    and therefore the refusal was a disproportionate interference with  his
    right to respect for family life.  By the time of the  appeal  hearing,
    the Appellant had also had a child with his partner who was  a  British
    Citizen, and in the alternative it was  found  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect that child to leave the United Kingdom  such  that
    paragraph EX.1(a) of Appendix FM applied.

The appeal

 5. The Respondent appeals on four  grounds  as  follows.   First,  at  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  Home  Officer  Presenting
    Officer had requested a short adjournment  to  obtain  confirmation  of
    service of the curtailment letter  to  the  Appellant's  email  address
    which was refused.  This  amounted  to  procedural  unfairness  as  the
    Respondent was prevented from adducing material  evidence  which  could
    have been obtained on the day in a short  period  of  time.   Secondly,
    following on from the first ground, the failure to grant an adjournment
    led to the making of a mistake of fact by the First-tier Tribunal  that
    the email with  the  curtailment  letter  had  not  been  sent  to  the
    Appellant when it had.  Thirdly, that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in
    its assessment of  the  curtailment  letter  itself  which  included  a
    typographical error in the dates but was otherwise clear and  effective
    to curtail leave to remain.  Fourthly, the First-tier  Tribunal  failed
    to take into account the fact that the Appellant did not undertake  his
    studies as originally planned and failed to update his circumstances to
    the Respondent.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Alis on all grounds on 3 June
    2018 and directions were given for the original Home Office  Presenting
    Officer to provide evidence in written form of the hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and for steps to be taken to clarify  it  with  the
    Appellant's representatives as to what happened.

 7. When the appeal came  before  me  on  6  August  2018,  the  directions
    contained in the grant of permission had not  been  complied  with  and
    there was no  further  evidence  from  the  Respondent  nor  any  prior
    agreement with the Appellant or his representatives as to what happened
    at that hearing.  Instead the  Respondent  continued  to  rely  on  the
    initial note of  hearing  from  the  original  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer which had been submitted with the application for permission to
    appeal.  That note, so far as relevant, only  states  that,  "Appellant
    claimed that he was not served with an email containing leave, I  asked
    for time to show that he was served though this was denied by the IJ."

 8. At the hearing, the Counsel for the Appellant confirmed that  what  was
    said in the Respondent's hearing note from the First-tier Tribunal  was
    correct.  An initial  adjournment  of  15  minutes  was  given  to  the
    Respondent to take instructions, but the evidence could not be obtained
    within that time.  The Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  requested  an
    adjournment of the appeal to allow another day which was  refused.   It
    was accepted that the second request and its refusal was  not  referred
    to at all in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. As to the grounds of appeal, Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds as drafted
    and highlighted the inconsistency in the  decision  as  to  the  second
    adjournment which was sought and refused by the First-tier Tribunal.

10. Ms Wass submitted that the issue of the curtailment letter  was  not  a
    new one, it had been referred to in the Appellant's grounds  of  appeal
    and in his witness statement which although only a few days before  the
    appeal hearing was sufficient time for the Respondent to  consider  and
    obtain any evidence on which he wished to rely.  In any event,  it  was
    found in the alternative that the curtailment letter was not  effective
    because it was so full of  errors  that  the  Appellant  could  not  be
    expected to overlook.  These errors included different dates given  for
    the curtailment.  There was no authority as to  whether  a  curtailment
    letter was ineffective such circumstances.

11. As to the fourth ground of appeal, the  First-tier  Tribunal  expressly
    considered the Appellant's lack of contact with  the  Respondent  about
    his studies at paragraph 38(b) of the decision, such that it cannot  be
    said that this was not taken into account.  It was submitted  that  the
    second,  third  and  fourth  grounds  of  appeal   amounted   only   to
    disagreement with the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
    amount to an error of law.

Findings and reasons

12. In relation to the first ground of appeal, although the Respondent  did
    not comply with the directions given in  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal for further written  evidence  from  the  original  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, it was clear from the candid submissions on  behalf
    of the Appellant that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not
    fully reflect the fact that a further application  for  an  adjournment
    was made on behalf of the Respondent to obtain evidence of  service  of
    the curtailment letter which was refused.  The reasons for refusal  are
    therefore also not apparent on the face  of  the  decision  and  it  is
    therefore difficult to assess whether the First-tier Tribunal  properly
    considered the fairness of a refusal to  adjourn  on  the  parties  (in
    particular  on  the  Respondent  given  the  issue   was   central   to
    determination of the appeal) in accordance with  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 0018 (IAC).

13. In these circumstances, I find an error of law in refusing to grant the
    adjournment to allow the Respondent  to  produce  further  evidence  of
    service of the curtailment letter which was of  central  importance  to
    the outcome of the appeal given the Respondent's agreement that if  not
    curtailed, the Appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules.
     If curtailed, then he did not, save for consideration under  paragraph
    EX.1 of Appendix FM and any assessment under  section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, to which the  Appellant's
    immigration history would potentially be relevant.  In the  absence  of
    any reference at all to the further adjournment request, it can not  be
    inferred that the First-tier Tribunal properly considered  whether  the
    hearing could fairly proceed in the absence of this evidence and in all
    of the circumstances.  On the evidence available to me, I find that the
    Respondent was prejudiced by not being given the opportunity to  adduce
    evidence which would have been relatively quickly available.  As such I
    find there was procedural unfairness.

14. I do not accept the Appellant's submission that any failure to  adjourn
    was immaterial because the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered in  the
    alternative that the curtailment letter itself was ineffective  due  to
    errors contained in  it.   I  find  a  further  error  of  law  on  the
    Respondent's third ground of appeal as  to  the  effectiveness  of  the
    curtailment  letter  itself.   On  its  face,  the  curtailment  letter
    contains two typographical errors in dates,  stating  2016  when  self-
    evidently due to the date of the letter and consistent  end  dates  for
    leave to remain given elsewhere in the letter,  both  dates  should  be
    2014.  In my view, the curtailment letter was sufficiently clear as  to
    be effective.  In any event, there is no authority for the  proposition
    that a First-tier Tribunal can find that curtailment of leave to remain
    is ineffective in such circumstances and Ms Wass was unable to refer to
    any such authority.  Further, the alternative could only be found if in
    fact the curtailment  letter  had  been  served,  in  which  case,  the
    Appellant would have had an opportunity to challenge it  at  the  time,
    for example by way of Judicial Review, which he failed to do.   It  was
    an error of law to find that the curtailment  of  leave  would  in  any
    event be ineffective both on the facts in this case and as a matter  of
    law.

15. As to the second ground of appeal, that follows on  from  the  findings
    above in relation to the first ground of appeal and  becomes  arguable.
    It is not however possible to find at the error of law stage that there
    was a mistake of fact capable of amounting to an error  of  law  as  to
    service of the curtailment decision, only that the First-tier Tribunal,
    having refused the adjournment request, had not taken into account  all
    of the relevant evidence  which  would  have  been  available  had  the
    adjournment been granted.  For the reasons already  given,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision contains errors of law such that  it  should  be
    set aside and further findings will need to be made as to  whether  the
    curtailment letter was served on the  basis  of  all  of  the  evidence
    available, (including that now available from the  Respondent)  and  in
    accordance with the relevant provisions as to notice of such decisions,
    when the decision is remade.

16. As to the fourth ground of  appeal,  although  regard  is  had  to  the
    Appellant's evidence about why he had not notified the Respondent  that
    he had ceased studying, I do not find that this gives adequate  reasons
    for the finding made or attaches adequate weight to  this  factor.   In
    particular, the statement that the Appellant can not be blamed for  not
    notifying the Sponsor that his  college  had  been  suspended  and  was
    entitled to wait for a 60 day letter fails to resolve the  conflict  in
    the evidence - the Respondent's position on curtailment  was  that  the
    Appellant had ceased studying, as opposed to loss  of  the  Sponsorship
    licence.  What is reasonable for a person to do is likely  to  vary  in
    these different situations and it is  not  clear  why  the  Appellant's
    evidence was preferred on this point.

17. The alternative conclusions further to paragraph EX.1  of  Appendix  FM
    have not been directly challenged by the Respondent in  the  course  of
    this further appeal, but  in  any  event  can  not  stand  because  the
    assessment of the Appellant's immigration  history  and  therefore  the
    overall assessment is infected by the findings  as  to  curtailment  in
    which I have found an error of law.  Although it may be that  the  same
    outcome is ultimately reached, it is impossible to say with  sufficient
    certainty that it would be such that the errors identified would become
    immaterial and it was not suggested by the Appellant that the  decision
    should in any event be upheld on this final  alternative  consideration
    under paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM.

18. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision contains material
    errors of law such that it is necessary to set it aside.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Directions

The Appellant and the Respondent are  at  liberty  to  file  and  serve  any
further evidence that they wish to rely on, no later  than  14  days  before
the relisted hearing.
Signed   [pic]         Date         6 September 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
