
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/20496/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2020                   |On 23 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmed, instructed by B Assured Law
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 18 November 2019, I found that the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell  to  be  set
    aside. My reasons were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant was born in  1985  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
         Pakistan. He applied for entry  clearance  for  settlement  in  the
         United Kingdom on the basis of family life with his  British  wife,
         SH (hereafter referred to as the sponsor).  By  decision  dated  14
         September 2018, the application is refused by the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  which,
         in a decision promulgated on 15 May 2019, dismissed the appeal. The
         appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   The judge did not uphold the conclusion of the Entry Clearance
         Officer that the relationship between the appellant and sponsor was
         not genuine and subsisting. At [18], the judge states that  he  was
         impressed by the evidence given by the sponsor. The judge  accepted
         that the relationship is genuine and subsisting. However, the judge
         found that the appeal on human rights grounds did not  succeed.  He
         agreed with the Entry Clearance Officer that the  sponsor  did  not
         meet the income requirement although she only narrowly failed to do
         so [25]. The sponsor has three children by a previous  relationship
         who live with her in the United Kingdom.

         3.   The sponsor works but her income is insufficient to  meet  the
         required threshold under HC  395  (as  amended).  The  sponsor  and
         appellant argue that the working  tax  credits  which  the  sponsor
         receives could, if there exists  the  likelihood  of  unjustifiably
         harsh consequences arising  from  the  separation  of  the  family,
         amount to a 'credible guarantee of sustainable  financial  support'
         to the sponsor from a third party (namely, the  State).  The  judge
         rejected  that  submission  noting  that,  'sponsor  receives   the
         benefits [working tax  credits]  as  a  result  of  her  particular
         circumstances and in particular  the  additional  financial  burden
         placed on her as a result of being single mother of three  children
         who does not receive any maintenance from  the  children's  father.
         Her outgoings as  an  unsupported  mother  of  three  children  are
         inevitably substantially greater than those of a childless  person.
         It is therefore inappropriate to treat these various benefits as  a
         windfall somehow carries her over the minimum income threshold.'

         4.   It may be the case that the appellant and sponsor  are  unable
         to rely upon the payment of working  tax  credits  as  a  'credible
         guarantee of sustainable financial support'  from  a  third  party.
         However, I do not consider that they will be unable to  do  so  for
         the specific reasons given by the judge. I accept  the  appellant's
         submission that the rules as to a minimum income  requirement  make
         no  reference  to  the  nature  or  extent   of   an   individual's
         expenditure. If the judge rejected the submission that the  working
         tax credits are to be excluded on account of the fact that  sponsor
         has three children to support using the funds which  she  receives,
         then I find that he fell into error. It was only necessary for  the
         appellant and sponsor to establish that  the  guaranteed  financial
         support from a third party is credible  and  sustainable;  how  the
         sponsor deals with such support as she might receive  is  a  matter
         for her.

         5.   This appeal raises interesting issues regarding the  relevance
         of, in this instance, working tax credits as a potential  means  of
         third-party support under the provisions of the  Immigration  Rules
         although I observe that the appellant still has to  establish  that
         unjustifiably harsh consequences would result from the  refusal  of
         entry clearance. I am satisfied, however, for the reasons  which  I
         have set out above,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  reason  for
         finding that no third-party support is available is flawed in  law.
         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. None  of  the
         findings of fact shall stand, save the finding that  the  appellant
         and sponsor  enjoy  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.  The
         decision will be remade in the Upper Tribunal.







         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. The  decision
         will be remade in the Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge Lane) at
         or following a resumed hearing in Bradford on a date to be fixed.

         Directions

         A.   Both parties may adduce new evidence provided  copies  of  any
         documentary evidence, including witness statements, are sent to the
         other party no less than 10 days prior to the resumed hearing.

         B.    The  appellant's  representatives  shall  file  and  serve  a
         skeleton argument no  later  than  3  days  prior  to  the  resumed
         hearing."

 2. At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 13 January 2020, Mr McVeety,  who
    appeared for the Secretary of State, told me that  the  respondent  now
    accepted the argument that working tax credits could, on the  facts  in
    this appeal, count as 'a credible guarantee  of  sustainable  financial
    support' from a third party for the purpose of  satisfying  the  income
    requirement of the Immigration Rules. He added that he had attended the
    Tribunal with the intention of conceding  that  the  appeal  should  be
    allowed.

 3. However, there is an unfortunate complicating factor  in  this  appeal.
    Since the promulgation of the error of law decision in  November  2019,
    the sponsor has lost  her  job.  Consequently,  if  I  now  remake  the
    decision, I do so having regard to the circumstances pertaining  as  at
    the date of the resumed hearing; the income requirement can  no  longer
    be met because the sponsor wife is not working. Mr Ahmed, who  appeared
    for the appellant, submitted that circumstances of this couple had  now
    been rendered  exceptional.  He  submitted  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer should have allowed the appeal (an argument which, in light  of
    the respondent's current position, is incontrovertible). Moreover,  had
    I remade the decision at the initial hearing, the  correct  outcome  in
    law at that time would  have  led  to  the  appellant  receiving  entry
    clearance.

 4. I have considered the submissions very  carefully.  I  am  fully  aware
    that, by allowing the appeal, a grant of entry clearance will be issued
    in circumstances where the Immigration Rules are not, as at this  date,
    satisfied. However, I am reminded that the appeal is brought  on  human
    rights grounds and not  under  the  strict  provisions  of  the  Rules.
    Ultimately, I need to consider the proportionality  of  a  decision  to
    refuse entry clearance in the light of all  the  circumstances  of  the
    appeal, including what I agree are exceptional circumstances which have
    arisen in the period between the initial and resumed  hearings  in  the
    Upper  Tribunal.  I  find  that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed,  the
    exceptional circumstance of the sponsor having lost her employment more
    than a year after the Entry Clearance  Officer  should,  on  a  correct
    application of the law, having granted entry clearance weighing heavily
    in the  appellant's  favour  in  the  Article  8  ECHR  proportionality
    assessment. Whilst I stress that the circumstances are specific to this
    appeal, the primary duty of the Upper Tribunal is to deliver justice as
    between the parties and I consider that duty may only be  met  in  this
    instance and on these facts by allowing the appeal.



    Notice of Decision

    The appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer dated 14 September 2018 is allowed.


         Signed                              Date 17 January 2020

        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

