
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/21165/2016
     HU/21162/2016
     HU/21164/2016
     HU/21161/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 December 2018                           |On 15 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                    C N-A
                                    O N-A
                                   OA N-A
                                    R N-A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J. Plowright, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria  born  on  18  October  1964,  3
    August 1971, 23 March 1998 and  4  September  2003,  respectively.  The
    first and second appellants are husband and wife and the parents of the
    third and fourth appellants.

 2. On 15 March 2016 they applied for leave to remain on article 8  grounds
    in terms of family and private life. The applications were refused in a
    decision dated 23 August 2017. Their appeal against that  decision  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Walters  ("the  FtJ")  after  a
    hearing on 7 December 2017.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by a judge of the Upper  Tribunal  who
    referred in the grant to the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MA
    (Pakistan) & Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]
    EWCA Civ  705.  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lewis  adjourned  these
    appellants' appeals pending the  judgment  of  the  Supreme  Court  now
    reported as KO (Nigeria) & Ors  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  [2018]  UKSC  53.  The  appeals  now  come  before  me  for
    determination in the light of that judgment.

    The FtJ's decision

 4. The following is a summary of the FtJ's decision.

 5. The FtJ noted that the appellants all entered the  UK  as  visitors  in
    2008 and then overstayed and that at the time they  entered  the  third
    appellant was aged 10 and the fourth appellant aged four. At  the  date
    of the applications for further leave  to  remain  the  appellants  had
    resided in the UK for seven years and for nine years at the date of the
    hearing before him.

 6. In his findings he concluded that the best interests  of  the  children
    were to remain in a family unit with their parents but also to continue
    their education in the UK. He did however note that the education  that
    they had been receiving had been provided free  at  taxpayers'  expense
    and as the minor appellants had no leave to remain they had no right to
    that education.

 7. He concluded that the evidence of the first appellant was not credible.
    In terms of language he found that it was probable that "a considerable
    proportion" of the language spoken in their home is Yoruba and that the
    third and fourth appellants have a considerable understanding of it.

 8. He found that the first appellant was an  electrician  in  Nigeria  and
    that he had produced no evidence to suggest that he would not  be  able
    to find employment in that respect on return to Nigeria.  His  evidence
    that that he had overstayed because he wanted to stay  in  the  UK  and
    work was contrary to his evidence that he had never had paid employment
    in the UK.

 9. He did not believe the evidence of the first appellant that his friends
    and family would not assist him financially if  he  had  to  return  to
    Nigeria. He noted that there was no witness statement from his brother-
    in-law who it was said gives  him  cash  on  a  regular  basis  and  he
    concluded that there was no reason why the same sums could not be given
    to him until he established himself on return to Nigeria.

10. The FtJ found that the appellants had family life with each  other  but
    noted that it was the respondent's intention to return them as a family
    unit to Nigeria. Referring  to  section  117B(4)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act")  (little  weight
    attached to private life  established  when  a  person  is  in  the  UK
    unlawfully) he again referred to the  fact  that  the  appellants  were
    overstayers but also said that the third  and  fourth  appellants  were
    blameless in that regard.

11. He found that the first appellant would be able to find  a  job  as  an
    electrician in Nigeria and would be  able  to  continue  educating  his
    children there although the quality of their education in Nigeria would
    not be as high as that which they presently receive in the UK.

12. He concluded that the wider  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of
    immigration control outweighed the children's best interests, referring
    to the expense of their education in the UK being met by the taxpayer.

13. The FtJ thus concluded that it would be reasonable for  the  third  and
    fourth appellants to return to Nigeria and that none of the  appellants
    would encounter very significant obstacles on return. He found that the
    children would have the support of their parents, and the family  as  a
    whole would have the support of the first appellant who is qualified in
    a skilled trade.

    The grounds and submissions

14. The grounds, to summarise, contend that  the  FtJ  failed  to  consider
    whether or not the minor appellants qualified for leave to remain under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) at the date of the application,  in  that  both
    were under 18 at the date of the application and had lived  in  the  UK
    for more than seven years at that date.  The  FtJ  needed  to  consider
    whether it was reasonable for them to leave the UK. It is asserted that
    there was likewise a failure to consider s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  It
    is further asserted  in  the  grounds  that  the  FtJ  only  considered
    proportionality in terms of the private lives of the appellants and not
    their family lives.

15. He had failed to identify any strong  reasons  for  refusing  leave  to
    remain and had made no reference to  relevant  authority  (such  as  MA
    (Pakistan)). Likewise, the  grounds  contend  that  the  FtJ  erred  in
    failing to refer to or apply Home  Office  guidance  (now  updated)  in
    relation to Appendix FM in particular having regard to the fact that no
    'suitability' issues are relied on by the respondent.

16. In submissions Mr Plowright relied on the grounds and  referred  me  to
    the decision in  KO  (Nigeria).  The  Home  Office  guidance  that  was
    applicable at the time of the hearing before the FtJ was that  set  out
    in MA  (Pakistan).  I  was  also  referred  to  the  current,  updated,
    guidance.

17. Mr Bramble argued that the FtJ had considered the best interests of the
    third and fourth appellants and had made a proper article 8 assessment.
    He took into account the length of  time  that  the  third  and  fourth
    appellants had been in the UK.

18. In terms of KO (Nigeria), the FtJ had in fact  decided  the  appeal  in
    line with that decision in the sense that he took into account that the
    parents had no leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  and  neither  did  their
    children.

19. As to whether the outcome would potentially have been any different had
    the FtJ referred to authority and guidance "potentially it would  not".
    Although another judge might have come to a different decision  on  the
    appeals, the FtJ's decision was sustainable.

20. After I indicated to the parties that I was satisfied that the FtJ  had
    erred in law in his decision such as to require the decision to be  set
    aside (for the reasons  explained  below),  the  parties  made  further
    submissions as to the re-making of the decision.

21. Mr Plowright submitted that OA would now meet the requirements  of  the
    Rules in terms of para 276ADE(1)(v) in that he was between the ages  of
    18 and 25 and had spent at least half his life in the UK. He  was  aged
    10 years and 2 months when he came to the UK. However, the fact that OA
    would now meet the requirements of the Rules in that respect was a 'new
    matter' (s.85(5)-(6) of the 2002 Act) which required the consent of the
    Secretary of State for it to be considered.

22. The second appellant's parents  live  in  the  UK  and  they  all  live
    together. That is a matter that has not previously been  considered  in
    terms of evidence.

23.  As  to  the  Home  Office  guidance,  there  were  no   countervailing
    circumstances such that leave on article 8 grounds  outside  the  Rules
    should not be granted. Although the appellants were  overstayers,  that
    was usually a factor in cases of this kind.

24. Mr Bramble submitted that although in  terms  of  the  Rules  and  para
    276ADE(1)(v) that was a new matter that required  the  consent  of  the
    Secretary of  State,  it  was  nevertheless  a  factor  that  could  be
    considered in article 8 terms outside the Rules. Thus, no issue  arises
    in terms of it being a new matter. What  is  required  is  a  balancing
    exercise.

    Assessment and Conclusions

25. The reason for my concluding that the FtJ erred in law in his  decision
    is in terms of his failure to have had regard to relevant authority and
    Home  Office  guidance  in  terms  of  the  'reasonableness'   question
    regarding return to Nigeria of the third and  fourth  appellants.  This
    aspect of my decision can be briefly expressed.

26. At [49] of MA (Pakistan) the Court said as follows:

         "...However, the fact that the child has been in the UK  for  seven
         years  would  need  to  be  given   significant   weight   in   the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary."


27. That reflected the Home Office guidance applicable at the time  of  the
    appeal before the FtJ, and as summarised by the Court in MA (Pakistan),
    were it said that:

         "Indeed, the Secretary of State published guidance in  August  2015
         in  the  form  of  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  entitled
         "Family Life (as a partner or parent) and  Private  Life:  10  Year
         Routes" in which it is expressly stated that once the seven  years'
         residence requirement  is  satisfied,  there  need  to  be  "strong
         reasons" for refusing leave (para. 11.2.4)."


28. It is not that the FtJ failed to refer to and consider  the  fact  that
    the third and fourth appellants had been in the  UK  for  a  period  in
    excess of seven years at the time of the hearing before him (and indeed
    before), it was that he failed to assess that issue in terms of whether
    there were "strong reasons" such that leave should not be  granted.  He
    very properly referred to the fact that  all  of  the  appellants  were
    overstayers and that the minor appellants had received  education  that
    they were not  entitled  to,  at  taxpayers'  expense.  However,  those
    factors were not analysed  in  terms  of  the  applicable  Home  Office
    guidance or with reference to the Court of  Appeal's  analysis  of  the
    significance of seven years' residence. Put another way, in my judgment
    he did not assess the seven years' residence of the  third  and  fourth
    appellants  with  proper  regard  to  the  significant  weight  to   be
    attributed to such residence.

29. What was said by the Supreme Court  in  KO  (Nigeria)  (including  with
    reference to what was said about MA  (Pakistan))  does  mean  that  the
    error of law on the part of the FtJ was not material, given the Supreme
    Court's own analysis of the 'reasonableness' requirement in  the  Rules
    and under s.117 of the 2002 Act and the need  to  consider  the  matter
    with reference to the latest Home  Office  guidance.  Accordingly,  the
    decision of the FtJ must be set aside.

30. Para 276ADE provides as follows:

         "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on  the
         grounds of private life


         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the
         date of application, the applicant:


             (i)  does not fall for refusal under any  of  the  grounds  in
             Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM;
             and


             (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain  on  the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and


             (iii)    has lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  20
             years (discounting any period of imprisonment); or


             (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously
             in the UK for at least 7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK; or


             (v)  is aged 18 years or above and  under  25  years  and  has
             spent at least half of his life living continuously in the  UK
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or


             (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,
             has lived continuously in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
             the UK."


31.  S.117 of the 2002 Act, so far as relevant, states as follows:

         "PART 5A


         ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS


         117A Application of this Part


         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-


             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and


             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998.


         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-


             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and


             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.


         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).


         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases


         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.


         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-


             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


         (4)  Little weight should be given to-


             (a)  a private life, or


             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.


         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

32. The guidance that was relied on on behalf  of  the  appellants  at  the
    hearing before me  was  the  'Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  on
    Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b, Family Life (as  a  Partner
    or Parent) and Private Life: 10-year Routes, dated 22  February  2018'.
    That superseded the guidance that was applicable at  the  time  of  the
    hearing before the FtJ.


33. However, since the hearing  before  me  yet  newer  guidance  has  been
    published which seeks to reflect the decision of the Supreme  Court  in
    KO (Nigeria). That guidance was published on 19 December 2018.  On  the
    question of reasonableness of return for a qualifying child there is no
    longer a reference to the need  for  "strong  reasons"  being  required
    before leave is refused. The updated guidance now says this:

         Would it be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK?


         If the effect of refusal of the application would be, or is likely
         to be, that the child would have to leave the UK, the decision
         maker must consider whether it would be reasonable to expect the
         child to leave the UK.


         Where there is a qualifying child


         A child is a qualifying child if they are a British child  who  has
         an automatic right of abode in the UK, to  live  here  without  any
         immigration restrictions as a result of their citizenship, or a non-
         British citizen child, who has lived in the  UK  for  a  continuous
         period of at least the seven years immediately preceding  the  date
         of application, which recognises that over time children  start  to
         put down roots and to integrate into life in the UK.  The  starting
         point is that we would not normally expect a  qualifying  child  to
         leave the UK. It is normally in a child's  best  interest  for  the
         whole family to remain together, which means if the  child  is  not
         expected to leave, then the parent or parents or primary  carer  of
         the child will also not be expected to leave the UK.


         In the caselaw of  KO  and  Others  2018  UKSC53,  with  particular
         reference to the case of NS (Sri Lanka), the  Supreme  Court  found
         that "reasonableness" is to be considered in the real-world context
         in which the  child  finds  themselves.  The  parents'  immigration
         status  is  a  relevant  fact  to  establish  that   context.   The
         determination sets out that if a child's parents are both  expected
         to leave the UK, the child is normally expected to leave with them,
         unless there is evidence that that it would not be reasonable.


         There  may  be  some  specific  circumstances  where  it  would  be
         reasonable to either expect the qualifying child to  leave  the  UK
         with the parent(s) or primary carer or for the parent(s) or primary
         carer to leave the UK and for the child to stay. In  deciding  such
         cases, the decision maker must consider the best interests  of  the
         child and the facts relating to the family as a whole. The decision
         maker should also consider any specific issues raised by the family
         or by, or on behalf of the child (or other children in the family).


         It may be reasonable for a qualifying child to leave  the  UK  with
         the parent or primary carer where for example:


           .  there  is  nothing  in  any  country  specific   information,
             including as contained in relevant country  information  which
             suggests that relocation would be unreasonable


             .    the parent or parents, or child, are  a  citizen  of  the
             country and so able to  enjoy  the  full  rights  of  being  a
             citizen in that country


             .    the parent or parents  or  child  have  existing  family,
             social, or cultural ties with the country  and  if  there  are
             wider  family  or  relationships  with  friends  or  community
             overseas that can provide support:


                  o    the decision maker must consider the extent to  which
                  the child is dependent on or requires support  from  wider
                  family members in the UK in important areas of his or  her
                  life and how a  transition  to  similar  support  overseas
                  would affect them


                  o    a person who has extended  family  or  a  network  of
                  friends in the country should be able to rely on them  for
                  support to help (re)integrate there


                  o    parent or parents or a child who  have  lived  in  or
                  visited the country before for periods of more than a  few
                  weeks. should be better able to adapt, or  the  parent  or
                  parents would be able to support the child in adapting, to
                  life in the country


                  o    the decision maker  must  consider  any  evidence  of
                  exposure to,  and  the  level  of  understanding  of,  the
                  cultural norms of the country


                  o    for example, a period of time spent living amongst  a
                  diaspora from the country may give a child an awareness of
                  the culture of the country


                  o    the parents or child can speak, read and write  in  a
                  language of that country, or are likely  to  achieve  this
                  within a reasonable time period


                  o    fluency is not required - an ability  to  communicate
                  competently with sympathetic interlocutors would  normally
                  suffice


             .    removal would not give rise to a significant risk to  the
             child's health


             .    there are no other  specific  factors  raised  by  or  on
             behalf of the child".

34. Although the "strong reasons" injunction  in  the  guidance  no  longer
    appears, it is notable that the guidance does state that "The  starting
    point is that we would not normally expect a qualifying child to  leave
    the UK".

35. For completeness, it is as well to point  out  that  it  has  not  been
    suggested on behalf of  the  appellants  that  any  of  them  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules in terms of  Appendix  FM,  for  example  for
    leave to remain as a parent.

36. In my summary of the FtJ's decision I  refer  to  his  findings.  Those
    findings that are not infected by the error of  law  plainly  ought  to
    stand. The immigration history of the  appellants  and  their  ages  at
    various points are matters that are not in dispute. The FtJ found  that
    the third and fourth appellants have a  considerable  understanding  of
    Yoruba, that the first appellant would be able to  find  a  job  as  an
    electrician in Nigeria and that he would be able to continue  educating
    his children there. He found that friends and family would  assist  the
    first appellant financially (and thus the family as a  whole)  if  they
    had to return to Nigeria.

37. On the question of 'reasonableness' KO (Nigeria) says the following:

         "16. It is natural to  begin  with  the  first  in  time,  that  is
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv). This paragraph is directed solely  to  the
         position of the child. Unlike its predecessor DP5/96 it contains no
         requirement to consider the criminality or misconduct of  a  parent
         as a balancing factor. It is impossible in my view to  read  it  as
         importing such a requirement by implication.


         17.  As has been seen, section 117B(6) incorporated  the  substance
         of the rule without material change, but this time in  the  context
         of the right of the parent to remain. I would  infer  that  it  was
         intended to have the same effect. The question  again  is  what  is
         "reasonable" for the child. As Elias LJ said in MA (Pakistan) Upper
         Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705,
         [2016] 1 WLR 5093, para 36, there is nothing in the  subsection  to
         import a reference to the conduct of the parent. Section 117B  sets
         out a number of factors relating to those seeking leave to enter or
         remain, but criminality is not one of them. Subsection  117B(6)  is
         on its face free-standing, the only qualification  being  that  the
         person relying on it is not liable  to  deportation.  The  list  of
         relevant factors set out in the IDI guidance (para 10 above)  seems
         to me wholly appropriate and  sound  in  law,  in  the  context  of
         section 117B(6) as of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)."


    And at [18]:

         "On the other hand, as the IDI guidance acknowledges, it  seems  to
         me inevitably relevant in  both  contexts  to  consider  where  the
         parents, apart from the relevant provision,  are  expected  to  be,
         since it will normally be reasonable for the child to be with them.
         To that extent the record of  the  parents  may  become  indirectly
         material, if it leads to their ceasing to have a  right  to  remain
         here, and having to leave. It is only if, even on that  hypothesis,
         it would not  be  reasonable  for  the  child  to  leave  that  the
         provision may give the parents a right to  remain.  The  point  was
         well-expressed by Lord Boyd in SA (Bangladesh) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department 2017 SLT 1245, [2017] ScotCS CSOH_117:


             "22. In my opinion before one  embarks  on  an  assessment  of
             whether it is reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK
             one has to address the  question,  'Why  would  the  child  be
             expected to leave the United Kingdom?' In a case such as  this
             there can only be one answer: 'because  the  parents  have  no
             right to remain in the UK'. To approach the  question  in  any
             other way strips away the context in which the  assessment  of
             reasonableness is being made ...""


38. For completeness I quote the guidance at [10], referred to at [17].  At
    [10] it states the following:

         "The President also cited (para 16) relevant guidance contained  in
         an Immigration Directorate Instruction ("IDI") of the  Home  Office
         entitled "Family Life (as a partner or parent)  and  Private  Life:
         Ten Year Routes", published in August 2015, extracts of which  were
         appended to the judgment (Appendix  2).  They  included  a  section
         headed "Would it be unreasonable to expect  a  non-British  citizen
         child to leave the UK?", under which  were  set  out  a  number  of
         "relevant considerations", such as  risk  to  the  child's  health,
         family ties in the UK and the likelihood of integration  into  life
         in another country and:


             "b.  Whether the child would be  leaving  the  UK  with  their
             parent(s)


             It is generally  the  case  that  it  is  in  a  child's  best
             interests to  remain  with  their  parent(s).  Unless  special
             factors apply, it will generally be  reasonable  to  expect  a
             child to leave the UK with their  parent(s),  particularly  if
             the parent(s) have no right to remain in the UK."


         There  was  no  reference  in  the  list  to  the  criminality   or
         immigration record of the parents as a relevant factor."


39. The Supreme Court held that the conduct of the parents  has  no  direct
    part to play in the assessment of what is  reasonable  in  relation  to
    return of a child. Its relevance is said to be only in terms of whether
    or not the parents themselves have any right to remain.

40. In the case of these appellants, none of them have any form  of  leave,
    having overstayed their visas. As to  the  conduct  of  the  first  and
    second appellants, not only is it  not  suggested  that  there  is  any
    adverse conduct on their part to be taken into account, notwithstanding
    that they have overstayed, any such conduct is irrelevant in the  light
    of the Supreme Court's judgment.

41. As regards the third and  fourth  appellants  with  reference  to  para
    276ADE(1)(iv), they were under the age of  18  years  at  the  date  of
    application (which is the relevant date) and had lived continuously  in
    the UK for at least 7 years. The issue of  reasonableness  then  arises
    for consideration under this aspect of the Rules. However, I cannot say
    that applying the Home Office guidance or, respectfully,  the  decision
    in KO (Nigeria) is without difficulty. For  example,  the  Home  Office
    guidance says that the starting point is that "we  would  not  normally
    expect a qualifying child to leave the UK" yet in its interpretation of
    KO (Nigeria) states that if a child's  parents  are  both  expected  to
    leave the UK, the child is normally expected to leave with them, unless
    there is evidence that that it would not be reasonable. In addition, as
    was suggested in submissions before me on behalf of the appellants, the
    fact of adult appellants being without leave is a commonplace in  cases
    such as these.

42. However, the resolution of these appeals does not in fact depend on any
    further analysis of the Supreme Court's judgment in  that  context,  or
    indeed of the Home Office's guidance.

43. Putting aside for the moment the question  of  reasonableness  in  para
    276ADE(1)(iv) in relation to the third and fourth  appellants,  as  was
    acknowledged  by  both  parties  before  me  OA  would  now  meet   the
    requirements of the Rules in terms of para 276ADE(1)(v) in that  he  is
    between the ages of 18 and 25 ( he is 20 years and nine months) and has
    spent at least half his life in the UK (he arrived when he was aged  10
    years and 2 months). What that means is that if  he  were  to  make  an
    application  now  he  would  succeed  under  para  276ADE(1)(v).   That
    provision  of  the  Rules  is  without  qualification   in   terms   of
    reasonableness.

44. He could not succeed under the Rules in that specific respect  in  this
    appeal because he would need to have met the age and living in  the  UK
    qualification as at the date of the  application,  which  he  did  not.
    However, if on a consideration of article 8 outside the  Rules  in  his
    case (and noting s.117B(5) of the 2002 Act-precarious private life) one
    reached the point of an assessment of  proportionality  as  one  surely
    would in this case, it seems to me inevitable that  the  appeal  of  OA
    must succeed. It could not be said to be proportionate to remove him in
    circumstances where he would,  on  simple  application  now,  meet  the
    requirements of the article 8 Rules which represent  the  Secretary  of
    State's view of the circumstances in which a person in that appellant's
    situation would be entitled to a grant of leave.

45. There is no issue in terms of family life;  they  are  a  family  unit.
    There is no dispute but that the appellants  have  each  established  a
    private life in the UK. Removing OA would amount to a  disproportionate
    interference with his private life. The result  would,  equally,  be  a
    disproportionate interference with his family life if  his  sister  and
    parents (with whom he came to the UK) were to have to leave the UK with
    him remaining behind, even though  he  is  now  an  adult.  It  is  not
    suggested that he is independent of his parents or  that  he  does  not
    still enjoy family life with them. To grant OA leave only for him to be
    separated from his parents and younger sibling would be  to  give  with
    one hand but to take away with the other.

46. One can approach the matter in  another  way  with  reference  to  para
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the Rules in relation to R who  is  now  aged  15.  In
    terms of reasonableness of her return a relevant factor would  be  that
    she would be separated from her brother, assuming he would remain. That
    seems to me to be a powerful  factor  militating  against  return  even
    taking into account the preserved findings  of  the  FtJ  in  terms  of
    language and material parental and other family support on  return.  In
    addition, she has lived in the UK since the age of four, a period of 11
    years, thus significantly in excess of seven years.

47. Once one reaches the conclusion that  OA's  appeal  must  succeed  with
    reference to article 8 outside the Rules,  and  R's  appeal  is  to  be
    allowed with reference to para 276ADE(1)(iv), it is inevitable that the
    appeals of their parents must be allowed in terms of article 8  outside
    the Rules. S.117B(6) applies in relation to R such as to mean that  the
    public  interest  does  not  require  her  parents'  removal  in  those
    circumstances. There are various permutations but the end result is the
    same.

48. If necessary to express a concluded view  as  to  whether  the  appeals
    succeed under the article 8 Rules or outside the Rules I hold that  the
    appeals of the third and fourth appellants are allowed under article  8
    (with reference to para  276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  Rules),  alternatively
    outside the article 8 Rules in relation to the third appellant OA,  and
    the appeals of the first and second appellants are allowed on article 8
    grounds (outside the Rules).

    Decision

49. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its  decision  is  set  aside  and  I  re-make  the
    decision by allowing the appeal of each appellant on article 8 grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  3/01/19

