
                               [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: hu/21082/2018
     HU/20122/2018
     HU/20125/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 June 2019                       |On 13 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                    a B e
                                master S d E
                                master h d e
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M E (First appellant's husband)
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGirr, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellants are Nigerian  nationals,  the  first  appellant  is  the
    mother of  the  second  and  third  appellants.   The  first  appellant
    initially entered the UK on 9 April 2009 with a valid Tier 4  dependant
    visa with the second and third appellants entering as Tier 4 dependants
    on 13 March 2011.  Further visas were granted.  On 11 November 2013 the
    appellants applied for further leave to remain which was refused by the
    respondent.  The appellants' appeal against that refusal was  dismissed
    by a First-tier Tribunal Judge on 11 November 2014 and  the  appellants
    subsequently withdrew their appeal to the Court of Appeal.  On  29  May
    2018 the appellants applied for leave to remain on the basis  of  their
    family and private life.  The respondent refused that application on 18
    September 2018.  In a decision, determined on the papers on 7  December
    2018 and promulgated on  23  January  2019,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Cox dismissed the appellants' appeals on human rights grounds.

 2. The appellants, who were unrepresented other than by the husband of the
    first appellant and the father of  the  second  and  third  appellants,
    appeal with permission from Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Doyle  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that the judge's Article  8  assessment  was
    inadequate given the guidance (which postdated  Judge  Cox's  decision)
    given by the presidential tribunal in JG (Section 117B(6):  "reasonable
    to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 72 (IAC).

Error of Law Decision

 3. Mr McGirr for the respondent conceded at the outset that given what was
    said by the Upper Tribunal in JG and by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  the
    subsequent case of AB (Jamaica) and AO (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA  Civ  661,
    the judge's findings on Article 8 were untenable.

 4. I agree that the judge's conclusion at [19] is inadequate and the First-
    tier Tribunal at least needed to grapple with whether or not the family
    would in fact potentially  be  separated,  and  made  findings  on  the
    consequences,  including  given  the  then  pending   application   for
    indefinite leave to remain by the first appellant's husband.

 5. In addition, Mr McGirr submitted that the judge also would have  needed
    to take  into  consideration  the  then  (November  2018)  Home  Office
    guidance, which was subsequently updated in April  2019  and  which  Mr
    McGirr confirmed had again been withdrawn  for  further  updating.   Mr
    McGirr also indicated that although KO (Nigeria)  [2018]  UKSC  33  was
    cited, this was not further developed.

 6. Given Mr McGirr's clear concession I agree that the Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal materially erred in law  in  inadequately  reasoning  his
    Article 8 assessment.

 7. In terms of  remaking  the  decision,  it  transpired  that  the  first
    appellant's husband is currently awaiting  the  outcome  of  his  paper
    appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse his  indefinite
    leave to remain.  Mr McGirr submitted and  I  agree  that  the  appeals
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal pending  the  outcome  of
    the first appellant's husband's paper appeal which Mr McGirr  submitted
    would be potentially determinative of the appeals of the appellants, it
    being Mr McGirr's submission that if the husband of the first appellant
    was successful in obtaining indefinite leave to remain  the  respondent
    would be unlikely  to  continue  to  oppose  the  appellants'  appeals.
    However, that is not the position that the appellants are currently in.

 8. Although it is a matter for the appellants they may  wish  to  consider
    obtaining legal representation for when their appeal comes  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal for an oral hearing.  As pointed out at  the  error
    of law hearing Judge Cox had noted the paucity of evidence including of
    the children's lives in the UK.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.  The decision is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  other
    than to Judge Cox, for a fresh oral rehearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Given that the second and third appellants are minors I  make  an  anonymity
direction.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 12 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee application was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
