
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU / 21579 / 2018_P
                                                         HU / 21581 / 2018_P
                                                         HU / 21582 / 2018_P


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision Under Rule 34 Without a Hearing  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 29th September 2020                    |On 1st October 2020              |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

                              (1) Rishiraj Rai
                                (2) Binam Rai
                                (3) Dilan Rai
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


    This is a decision on the papers without a hearing. The Upper  Tribunal
    did not receive any written submissions from the appellants. The  Upper
    Tribunal received written submissions from the respondent but these did
    not address the question whether a decision could appropriately be made
    on the papers. The documents described at para 7 below were  submitted.
    A face-to-face hearing or a remote hearing was not held for the reasons
    given at para 8 below. The order made is set  out  at  para  15  below.
    (Administrative  Instruction  No.  2  from  the  Senior  President   of
    Tribunals).

Representation (by written submissions):
For the appellants:    (No submissions received)
For the respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer.


                                  DECISION

 1. The appellants are siblings born (respectively) on 29 August  1987,  13
    September 1990 and 27 May 1997.  They  are  nationals  of  Nepal.  They
    appeal against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chudleigh
    (hereafter the "Judge") who dismissed their  appeals  on  human  rights
    grounds (Article 8) against decisions of the respondent  of  21  August
    2018 to refuse their applications of 25 August 2017 for entry clearance
    certificates in order to settle in the  United  Kingdom  as  the  adult
    dependent children of Mr Hari Chandra Rai (hereafter the "sponsor") who
    was settled in the United Kingdom with his wife, and their  mother  Mrs
    Mantala Rai.

 2. The sponsor had served in the Brigade of Gurkhas of  the  British  Army
    from 26 January 1978 until 29 September 1988, when he  was  discharged.
    The sponsor and Mrs Rai left Nepal on 25 September 2018  to  settle  in
    the United Kingdom. They returned to Nepal  on  22  November  2018  and
    stayed until 26 December 2018 when they returned to the United Kingdom.



 3. The Judge was not satisfied that the  appellants  enjoyed  family  life
    with their parents. She was not satisfied that they were  dependent  on
    the sponsor for financial or emotional support. She concluded that  the
    appellants and their parents had tried to construct a  case  for  entry
    clearance and were endeavouring to demonstrate financial and  emotional
    support where it did not exist (para 57).

 4. In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara made some
    detailed observations.

 5. On 1 July 2020, the Upper Tribunal  sent  to  the  parties  a  "Note  &
    Directions" dated 26 June 2020 by Upper Tribunal Judge Owens  in  which
    Judge Owens stated that she had taken  the  provisional  view  that  it
    would be appropriate in  the  instant  case  to  decide  the  following
    questions without a hearing:

         (a)      whether the decision of the Judge involved the  making  of
         an error of law; and

         (b)      if so, whether it should be set aside.

 6. Judge Owens  then  gave  directions  which  set  a  timescale  for  the
    appellants to make written submissions on questions (a)  and  (b),  for
    the respondent to lodge submissions in reply and for the appellants  to
    lodge further submissions in response. She also gave  directions  which
    provided for any  party  who  considered  that  despite  the  foregoing
    directions a hearing was necessary to consider questions (a) and/or (b)
    to submit reasons for that view within a certain timescale.

 7. In response to the "Note and Directions"  of  Judge  Owens,  the  Upper
    Tribunal has received from the  respondent  a  document  entitled:  "Re
    Secretary of State's response to the grounds of appeal under  Rule  24"
    dated 17 July 2020 from Mr Tan, sent to the  Upper  Tribunal  by  email
    dated 17 July 2020 timed at 09:57 hours. The  Upper  Tribunal  has  not
    received any written submissions from the appellants.

 8. Mr Tan accepted in his Rule 24 Reply  that  the  Judge  had  materially
    erred in law in reaching her finding that the appellants did not  enjoy
    family life with their parents and that  her  decision  should  be  set
    aside. Having considered the grounds, the grant of permission by  Judge
    Kamara and the respondent's Rule 24 Reply, I agreed that the Judge  had
    materially erred in law and that her decision should be set  aside.  My
    reasons are given below. In these circumstances, I concluded  that  the
    appellants would not suffer any prejudice by my  proceeding  to  decide
    questions (a) and (b) without a  hearing  and  without  giving  them  a
    further opportunity to make submissions in response to  the  directions
    issued by Judge Owens.

Assessment

 9. I am satisfied that the Judge erred in law in reaching her finding that
    the appellants did not enjoy family life with the sponsor and his wife,
    for the following reasons:

         (i)      The Judge failed to take into account  relevant  evidence,
         i.e. that  the  entire  family  had  applied  for  entry  clearance
         simultaneously in order to travel to the United  Kingdom  together;
         that the appellants lived with their parents until their  departure
         for the United Kingdom; and their continued residence in the family
         home subsequently.

         (ii)     The Judge fell into speculation in  stating  that  it  was
         likely that the appellants were working  because  the  sponsor  and
         their elder sibling had left Nepal in order to work.

         (iii)    The Judge erred by failing to apply the  guidance  in  Rai
         [2017] EWCA Civ 320 which stated, inter alia, that it was necessary
         to assess whether family  life  was  being  enjoyed  prior  to  the
         departure  of  the  sponsor-parent(s)  and,  if  so,  whether   the
         enjoyment of such family life had endured.

10. The Judge's finding, that the appellants did not enjoy family life with
    the sponsor, was plainly material to her assessment of proportionality.



11. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's decision  on  the  appeal  of
    each of the appellants did involve the making of an error of  law  such
    that her decision to dismiss their appeals stands to be  set  aside.  I
    therefore set aside her decision to dismiss the appeals.

12. However, the Judge's summary of the oral evidence that was given before
    her, at paras 11-23, shall stand as a record of the oral evidence  that
    was given before her.

13. The next question is whether the decisions on the appeals should be re-
    made in the Upper Tribunal or whether the appeals should be remitted to
    the Upper Tribunal.

14. It has not been possible to  preserve  any  of  the  Judge's  findings.
    Furthermore, although there will be only one  hearing,  the  individual
    circumstances of  the  three  appellants  may  have  to  be  considered
    separately. For example, it will be necessary to  consider  whether  or
    not the second and third appellants meet the terms of the  respondent's
    policy on adult children of former Gurkhas, as argued  in  the  grounds
    and which the Judge did not consider. In all of these circumstances,  I
    have concluded that the only fair course of action is for  the  appeals
    to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

15. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the appeals of  the
    appellants involved the making of errors on points of law such that the
    decisions fell to be set  aside.  The  decisions  are  set  aside.  The
    appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  the  decisions  on
    the appeals to be re-made by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  other
    than Judge Chudleigh.


Signed      Date: 29 September 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill







        _____________________________________________________________


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email

