
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21300/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 May 2018 & 31 August 2018                |On 15 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     SL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Semega-Jammeh, instructed by Beachwood Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, SL, was born in 1984 and is a female citizen  of  Ghana.
    She entered the United Kingdom in July 2012 with entry clearance  as  a
    visitor.  Thereafter, in January 2016, she applied for further leave to
    remain.  She claimed that she had a British child  and  was  unable  to
    return to Ghana.  On 22 August 2016, a decision was made to refuse  her
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  She appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge S T Fox) which, in a decision promulgated  on  7  April
    2017,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Following the initial hearing at Bradford on 3 May 2018, I  found  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to
    be set aside.  Judge Fox had concluded that the appellant had failed to
    prove that her child is British.  The appellant had given birth to  the
    child when she had been married to a man who she  claims  was  not  the
    natural father (GM).  GM is a Ghanaian citizen.  The  appellant  claims
    that the father of her child is a British citizen, with  whom  she  was
    having an affair at the time, whom I shall refer to  hereafter  as  ES.
    The appellant claims that she had asked ES (who she says  continues  to
    pay her maintenance for her child) to cooperate in proving that he  was
    the natural father of the child.  However, he has refused to cooperate.
     Judge Fox noted that the appellant had admitted in evidence  that  she
    must have been pregnant when she arrived in the United Kingdom in 2012.
     The child was born  in  January  2013.   The  appellant  divorced  her
    husband GM in August 2014.  Judge Fox noted that ES was not present  in
    court before the First-tier Tribunal.  The  appellant  is  recorded  as
    having told the judge that "[ES] was willing to help in  all  ways  but
    could not give any blood sample for DNA purposes.  A  blood  sample  is
    not necessary for a DNA test.  A simple swab in the inner  cheek  or  a
    lock of hair would suffice".

 3. I find that this latter observation by Judge Fox is problematic.  It is
    not clear from what source the judge has drawn his  comments  regarding
    DNA testing.  More significantly, the judge appears  to  have  attached
    weight to the fact that the appellant  had  been  unable  to  obtain  a
    sample from ES.  Whilst the judge was entitled to consider whether  the
    appellant had, in fact, sought a sample from ES,  he  should  not  have
    attached weight to the failure of the appellant to obtain a sample.  It
    was not within the appellant's power or control to obtain a  sample  of
    this kind from a third party.  The fact that  a  sample  may  not  have
    required the taking of blood is irrelevant.

 4. Following the initial hearing, I told the parties that  I  intended  to
    set aside the First-tier decision  and  issued  the  directions  for  a
    resumed hearing.

 5. At the resumed hearing, the appellant gave evidence  in  English.   She
    adopted her written evidence as her evidence-in-chief.   She  said  she
    did not know why ES had refused to cooperate in the obtaining of a  DNA
    sample.  In her statement and again in her oral evidence she  explained
    that she had asked ES to provide such a sample.  Cross-examined by  Mrs
    Pettersen, the appellant said that she is given cash  on  an  irregular
    basis by ES to pay for the child.

 6. In her submissions, Mrs Pettersen claimed that the oral evidence at the
    resumed hearing had taken the matter no further  forward.   Mr  Semega-
    Jammeh, for the  appellant,  submitted  that  the  appellant  had  done
    everything that she possibly could to discharge the burden  of  proving
    that a British citizen was the father of her child.

 7. The appellant was born before the amendment to the British  Nationality
    (Proof of Paternity) Regulations which came  into  force  in  September
    2015.  Those Regulations now provide:

         For the purposes of Section 50(9A)(c) of  the  British  Nationality
         Act 1981, the prescribed requirement as to proof  of  paternity  is
         that the person must satisfy the Secretary of State that he is  the
         natural father of the child.

 8. Section 50(9A) of the British Nationality Act 1981 provides:

         (9A) For the purposes of this Act a child's father is-

          a) the husband, at the time of the child's birth,  of  the  woman
             who gives birth to the child, or

          b) where a person is treated as the father  of  the  child  under
             section 28 of the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act  1990
             or section 35 or 36 of the Human Fertilisation and  Embryology
             Act 2008, that person, or

             (ba) where a person is treated as a parent of the child  under
                  section 42 or 43 of the Human Fertilisation and Embryology
                  Act 2008, that person, or

          c) where none of paragraphs (a) to (ba)  applies,  a  person  who
             satisfies prescribed requirements as to proof of paternity.]

 9. The provision which applies to the  child  in  this  instance  are  the
    British Nationality (Proof of Paternity) Regulations 2006.  Paragraph 2
    provides:

         The following requirements are prescribed as proof of paternity for
         the purposes of Section 50(9A)(c) of the  British  Nationality  Act
         1981 -

         (a)  the person must be named as the father of the child in a birth
             certificate issued within one year of the date of the  child's
             birth; or

         (b)  the person must satisfy the Secretary of State that he is  the
             father of the child.

10. ES is named as the father of the child in the birth  certificate  which
    is in the appellant's bundle of which there is an official  copy  dated
    12 April 2015.  The nationality of ES is not stated, only his place  of
    birth (Ghana) and occupation (postman).  The problem for the  appellant
    lies in Section 50(9A) of the 1981 Act (see above).  The  Act  provides
    that a child's father would be the husband at the time of  the  child's
    birth of the woman  who  gives  birth  to  the  child  or,  where  that
    subparagraph does not apply, any person who  satisfies  the  prescribed
    requirements as to proof of paternity (as already established  in  this
    case, the person whose name appears on the  birth  certificate  of  the
    child).  However, the birth certificate only becomes  relevant  if  the
    provisions of Section 50(9A)(a) do not apply.  In the present case, the
    appellant had a husband  at  the  time  of  the  child's  birth.   Sub-
    paragraph (a) therefore applies and the inclusion of ES's name  on  the
    birth certificate does not  assist.   The  only  way  forward  for  the
    appellant is to prove by reference to the civil standard of the balance
    of probabilities that her husband at the time of the child's  birth  is
    not the natural father.   Whilst  I  appreciate  that  that  conclusion
    returns the analysis to the difficulties in obtaining evidence from ES,
    I am not satisfied that the appellant  has  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof.  The only evidence regarding ES which we have before us  is  his
    name appearing on a birth certificate.  His nationality is not given on
    that birth certificate nor do we have any other proof  beyond  what  we
    were told by the appellant herself, that ES is a British  citizen.   It
    is not clear from the appellant's own evidence both  written  and  oral
    why she is so sure that ES is a British citizen.  Even  if  I  were  to
    accept that the  appellant  is  a  credible  and  truthful  witness,  I
    consider that her evidence alone is simply  inadequate  to  prove  ES's
    nationality.  I stress that in making that finding I am not in any  way
    "punishing" the appellant for her failure to  obtain  cooperation  from
    ES.  However, in the light of the  paucity  of  the  evidence,  I  have
    concluded that the appellant has failed, on this occasion, to discharge
    the burden of proof.

11. The appellant's case on Article 8 ECHR is, of course,  predicated  upon
    her assertion that her child is a British citizen.  Were  she  able  to
    prove that fact, then she would  appear  to  have  a  strong  case  for
    remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  carer  for  the  child.   I
    appreciate, however, that  that  consideration  may  not  conclude  the
    argument; the hearings  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  were  exclusively
    concerned with the nationality of  the  child  and  did  not  touch  on
    matters such as the reasonableness of  the  child  (even  if  he  is  a
    British citizen) returning to live with his mother in Ghana.

12. It remains open to the appellant to make a fresh  application  if,  for
    example, she were  able  to  obtain  cooperation  from  ES;  given  the
    existence  of  the  birth  certificate,  persuasive   proof   of   ES's
    nationality may be sufficient on a future application to  dislodge  the
    presumption that the appellant's previous husband, GM, is  the  child's
    natural father.  However, that is a matter for the  appellant  and  her
    advisers.

13. In the light of my findings at [10] above, this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

14. The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    dated 22 August 2016 is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 1 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

