
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21681/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal       |Decision promulgated         |
|on 13 September 2017                          |on 06 November 2017          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                             CHIARA JAIMEE MACK
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Bhatti - Direct Access Counsel.
For the Respondent: Mrs Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Widdup promulgated on 16 May 2017 in which the Judge dismissed  the
        appellant's appeal.






Error of law


     2. The Judge made no error of law in the analysis of the challenge  to
        the TB certificate. The appellant applied for  entry  clearance  as
        the child of a person present and settled  in  the  United  Kingdom
        which was assessed  by  the  ECO  pursuant  to  paragraph  297  and
        paragraph 320(8A) of the Immigration Rules.
     3. The ECO noted that as the appellant intended to stay in the UK  for
        more than six months, under paragraph 320(8A),  the  appellant  was
        required to produce a certificate  issued  by  an  approved  clinic
        showing that they were free of TB. The certificate provided by  the
        appellant in support of the application was not  from  an  approved
        clinic. The application therefore failed.
     4. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that  a  certificate
        had been provided. This point is not disputed as the ECO accepts  a
        certificate was provided but the issue in the appeal is not whether
        a TB certificate was obtained and provided but  whether  it  was  a
        valid certificate from a recognised provider.
     5.  The  appellant  appears  to  accept  that  a  certificate  from  a
        recognised provider was not provided with the application. Although
        such certificate was provided at a later date this is post decision
        evidence  and  does  not  establish  that  the  appellant   had   a
        certificate which satisfied the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
        Rules at the date of application, which she was required to do.
     6. Submissions were made regarding the nature of the evidence that had
        been sent in although it appears that material  the  appellant  was
        seeking to be rely upon may not have been sent  to  the  First-tier
        Tribunal. I am satisfied to Judge assessed the  material  that  had
        been made available.
     7. A second issue arose in relation to the basis  of  the  appeal.  It
        appears from the grounds of appeal that the appeal is  a  challenge
        to the decision under the Immigration Rules with no article 8 human
        rights grounds raised.  It was raised at the hearing  whether  this
        gave rise to a jurisdictional point as  following  the  Immigration
        Act 2014 a right of appeal against a refusal under the  immigration
        rules no longer exists.
     8. The decision refers to both the Rules and human rights elements but
        the grounds do not challenge the human rights aspect of the claim.
     9. Ms Bhatti asked for additional time  to  consider  this  aspect  as
        jurisdiction  had  not  been  raised  previously.  Directions  were
        accordingly given for additional written submissions to be provided
        by the appellant within a specified time with Mrs Aboni being  able
        to respond.
    10. The submissions made on the appellant's behalf are set out at Annex
        A to this decision. In light of the appellant's concession that the
        First-tier Tribunal did not have jurisdiction and that  the  appeal
        could proceed no further this application is dismissed.
    11. No arguable legal error material  to  the  decision  sufficient  to
        warrant a grant permission to appeal has been made out.





Decision

    12. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    13. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008



Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 3 November 2017

                                   Annex A



IN                   THE                   UPPER                    TRIBUNAL
 APPEAL NO:
(IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)                      HU/21681/2016
BIRMINGHAM EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNAL



BETWEEN:

                  MISS CHIARA JAIMEE MACK         Appellant

                                      V

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICE        Respondent



           SUBMISSIONS ON POINT OF LAW RAISRED DURING THE HEARING

                           ON 13TH SEPTEMBER 2017




                 Right to appeal refusal of entry clearance



    1. The application in this case was refused on 23rd August 2017.
    2. The immigration Act 2014 can  into  force  on  6th  April  2015  and
       therefore applies to applications made on or after that date.
    3. Accordingly the right to appeal against refusal of  entry  clearance
       has been removed.
    4. Decisions received on or after 6 April 2015 on an  application  that
       is solely a human rights or protection claim are subject to the  new
       regime.


    Law

    PART 3 Amendment of  the  Commencement  Order  and  revocation  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014 (Transitional and Saving Provisions) Order 2014

    Amendments coming into force on 6th April 2015


    8.-(1) The Commencement Order is amended as follows.
    (2) For article 9 substitute-


    "9.-(1) Notwithstanding the commencement of the  relevant  provisions,
    the  saved  provisions  continue  to  have  effect  and  the   relevant
    provisions do not have effect so far as they relate  to  the  following
    decisions of the Secretary of State-


    (a) a decision made on or after 6th April 2015 to refuse an application
    to vary leave to enter or remain made before 20th  October  2014  where
    the person was seeking leave to remain as a Tier 4 Migrant  or  as  the
    family member of a Tier 4 Migrant and where the result of that decision
    is that the applicant has no leave to enter or remain;


    (b) a decision made on or after 6th April 2015 to refuse an application
    to vary leave to enter or remain made before 2nd March 2015  where  the
    person was seeking leave to remain as a Tier 1 Migrant or (as the  case
    may be), Tier 2 Migrant or Tier 5 Migrant or as the family member of  a
    Tier 1 Migrant, a Tier 2 Migrant or a Tier  5  Migrant  and  where  the
    result of that decision is that the applicant has no leave to enter  or
    remain;


    (c) a decision made on or after 6th April 2015 (so far as that is not a
    decision  mentioned  in  sub-paragraph  (a)  or  (b))  to   refuse   an
    application made before 6th April 2015, where that decision is-
         (i) to refuse leave to enter;
         (ii) to refuse entry clearance;
         (iii) to refuse a certificate of entitlement under  section  10  of
the 2002 Act(1);
         (iv) to refuse to vary a person's leave  to  enter  or  remain  and
         where the result of that decision is that the person has  no  leave
         to enter or remain; unless that decision is also a  refusal  of  an
         asylum, protection or human rights claim.

    (d) a decision made  before  6th  April  2015  in  relation  to  which,
    immediately before 6th April 2015, an appeal could have been brought or
    was pending under the saved provisions.

    2) In paragraph (1)-

    a) an application as the family member of a Tier  4  Migrant  means  an
    application under paragraph 319C or 319H of the immigration rules;
    (b)an application as the family member of a Tier 1 Migrant,  a  Tier  2
    Migrant or a Tier 5 Migrant means an application under paragraph  319C,
    319E, 319H or 319J of the immigration rules.

    (3) In this article- "entry clearance" has  the  same  meaning  as  in
    section 33(1) of the 1971 Act(2);

    "human rights claim" has the same meaning as in section 113 of the 2002
Act(3);
    "immigration rules" means the rules for the time being laid down by the
    Secretary of State as mentioned in section 3(2) of the 1971 Act;
    "leave to enter" means leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  given  in
    accordance with the provisions of, or made under, the 1971 Act;
    "leave to remain" means leave to remain in the United Kingdom given  in
    accordance with the provisions of, or made under, the 1971 Act and  any
    variation of leave to enter or remain by the Secretary of State;
    "pending" has the same meaning as in section 104 of the 2002 Act(4);
    "protection claim" has the same meaning as in section 82(2) of the 2002
Act;
    "Tier 1 Migrant", "Tier 2  Migrant",  "Tier  4  Migrant"  and  "Tier  5
    Migrant" have the same meanings as in the immigration rules."
    (3) Omit article 10.
    (4) In article 11, omit paragraphs (1), (1A), (2), (3) and (5) (a) and
(c) to (i).
    (5) Omit article 13.

   Revocation
    1. 9.  The Immigration Act 2014 (Transitional and  Saving  Provisions)
       Order 2014(5) is revoked.

Jurisdiction

    1. In the case of Virk Neutral Citation Number: [2013] EWCA Civ 652 the
       issue of jurisdiction was considered by the court of  appeal  (civil
       division). In short it concludes that the court can raise the  issue
       of whether or  not  it  has  jurisdiction  of  its  own  motion  and
       importantly at any stage.

Submissions.

Dealing with the issues arising out of the hearing it is submitted:

    1. There was no right of appeal against the refusal of entry  clearance
       dated 23rd August 2016.
    2. The court can raise the point of jurisdiction, even at this stage.
    3. The appellant has not raised a Human  Rights  ground,  which  is  an
       argument available to her under the applicable legislation.
    4. I have been instructed that since the case  was  adjourned  for  the
       consideration of points of law the appellant has been admitted  into
       hospital after she attempted to commit  suicide  and  is  now  being
       treated for Bipolar Mood Disorder by Dr M Dube. Should the appellant
       make a fresh application this can be raised at that  stage.  It  was
       made clear at the hearing that it was too  late  to  raise  a  human
       rights argument at this late stage.
    5. Accordingly I cannot oppose the arguments raised at the hearing  nor
       object to the conclusion that this appeal can go no further.




Dated this: 20th September 2017

Balvinder Bhatti of Counsel
Citadel Chambers









