
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21879/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 20 February 2018                  |on 26 February 2018                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     MBI
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Adewusi
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge M Davies promulgated on 24 May 2017 in which  the
       Judge dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
       refusal to grant the appellant leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
       under both the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.

Background


    2. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, entered the  United  Kingdom  in
       July 2002 on a visit Visa with leave to remain for  six  months.  The
       appellant overstayed once the visa expired and has  remained  in  the
       United Kingdom illegally since.

    3. The appellant has a child who is a 'qualifying child' having spent at
       least seven years in the United Kingdom but the  respondent  did  not
       believe it  unreasonable  to  expect  either  the  appellant  or  the
       children to return to Nigeria with her as they would be remaining  as
       a family unit.

    4. Having considered the written and oral evidence  made  available  the
       Judge sets out findings of fact  from  [36]  of  the  decision  under
       challenge. The Judge is critical of what is described as the  "wholly
       inadequate  preparation   of   this   appeal   by   the   appellant's
       representative". The Judge finds  that  statements  provided  by  the
       appellant's representative on behalf of the appellant and her partner
       were "indeed sparse and  totally  lacking  in  detail".  It  is  also
       recorded the representative chose not to provide  further  detail  by
       way of examination in chief and chose not to  re-examine  either  the
       appellant  or   her   partner.   The   appellant's   representative's
       submissions are also said to be "equally sparse".

    5. At [37] the Judge finds when considering the appeal under  the  'ten-
       year  parent  route'  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  that  whilst  the
       appellant is in a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
       qualifying child there is "no evidence whatsoever to indicate that it
       would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
       Kingdom".  The  Judge  takes  into  account  that  neither   of   the
       appellant's children  are  British  citizens  as  both  of  them  are
       citizens of Nigeria by  virtue  of  their  mother  being  a  Nigerian
       national.

    6. The Judge did not find that expecting the  children  to  return  with
       their mother to Nigeria would have an adverse effect  on  their  best
       interests and no  evidence  had  been  submitted  to  show  that  the
       children would not be maintained and accommodated in Nigeria or  that
       the children could not continue  their  education  in  Nigeria  where
       there is a fully functioning education system and where English is  a
       language widely used.

    7. The Judge took into account the fact the appellant's partner appeared
       before him in a wheelchair and has a medical condition outlined  what
       is described as the "outdated evidence" that has been  submitted  but
       there was no evidence that the  partner  could  not  receive  similar
       treatment in Nigeria and no evidence he could not return  to  Nigeria
       and lead a life there similar to the life  he  leads  in  the  United
       Kingdom.

    8. At [40] the Judge writes:

           "40.   There is no evidence before me to indicate that it  would
                not be reasonable to expect the Appellants children  and  in
                particular the qualifying child to return  to  Nigeria  with
                the Appellant."

    9. When considering Article 8; the Judge did  not  accept  the  decision
       amounted to an interference with the  right  to  respect  for  either
       family or private  life  as  family  life  can  continue  in  Nigeria
       although, in the alternative, if the  decision  did  amount  to  such
       interference there  was  no  evidence  to  indicate  that  any  grave
       consequence would follow if the family had to return to Nigeria [41].
       Further, in the alternative, the Judge finds that if  the  issue  was
       one of proportionality that the decision is proportionate taking into
       account all the circumstances.

   10. The Judge refers to section 117B but at [44] refers again to the fact
       that no evidence had been  produced  to  indicate  it  would  not  be
       reasonable to expect the children to leave the United Kingdom.

   11. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was initially refused
       by a Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal. The application was
       renewed to the Upper Tribunal which resulted in  a  limited  granting
       permission in relation to the approach to the reasonableness test for
       the purposes of 276 ADE in section 117B(6).

Error of law


   12. The "reasonableness of return" test for children in paragraph  276ADE
       applies to all applications decided on or after 13 December 2012.  In
       R (on the application MA (Pakistan)  and  Others)  v  Upper  Tribunal
       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another [2016] EWCA Civ 705  the
       Court of Appeal held that paragraph 276ADE(iv)  and  section  117B(6)
       were similarly framed with both requiring seven years' residence  and
       the critical question being whether it was unreasonable for the child
       to be expected to leave the  UK.  It  was,  therefore,  a  legitimate
       assumption that the question of reasonableness should  be  approached
       in the same way in each context. Read  in  isolation,  the  focus  of
       section  117B(6)(b)  was  solely  on  the  child  and  there  was  no
       justification for reading the concept  of  reasonableness  so  as  to
       include a consideration of the conduct and immigration history of the
       parents as part of the overall analysis of the public interest.  That
       approach was, however, inconsistent with MM (Uganda) v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 450 which the Court was
       bound to follow. As courts were obliged  to  take  into  account  the
       wider public interest considerations when applying the "unduly harsh"
       criterion under section 117C(5), it had to be equally so with respect
       to the reasonableness criterion in section 117B(6). Further, the test
       for determining the reasonableness  of  removal  in  cases  involving
       children present for more than seven years in the UK could no  longer
       be "compelling reasons". That was not the language of section 117B(6)
       or paragraph 276ADE and set the bar too high. It might be  reasonable
       to require the child to leave where there were good  cogent  reasons,
       even if they were not compelling (paras 13, 19 - 22, 36, 45,  46,  71
       and 73). The fact that the parents were overstayers and had no  right
       to remain in their own right  could  thereafter  be  weighed  in  the
       proportionality balance against allowing the  child  to  remain,  but
       that was  after  a  recognition  that  the  child's  seven  years  of
       residence was a significant factor pointing the other way (paras  74,
       75, 86 - 88 and 101 - 104).  Accordingly,  given  the  dishonesty  of
       three of the Claimants, the decision to refuse leave to the  children
       was manifestly  proportionate  even  though  it  was  in  their  best
       interests to remain in the UK.

   13. The Court of Session has approved and followed the approach taken  in
       MA (Pakistan) in the case of SA, SI, SI and TA  v  SSHD  [2017]  CSOH
       117.

   14. The Court of Appeal came to the same  conclusion  i.e.  that  it  was
       inherent in the reasonableness test in section 117B(6) and  paragraph
       276ADE that the Court should have regard  to  wider  public  interest
       considerations,  particularly  the  need  for  effective  immigration
       control, in the case of AM (Pakistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 180.

   15. The IDIs on Family Migration, Paragraph 11.2.4 deals with non-British
       children. The August 2015 version states that the requirement that  a
       non-British Citizen child has lived in the UK for a continuous period
       of  at  least  the  7  years  immediately  preceding  the   date   of
       application, recognises that over time children  start  to  put  down
       roots and integrate into life in the UK, to  the  extent  that  being
       required to leave the UK may be unreasonable. The  longer  the  child
       has resided in the UK, the more the balance will begin  to  swing  in
       terms of it being unreasonable to expect the child to leave  the  UK,
       and strong reasons will be required in order to refuse  a  case  with
       continuous UK residence of more than 7 years. Relevant considerations
       are likely to include: (i) Whether there would be a significant  risk
       to the child's health: For example, if there  is  evidence  that  the
       child is undergoing a course of treatment for a life  threatening  or
       serious illness and treatment will not be available in the country of
       return; (ii) Whether the child would be leaving  the  UK  with  their
       parent(s): It is generally the case that it  is  in  a  child's  best
       interests to remain with  their  parent(s).  Unless  special  factors
       apply, it will generally be reasonable to expect a child to leave the
       UK with their parent(s), particularly if the parent(s) have no  right
       to remain in the UK; (iii) The extent of wider family ties in the UK:
       The decision maker must consider the extent to  which  the  child  is
       dependent on or requires support from wider family members in the  UK
       in important areas of his or her life.  (iv)  Whether  the  child  is
       likely to be able to  (re)integrate  readily  into  life  in  another
       country. Relevant factors include: (a) whether the  parent(s)  and/or
       child are a citizen of the country and so  able  to  enjoy  the  full
       rights of being a citizen in that country; (b) whether the  parent(s)
       and/or child have lived in or visited the country before for  periods
       of more than a few  weeks.  The  question  here  is  whether,  having
       visited or lived in the country before, the  child  would  be  better
       able to adapt, and/or the parent(s) would  be  able  to  support  the
       child in adapting, to life in the country; (c) whether the  parent(s)
       and/or child have existing family or social ties with the country.  A
       person who has extended family or a network of friends in the country
       should be able to rely on them  for  support  to  help  (re)integrate
       there; (d) whether the parent(s) and/or child have relevant  cultural
       ties with the country. The caseworker must consider any  evidence  of
       exposure to, and the level of understanding of, the cultural norms of
       the country. For example,  a  period  of  time  spent  living  mainly
       amongst a diaspora from the country may give a child an awareness  of
       the culture of the country; (e) whether the parents and/or child  can
       speak, read and write in a language of that country, or are likely to
       achieve this within a reasonable time period. Fluency is not required
       -  an   ability   to   communicate   competently   with   sympathetic
       interlocutors would normally  suffice;  (f)  whether  the  child  has
       attended  school  in  that  country;   (v)   Any   country   specific
       information, including as contained  in  relevant  country  guidance;
       (vi)  Other specific factors raised by or on  behalf  of  the  child:
       Parents or children may highlight the differences in the  quality  of
       education, health and wider public services or in economic or  social
       opportunities between the UK and the country of return and argue that
       these would work against the best interests of the child if they  had
       to leave the UK and live in that country. Other than  in  exceptional
       circumstances, this will not normally be  a  relevant  consideration,
       particularly if the parent(s) or  wider  family  have  the  means  or
       resources to support the child on return or the skills, education  or
       training to provide for  their  family  on  return,  or  if  Assisted
       Voluntary Return support is available.

   16. The IDIs also state that  where  the  applicant  does  not  meet  the
       requirements of the family and private life  Rules,  refusal  of  the
       application will normally be appropriate, but in every  case  falling
       for refusal under the Rules the decision maker must consider  whether
       there are exceptional circumstances warranting a grant  of  leave  to
       remain   outside   the   Rules.   Occasionally   these    exceptional
       circumstances will be obvious, but generally it is for the  applicant
       to raise them.

   17. The appellants fail to identify any special factors  or  aspects  not
       taken into account by the Judge which makes out legal  error  in  the
       impugned decision. The parents have no right to remain in the  United
       Kingdom and it has been found they can return. The best interests  of
       the children are to remain with their parents.   No  member  of  this
       family has any right to remain in the United Kingdom between the date
       of decision and hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. The fact  one
       of the children may now have acquired British citizenship was  not  a
       situation appertaining at the date of decision or hearing before  the
       First-tier Tribunal.

   18. The Judge clearly considered the evidence with the required degree of
       anxious scrutiny and has given adequate reasons  in  support  of  the
       findings made. The core finding  is  that  the  appellant  failed  to
       adduce sufficient evidence to warrant a finding  being  made  in  her
       favour. The medical evidence is a report dated 16 October 2013  which
       was supported by witness statements in which  the  appellant  claimed
       her partner was seriously ill and needed a frame to walk slowly which
       was clearly taken into account by the Judge.

   19. Who is responsible for the failure to provide adequate evidence was a
       not  a  matter  that  needed  to  be  explored.  If  the  appellant's
       representative requested such evidence but the  appellant  failed  to
       provide  it  the  representative  cannot  be  criticised.  Similarly,
       evidence relating to the claim the appellant's partner has  now  been
       diagnosed as suffering from dementia is not evidence that existed  at
       the time of the hearing before the First-team Tribunal.

   20. The appellant has failed to establish any basis warranting the  Upper
       Tribunal interfering with the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       which shall therefore stand.

Decision

   21. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   22. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 20 February 2018.

