
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/21469/2018
                                                               HU/01396/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Oral decision given following hearing|On 9 April 2020                      |
|On 27 January 2020                   |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                 Mr VIRENDRA KUMAR SIMRYA (FIRST appellant)
                    Mrs VINITA SIMRYA (SECOND appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M I Hossain, Solicitor of Chancery Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants  are  both  Indian  nationals  born  respectively  on  4
    December 1979 and 12 November 1981.  They are husband and  wife.   They
    both appeal with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  J  M
    Holmes against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wilding  who,
    following a hearing at Taylor House on 18 July 2019, in a decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 2 August 2019, dismissed their  appeals  against
    the respondent's decision refusing to allow them  leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds.

 2. The immigration history of the appellants can be summarised briefly, it
    being set out in some detail in Judge Wilding's  decision.   They  have
    been in this country now for some several years,  the  first  appellant
    having had leave from April 2008 until September 2014  when  he  became
    appeal rights exhausted from his latest appeal.   Subsequently  he  has
    made further applications  which  have  been  progressing  through  the
    various  Tribunals  and  courts,  but  he  and  his  wife,  the  second
    appellant, have not had leave to be in this country since 2014.  It  is
    fair to say that this is not a case where the appellants have sought to
    hide from the authorities, as they have been openly present in  the  UK
    while their various appeals were progressing, but nonetheless they have
    been in this country without leave and accordingly cannot  qualify  for
    leave to remain on the grounds  of  long  lawful  residence  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. The couple have two children, both born in the UK, and by the  time  of
    the hearing before Judge Wilding the oldest child had just turned 7 and
    accordingly was for the purposes of Section 117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as  inserted  by  Section  19  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014) a "qualifying child".

 4. By Section 117B(6) it is provided as follows:

         "117B    Article 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in
                all cases ...

                In the case of a person who is not  liable  to  deportation,
                the public interest does not require  the  person's  removal
                where -

                (a)    the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b)    it would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  child
                     to  leave  the  United Kingdom".

 5. The definition of "qualifying child" is set  out  in  Section  117D  as
    follows:

         "(1) In this Part -

             ... 'qualifying child' means a person who is under the age  of
                  18 and who -

             (a)  is a British citizen, or

             (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period
                  of seven years or more ...".

 6. The argument made on behalf of the appellants  at  the  hearing  before
    Judge Wilding, and certainly the argument which he considered, was that
    by reason of Section 117B(6) it would  not  be  proportionate  for  the
    appellants to be removed.

 7. Judge Wilding set out the appellants' case in  the  following  way,  at
    paragraphs 11 and 12 of his decision:

         "The appellant's case

         (11) The first appellant initially  was  seeking  to  argue,  as  I
             understand it, that he did have ten years'  lawful  continuous
             residence, but having clarified with Mr Aslam [the appellants'
             then Counsel] at the hearing he does not advance such a  case.
             The appellant's leave ended in 2014 but [he] sought to  always
             regularise his stay, and  thus  when  looking  at  the  matter
             through the lens of his private life, significant  weight,  Mr
             Aslam argues, should be given to that length [of] residence.

         (12) It [would] be unreasonable for the eldest child to  return  to
             India in all the circumstances applying s.117B(6) and  in  all
             the  circumstances  it  would  be  disproportionate  for   the
             appellants to be removed".

 8. When giving his reasons for granting permission to appeal against  this
    decision, Judge Holmes, stated as follows:

         "... Although apparently professionally drafted the grounds do  not
         focus upon identifying an arguable error of  law.   However  it  is
         arguable within the scope of this diffuse drafting that  the  focus
         of  the  appeals  ought  to  have  been  on  the  position  of  the
         'qualifying child' in the context of s.117B(6), given he has  lived
         his entire life in the UK,  and  thus  the  reasonableness  of  the
         expectation that he should leave the UK for India.  (There  was  no
         issue that  the  appellants  as  his  parents  had  a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship  with  him,  or  that  they  would
         otherwise  have  no  arguable  human  rights  appeal).   The  judge
         accepted that the child did not speak  Hindi  [18],  and  the  only
         language the judge found that this child  did  speak  was  English.
         That ought to have prompted a consideration of how the child  would
         access education in India, which  is  arguably  absent,  the  judge
         merely commenting that Hindi can be learned in time.  The  decision
         contains no reference to  the  relevant  current  jurisprudence  on
         s117B(6).  Arguably the judge's approach to s117B(6) was flawed".

 9. It appears that after this decision had been promulgated but before the
    hearing before this Tribunal, on 23  August  2019  the  respondent  has
    granted limited leave  to  remain  to  the  appellants'  oldest  child,
    seemingly on the basis that he is now a qualified child.  He  has  been
    granted a period of 30 months' limited leave to remain on the ten  year
    private  life  route,  the  expectation  normally  being  that   having
    completed ten years under this route, he would be eligible to apply for
    settlement.  In fact, as the Rules are currently, were  this  child  to
    remain in the UK until he was 10 years old, having been born in the UK,
    he would then be eligible to apply for British  citizenship,  but  that
    point has not yet been reached.

10. It is not clear why the respondent should  have  chosen  to  grant  the
    child limited leave to remain without at the  same  time  reconsidering
    the position of his parents.  Clearly the child cannot be  expected  to
    remain in the UK on his own without either parent,  and  so  one  would
    normally expect the position of all the members of  the  family  to  be
    considered together, which clearly it has not been in this case.

11. On behalf of the appellants, Mr  Hossain  advances  the  argument  that
    because this child has now been granted leave to remain,  the  decision
    of Judge Wilding should  be  set  aside  and  that  I  should  "use  my
    discretion" to send this  back  to  the  respondent.   He  was  unable,
    however, to refer the Tribunal  to  any  Rule  or  statute  giving  the
    Tribunal any discretion to do this, which this Tribunal does not  have.



12. It is also the case that whatever the position might  now  be,  at  the
    time of Judge Wilding's decision the child did not have  any  leave  to
    remain and so this was not a factor which he could possibly have  taken
    into account.

13. As Judge  Holmes  pointed  out  when  giving  his  reasons  for  giving
    permission to appeal, the  grounds  do  not  focus  on  identifying  an
    arguable error of law and indeed do not specify any such error of  law.
    When the Tribunal invited Mr Hossain to identify such an arguable error
    of law he could do no more than rely on paragraph 3  of  Judge  Holmes'
    reasons for granting permission but without going into any detail as to
    what the error had actually been.

14. Accordingly, this Tribunal must consider whether or not Judge Wilding's
    decision did contain any error of law with regard to his  consideration
    of whether or not it would be reasonable for the child to leave the UK.



15. Mr Hossain referred the Tribunal to the recent decision of AB (Jamaica)
    and AO (Nigeria) [2019] EWCA Civ 661, which decision was handed down on
    12  April  2019  and  has  taken  into   consideration   the   relevant
    jurisprudence  culminating  in  the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in  KO
    (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.  When the  Tribunal  invited  Mr  Hossain  to
    address the court as  to  the  point  of  law  to  be  derived  in  the
    appellants' favour from AB and AO, he submitted that this was authority
    for the proposition that as the child was a qualifying child  it  would
    not be reasonable for that child to leave the  UK.   He  then  repeated
    that "because the child has been granted leave to  remain,  it  is  not
    reasonable to remove his parents".   When  asked  how  this  subsequent
    grant of leave to the child could touch on  Judge  Wilding's  decision,
    which had been made earlier, he repeated that the Tribunal  should  use
    its discretion to send this decision back to the Home Office.

16. On behalf of the respondent, Ms  Jones,  in  her  succinct  submissions
    asked the Tribunal to note that Judge Wilding had been fully  aware  of
    the child's circumstances, and had taken into account all  the  factors
    concerning the child (set out in particular at paragraphs 17 and 18  of
    the decision).  He had noted that the parents had had no leave to be in
    the UK since 2014 and he also considered the family dynamics, including
    the history of the child within his school, and  whether  he  would  be
    able to adapt and learn the language on return to India.  At  paragraph
    21 the judge had noted that no evidence had been produced to show  that
    the child would not be able to communicate on return and  at  paragraph
    22 he noted that in this particular case he had not been provided  with
    any evidence that the child would not be able to leave the UK and  live
    with his parents, who would have his best interests at heart.

17. The judge also looked at the availability  of  public  services  within
    India and in the UK and on balance considered that  it  was  reasonable
    for the child to leave with his parents.

18. Accordingly, Ms Jones submitted that in the particular circumstances of
    this case no error of  law  had  been  identified  in  Judge  Wilding's
    decision and there had been none.  In these circumstances there was  no
    proper basis upon which Judge Wilding's decision should be set aside.

19. In reply, Mr  Hossain  repeated  the  argument  he  had  made  earlier,
    essentially to the effect that because the child had been  given  leave
    to remain, it would not  be  reasonable  to  remove  his  parents,  but
    without making any further argument as to why Judge Wilding's  decision
    contained any error of law by his failure to consider this point.

My Findings

20. What the Court of Appeal found in AB is set out succinctly at paragraph
    75 of that decision (given by Singh LJ) as follows:

         "It is clear, in my view,  that  the  question  which  the  statute
         requires to be addressed is a single question: is it reasonable  to
         expect the child to leave the  UK?  It  does  not  consist  of  two
         questions, as suggested by the Secretary of State.  If  the  answer
         to the single question is obvious, because it is common ground that
         the child will not be expected to leave the UK, that does not  mean
         that the question does not have to be asked; it merely  means  that
         the answer to the question is: No".

21. In this case, it is clear that Judge Wilding did indeed ask himself the
    right question, because he does so at paragraph 20 when  he  turns  "to
    consider the question of whether it would be  reasonable  for  AA  [the
    name of the child has  been  anonymised,  although  the  names  of  the
    appellants have not] to return to India".

22. At paragraph 20 Judge Wilding continues as follows:

         "Neither parent has any lawful right to be in  the  UK,  they  will
         therefore be returning to India, all things being equal.  AA's best
         interests are to remain with them, there is nothing,  in  my  view,
         unreasonable about expecting AA to leave the UK now".

23. Although Judge Holmes in his reasons for granting  permission  suggests
    that the judge's accepting that the child "did not speak Hindi" (I note
    that the judge did not find that the child  did  not  speak  Hindi  but
    merely that he "may not speak Hindi") arguably "ought to have  prompted
    a consideration of how the child could access education in India",  but
    in the judgment of this Tribunal the judge did consider this aspect  of
    the case, because he found at paragraph 21 that he was of  an  age  (as
    was his sibling) where he "can adapt on return to India",  noting  that
    both children "speak English but will be able to  adjust  and  in  time
    learn Hindi insofar as it is required in India".

24. Furthermore, the judge notes that he "was provided [with]  no  evidence
    that the children will be unable to communicate on return to Mumbai  in
    English, indeed English is widely spoken in India and is one of the two
    languages used in administrative affairs".

25. At paragraph 23 the judge notes that both parents, the appellants,  can
    seek  employment  within  India  and  that  accordingly  it  would   be
    appropriate and reasonable for their children to leave with them  as  a
    family together.  As the judge notes, at paragraph 19 "AA and AB's best
    interests are to remain with their  parents  wherever  that  may  be.".
    That, in the judgment  of  this  Tribunal,  is  a  clearly  sustainable
    finding.

26. There is nothing  untoward  in  the  judge's  findings  in  this  case.
    Families will traditionally stay together and there is nothing in  this
    case which makes it unreasonable to expect the young children of  these
    appellants, the oldest being 7, to remain with their parents as part of
    one family unit.  It is probably the case that the  immigration  status
    of the older child does not  even  have  a  bearing  on  this,  because
    regardless of whether or not he has a right at the moment to remain  in
    the UK it would still be reasonable and in his best interests  for  him
    to remain with his parents, but regardless of this  factor,  the  issue
    before  this  Tribunal  is  not  to  reconsider  the  position  of  the
    appellants now in light of events which  have  happened  subsequent  to
    Judge Wilding's decision, but whether at the time of that decision  and
    on the basis of the material put before him, Judge  Wilding's  findings
    are sustainable.

27. In the judgment of this Tribunal, Judge Wilding's  findings,  based  on
    the material which was before him, were and remain sustainable, and  no
    error of law in his decision has been identified.

28. It follows that  these  appeals  must  be  dismissed  and  I  so  find.



Notice of Decision

The appellants' appeals against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Wilding are dismissed, there  being  no  material  error  of  law  in  Judge
Wilding's decision.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 18 March 2020
