
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21755/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 August 2019                    |On 5 September 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                            mr santosh Lamichhane
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson (instructed by Paul John & Co,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    a Decision and Reasons of Judge Sullivan  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 22 May 2019.  It was a human rights appeal by a  citizen
    of Nepal.  Also, claiming as his dependants,  were  his  wife  and  two
    children.

 2. The reason that I am allowing the appeal to the Upper Tribunal  to  the
    extent that it is set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  is
    the judge's failure to adjourn on the  day  amounted  to  a  procedural
    unfairness. I say that because there  was  clear  evidence  before  the
    judge that the Appellant had been taken, on the morning of the hearing,
    with chest pains to Accident and Emergency/an Urgent Care Centre  where
    he was given an ECG.  That fact was communicated to the  Judge  in  the
    morning. Happily, he was discharged to see his GP and warned to  remain
    calm.  However, he was clearly unwell and the judge, having checked the
    situation in the morning, decided that he would put the matter back  to
    the afternoon when the Appellant did in fact attend and the judge  then
    proceeded with the hearing.

 3. I am persuaded that the judge in those circumstances ought not to  have
    proceeded with a clearly very vulnerable and unwell Appellant.   I  can
    see that the  judge  did  take  steps  to  treat  the  Appellant  as  a
    vulnerable witness offering breaks. However, I am also  satisfied  that
    given the circumstances on the day the Appellant did not  have  a  fair
    hearing.

 4. It is not in the grounds but  I  think  it  is  also  significant  that
    another person who might have given valuable evidence was his wife, but
    at the time she had given birth only a few days earlier to their second
    daughter and had herself some health issues at the time so there  would
    have been ample reason to have adjourned this appeal.



Notice of Decision

Directions

 5. On the basis that the initial hearing was tainted by unfairness  I  set
    the Decision aside and remit it for a full rehearing before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 6. The appropriate hearing centre remains Hatton Cross  before  any  judge
    other than Judge Sullivan.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]                  Date 29 August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
