
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21635/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Determination & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th November 2018                    |On 8th January 2019                |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   MISS PK
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik (Counsel), Sabz Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Durance, promulgated on 7th December 2017, following a hearing at
    the First-tier Tribunal on 22nd November 2017.  In  the  determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of South Africa, being born  on  27th  April
    2003, and is a female.   She  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent refusing her application to join her sponsoring father under
    paragraph 297 of HC 395, such a decision being dated 15th August  2016.
    There had been a previous decision also in March 2016.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she is dependent upon her  father,  Bobby
    [C], who is presently residing in the UK, and it is he who has had sole
    responsibility for her upbringing, so that  she  can  comply  with  the
    requirements of paragraph 297 of HC 395.  She claims  that  her  mother
    has not played a role in her upbringing because she has not  been  able
    to cope with her, and all material decisions during her life have  been
    taken by her sponsoring father in the UK.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had regard to the fact that  the  Appellant  child  had  been
    looked after by a family friend by the name of "Violet  [V]",  to  whom
    the Appellant referred to as "Aunty Violet", because the allegation was
    that the Appellant's mother was not capable of providing the  necessary
    care for the Appellant, or to support her and to meet her  needs  as  a
    young child (paragraph 8).  The judge heard how  the  arrangements  had
    been made by the sponsoring father in the UK for  Violet  [V]  to  look
    after the child on a temporary basis.  An  important  feature  of  this
    appeal is that there was a court order dated 26th April 2016  from  the
    High Court of South Africa, awarding full custody of the  Appellant  to
    the sponsoring father.  The mother only had visitation rights.

 5. What was said before the judge was that it was  the  sponsoring  father
    who had arranged home-schooling for the Appellant, and  that  he  spent
    many hours teaching her online.   He  is  the  person  responsible  for
    decision making in her  life  (paragraph  9).   The  judge  also  heard
    evidence from the Appellant's grandmother, who had indicated  that  the
    Appellant's mother was actually living with  the  Appellant  (paragraph
    19), but the judge did not find the evidence before him to be credible.
     He observed that only selective documents had  been  presented  before
    the Tribunal.  These did not disclose the mother's angle (see paragraph
    27(c)).  When the Appellant's father left for South Africa in 2010,  he
    had left his daughter with her mother (paragraph 27(d)).

 6. The  judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant's  father  had  encountered
    difficulty in obtaining the Appellant's birth certificate, and this was
    telling with respect to the  application  in  the  appeal  before  him.
    Moreover, the High Court decision, with respect to  the  child  welfare
    proceedings in relation to the Appellant, was not a credible one  given
    that the father could not obtain  a  birth  certificate  expeditiously,
    leading the judge to  conclude  that  "the  abandonment  is  contrived"
    (paragraph 27(g)).  The judge firmly concluded that "the  Appellant  is
    in contact with her mother and that decision was made jointly  by  both
    parents" (paragraph 27(l)).

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds of Application

 8.  The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  had  placed  a
    disproportionate  focus  on  the  historic  welfare  concerns  of   the
    Appellant, giving insufficient weight to the custody order in favour of
    the sponsoring father from April 2016.   The  judge  had  made  adverse
    credibility findings in relation to the birth certificate.   The  judge
    had also concluded that the Appellant was in contact  with  her  mother
    when there was no such  evidence  in  relation  to  the  mother  making
    decisions.  Moreover, the judge had failed to  consider  whether  there
    was  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other  circumstances  making
    exclusion of the Appellant undesirable.

 9. On 4th October 2018 the Tribunal granted permission to appeal.  It  did
    so on the basis that the judge had concluded that the Sponsor  did  not
    have sole responsibility largely on adverse credibility  grounds,  that
    his choice to move to the  United  Kingdom  is  inconsistent  with  the
    Appellant's claimed situation from  that  date  and  that  it  was  not
    accepted that the birth certificate could not be obtained  sooner.   It
    was arguable that in the light of a lack of evidence of ongoing contact
    between the Appellant  and  the  mother,  the  judge  should  not  have
    concluded that there was joint shared responsibility between the mother
    and the sponsoring father in the UK for the Appellant.

10. Second, there was a lack of detailed consideration of  the  Appellant's
    current circumstances in South Africa and as to Article 8,  the  latter
    being dismissed on the basis that there was no family life between  the
    Appellant and her father, after he  abandoned  her  by  moving  to  the
    United Kingdom.

11. Third, it  was  arguable  that  family  life  does  exist  between  the
    sponsoring  father  and  his   minor   child,   particularly   in   the
    circumstances where contact appears to be accepted in this case.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 29th November  2018,  Mr  Karnik  submitted
    that the Appellant had provided sufficient evidence that her father had
    sole responsibility for her.  He made all the  important  decisions  in
    her life, including  her  schooling,  accommodation,  and  her  medical
    treatment.  Documentation to this  effect  was  provided,  as  was  the
    documentation showing that the mother was not capable of providing  any
    care and had absolved herself of all responsibility for the  Appellant.
    It was the Sponsor who now had full parental custody of  his  daughter.
    It was the Sponsor who had arranged for temporary accommodation of  the
    Appellant with her family friend (see pages 123 to 124 and pages 256 to
    269 of the Appellant's bundle).

13.  Furthermore,  there  was  independent  evidence  indicating  that  the
    Appellant had been placed into a children's home, foster care, and then
    into the Sponsor's mother's care at various points in  the  Appellant's
    young life.  Social sciences had been involved and there  was  evidence
    from  lawyers  representing  the  Sponsor  with  regard   to   previous
    applications.

14. In the circumstances, it could not be inferred from these  facts,  that
    there had been a planned contrivance at the outset, whereby the  mother
    would simply give up her parental responsibility for the caring of  her
    child, just in order to satisfy the Immigration  Rules,  whereupon  the
    sponsoring father could then have her come to the UK.

15. Mr Karnik also argued that the Sponsor was in  a  position  to  provide
    proper care for the Appellant.  He  rented  property  with  his  family
    members and was in a  good  position  to  accommodate  and  financially
    maintain the Appellant in the UK without recourse to public funds  (see
    pages 243 to 254 of the Appellant's bundle).  The Sponsor was  also  in
    regular contact with the Appellant's daughter by way of Skype and  this
    was evidenced at pages 126 to 170 of the Appellant's bundle,  and  that
    there was also mobile  call  evidence  at  pages  222  to  242  of  the
    Appellant's bundle.  There was evidence of money  transactions  to  the
    Appellant from the Sponsor at pages  171  to  214  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle.

16. Mr Karnik also went on to say that the judge had  conspicuously  failed
    to  give  regard  to  essential  documentary  evidence  that  had  been
    furnished before the Tribunal.  For example, there was  a  letter  from
    the Appellant's father (at page 106 of the bundle), dated 16th November
    2017, and this explains the background to the neglect of the Appellant,
    and the various efforts being made to provide  her  with  a  degree  of
    stability at home.  This was not referred to by the judge.

17. In the same way, there is a letter from Arthur [C] (at page 108)  dated
    16th November 2017, and this is from the family members,  and  observes
    how in June 2010 they came to the UK:

         "In preparation for the rest of the family's arrival.   I  left  my
         two children in my mother's care and Bobby [C] done the  same  with
         [PK].  Our intention was for it never to be long.  Once  Bobby  [C]
         and I were staying in the UK we set about applying for visas for my
         two children ..." (paragraph 3).

18. What Mr Karnik submitted was that  this  showed  that  a  similar,  and
    entirely genuine foundation had been  laid  by  somebody  else  in  the
    family, to bring their children over to the UK, and they had  succeeded
    in doing so, whereas the Appellant's sponsoring father  had  failed  in
    his attempts, and this was not say that there was  any  contrivance  at
    all in what was being done.

19. My attention was also drawn to a Gmail trail,  which  culminated  in  a
    rather anxious and desperate plea from the  Appellant's  father,  Bobby
    [C], to the Department of Home  Affairs  in  Sri  Lanka,  requiring  to
    provide an unabridged birth certificate for his Appellant daughter.  He
    states, "I have exhausted all means possible in trying to acquire  this
    document as I have been waiting for over five  years  to  finalise  the
    application".  He goes on to say that, "I am currently residing in  the
    United Kingdom of England and had therefore had Home  Affairs  official
    from  the  South  African  High  Commission  in  London  to  sign   and
    officialise the B1 - 1682 application form for  insertion  of  father's
    details".  He ends by saying, "I am duly requesting the  completion  of
    this document as soon as possible" (page 673).

20. Mr Karnik went on to say that there were no less  than  three  sets  of
    court proceedings, and all had ended up in  favour  of  the  sponsoring
    father.  This is a High Court order in relation to the Appellant child,
    confirming that custody is to be given to the  sponsoring  father,  but
    that the Appellant's mother is to have visitation rights, to the extent
    that the sponsoring father is to pay for the Appellant  child  to  come
    from England to South Africa for each school holiday, so  as  to  spend
    time in South Africa, and to meet with her mother (page 91).

21. Mr Karnik ended by saying that even if there was "contrivance"  in  the
    way suggested by the judge in this case, so as to ensure  that  custody
    was to be given to the sponsoring father and visitation rights only  to
    the mother, the plain fact was that under the legal terms of  the  High
    Court  order,   the   mother   could   not   actually   exercise   sole
    responsibility, in the form of giving  control  and  direction  to  the
    child's life, because that was a  matter  that  was  reserved  for  the
    sponsoring father in the UK.

22. In the circumstances, it was wrong for the judge to say that there  was
    a shared responsibility between the sponsoring mother and  the  father.
    Whatever may have  been  the  position  in  earlier  years,  after  the
    sponsoring father left South Africa in 2010, and then  the  grandmother
    left in 2011, it had been the sponsoring father who  had  been  looking
    after the Appellant child.  In point of fact,  there  was  no  evidence
    whatsoever that decisions were  made  jointly  between  the  sponsoring
    father and the mother.  On the other hand, there was clear evidence  to
    the contrary, not least in the form of a court order.  The evidence  on
    other deponents to the hearing all confirmed that the daughter  was  no
    longer living with the mother.

23. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that  the  judge  was  right  to  have
    concluded that the credibility of the witnesses was in issue.   He  was
    right to have concluded that they had contrived, by virtue of  a  court
    order in April 2016, to create  a  situation,  whereby  the  appearance
    would be given of the mother having abandoned  the  child.   There  was
    evidence of contrivance  even  in  the  documentation  that  Mr  Karnik
    referred to.  For example, the letter of 15th November  2017  by  Brian
    [C], (page 106) makes it quite clear that  the  Appellant  child  lived
    with them "until we migrated to the United Kingdom in 2011.   At  which
    point Bobby [C] arranged for the child to live with  her  mother  on  a
    temporary basis while he applied for her unabridged birth certificate".



24. Plainly, submitted Mr Bates, much was being done behind the  scenes  to
    create a situation, the ultimate aim of which  was  to  facilitate  the
    entry  of  the  Appellant  to  the  United  Kingdom,  including  making
    arrangements for the Appellant to live with her mother when  it  suited
    the parties to do so.

25. Furthermore, what was perhaps most important, however, was  that  under
    the decision in TD (Paragraph 297(1)(e): "sole  responsibility")  Yemen
    [2006] UKAIT 00049, it was stated  that  "sole  responsibility"  was  a
    factual matter to be decided on all the evidence.  The test was whether
    a  parent  had  continuing  control  and  direction  of   the   child's
    upbringing.  However, it was also made clear that where one  parent  is
    not involved in a child's upbringing, because he or she  has  abandoned
    responsibility, the issue may arise between the  remaining  parent  and
    others who have day-to-day care  of  the  child.   Nevertheless,  where
    there were both parents  present,  it  would  be  only  in  exceptional
    circumstance that sole responsibility could be said not  to  have  been
    shared between two parents.  If the father had had  sole  responsivity,
    it did not make sense why it would have taken him such a long  time  to
    get an unabridged birth certificate for his child.

26. In reply, Mr Karnik submitted  that  there  were  large  parts  of  the
    evidence in respect of which no recent decision had  been  given.   The
    Appellant was currently living  with  Dr  M  G  Holland,  who  was  the
    family's long-time regular medical physician, and he has explained  how
    there has been difficulty in the child's upbringing, such that  it  has
    required various  arrangements  to  be  made,  at  the  behest  of  the
    sponsoring father, and all of this showed that the Sponsor was entirely
    credible in what he was stating.

27. The judge had failed once again to refer to the  letter  from  Dr  M  G
    Holland, just as he had failed to give adequate attention to the  email
    trail, demonstrating the sponsoring father's frustration in failing  to
    precure a timeous unabridged birth certificate, as he had  been  aiming
    to do for no less than five years.

Error of Law

28. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

29. First, there is the question of the background evidence.  The judge has
    taken the  view  that  there  was  a  contrivance  here  to  circumvent
    paragraph 297 of HC 395, so as to show that the  sponsoring  father  in
    the UK had exercised  sole  responsibility  for  the  Appellant  child.
    Unfortunately, the basis of this decision is very  much  predicated  on
    the sponsoring father having left his child in 2011 to come to the  UK,
    and the judge has taken the view that there would  be  no  family  life
    between the Appellant and the father who had abandoned her by moving to
    the United Kingdom.  This cannot be right.  The evidence certainly does
    not show that the  sponsoring  father  had  "abandoned"  the  Appellant
    child.

30. Given this initial mistake as to fact,  the  determination  of  whether
    there had been "sole responsibility" by the  sponsoring  father  as  of
    2011, has not been properly determined.  The sponsoring father does not
    have to show that he has always had sole responsibility for his  child.
    He needs only show that at the date of the decision  he  was  a  person
    exercising such responsibility.

31. The background evidence is properly  described  in  the  letter  of  Dr
    Holland (at page 125) which the judge does not set out, where he  makes
    it clear that the Appellant's sponsoring mother has been a professional
    musician (vocalist) who has been aspiring to  establish  herself  in  a
    very competitive profession.  Her working hours have been such that she
    has not been able to devote proper attention to the Appellant child  in
    this case.

32. As a solution to this, the Appellant had been given to the  care  of  a
    family friend, Violet [V], and this was  an  arrangement  made  by  the
    sponsoring father.  The care provided by "Violet  cannot  be  faulted".
    However, as the child is growing up she  would  benefit  from  "a  more
    wholesome family oriented environment" and this  environment  would  be
    "most certainly provided by her father and grandparents in the UK".  Dr
    Holland states that "the child's mother is willing" to give the child's
    "custody to her father ...".  Precisely what the circumstances were  of
    the Appellant's mother, in the way that they have been set  out  by  Dr
    Holland, have not been referred to by the judge, before the  conclusion
    was reached as to whether the mother is  providing  continuing  control
    and direction to this child on  a  shared  basis  with  her  sponsoring
    husband in the UK.

33. Second, the email trail, that Mr Karnik has brought  to  my  attention,
    plainly demonstrates the frustration and anxious efforts  made  by  the
    sponsoring father, over  a  period  of  some  five  years,  to  get  an
    unabridged  birth  certificate  for  the  Appellant  child,  and   this
    evidence, plainly goes to an important link between the  father  and  a
    daughter, in a way in which appears to have been wrongly discounted  by
    the judge below.

34. Third, the judge does not  take  cognisance  of  the  Appellant's  full
    position in South Africa, in the way that it  is  set  out  in  various
    testimonial letters provided by those associated  with  the  sponsoring
    father in the Appellant's bundle.

35. Fourth, although the judge states, after  the  Appellant's  father  had
    left South Africa in 2010, he left "his daughter alone with her mother"
    (paragraph 27(g)), this was not strictly correct, because the child was
    left in  the  family  household  consisting  of  the  grandmother,  the
    grandfather, other children, as well as the Appellant's mother.

36. In any event, it is not correct to say that  the  Appellant's  father's
    decision to come to the UK "due to concerns  about  his  own  security"
    were such that "it is incredible that he would leave his daughter alone
    with her mother" (paragraph 27(d)).

Notice of Decision

37. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside (see Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007).  I set aside the decision of the original judge.  I  remake  the
    decision as follows.  This appeal is remitted back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be determined by a judge other than Judge Durance  pursuant
    to Practice Statement 7.2.(b) because  the  nature  or  extent  of  any
    judicial fact-finding which is necessary in order for the decision  and
    the appeal to be remade as such that, having regard to  the  overriding
    objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

38. An anonymity order is made.

39. The appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 4th January 2019






