
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
HU/21589/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 November 2018                      |On 20 December 2018               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                Mr lei jiang
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Richardson, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This was initially the appeal of Mr Jiang against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State of 3 September 2016  refusing  his  application  for
    leave to remain under the ten-year route.  There were two  reasons  for
    refusal in relation to that, one was that it was contended that he  had
    submitted a false TOEIC certificate from ETS and also that he  had  not
    completed ten years' lawful residence in the  United  Kingdom  by  that
    time so it was refused on that basis.  He appealed to a  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal who allowed his appeal  on  human  rights  grounds.
    The judge found that the ETS allegation  was  not  made  out  and  also
    concluded at paragraph 14 that he satisfied the other  requirements  of
    the ten-year Rule and therefore the appeal succeeded.

2.   The hearing before the judge was in January 2018  and  I  think  it  is
    common ground that the ten years was completed  in  August  2017.   The
    Secretary of State appealed the decision on the basis first in relation
    to the TOEIC point where I found at the error of law hearing there  was
    no error of law and secondly in relation to  the  failure  to  consider
    proportionality properly.  The reason for  finding  an  error  of  law,
    which may have seemed to the  appellant  to  be  a  somewhat  technical
    reason but it seemed to me a proper reason for finding an error of  law
    was the equation of success under the Immigration Rules with success in
    a human rights appeal.  As I said at paragraph 20 it is unlikely to  be
    the case and not so in this particular case that all that needs  to  be
    said about human rights is success under the Immigration Rules.

3.   We now have the decision of the Court of Appeal in TZ (Pakistan)  which
    seems to take matters  further  on  and  I  will  read  from  that  the
    quotation at paragraph 34 which Mr Richardson read out earlier:

         "Where a person satisfies the Rules, whether or not by reference to
         an Article 8 informed requirement, then  this  will  be  positively
         determinative of that person's Article 8 appeal provided their case
         engages Article 8(1) for the very reason  that  it  would  then  be
         disproportionate for that person to be removed."

4.   So, that in a sense takes out the step that I thought was  a  necessary
    one at paragraph 20.  The  reasons  for  refusal  as  I  say  had  both
    essentially been disposed of the TOEIC point, the ETS point and the ten
    years point and in light of what was said by the Court of Appeal in  TZ
    (Pakistan) it seems clear to me, bearing in mind the further point that
    the appellant has been in the  United  Kingdom  for  eleven  years  and
    clearly has a private life and it seems that he may have had  a  family
    life also, that Article 8(1) is clearly engaged and as a consequence of
    his success in meeting the requirements of the  Rules  it  must  follow
    that the proportionality balance falls on his side  and  therefore  the
    appeal falls to be allowed under Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 7 December 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
