
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21351/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 7 October 2019                   |On 15 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          praise kottekudy paulose
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Kannangara, instructed by Wise Legal Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  Mr  Paulose's
    appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse his application  for
    indefinite leave to remain and his human rights claim.

 2. For the purposes of this decision, I shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent and Mr Paulose as  the  appellant,
    reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 2 July 1988. He arrived  in
    the UK on 21 May 2008 with entry clearance as a student valid until  31
    December 2010. On 17 December 2010 he applied for leave to remain as  a
    Tier 4 student. His application was refused,  an  appeal  against  that
    decision was allowed  and  his  Tier  4  application  was  subsequently
    reconsidered and refused again on 16 July 2015. An appeal against  that
    decision was dismissed and the appellant became appeal rights exhausted
    on 13 October 2017.

 4. On 27 October 2017 the appellant applied, fourteen days  out  of  time,
    for leave to remain on the basis of his family and private life.  On  4
    April 2018 he applied to vary that application to  an  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of ten years' long residence.

 5. The  appellant's  application  was  refused  on  5  October  2018.  The
    respondent considered that the appellant did not have  valid  leave  at
    the time he made his application for indefinite  leave  to  remain  and
    that his continuous residence was broken on 13  October  2017  when  he
    became appeal  rights  exhausted.  He  therefore  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements for ten years' continuous lawful residence under paragraph
    276B(i) of the immigration rules. The respondent noted with  regard  to
    Appendix FM that, although the appellant had mentioned a girlfriend  in
    his application of 27 October 2017, he had  provided  only  unsupported
    photographs as evidence and no other evidence of a relationship and  he
    had made no mention of a partner in  his  settlement  application.  The
    respondent considered that the appellant did not meet the  requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE(1) and that there were no exceptional circumstances
    justifying a grant of leave outside the immigration rules.

 6. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal  was  heard
    in the First-tier Tribunal on 17 May 2019 by Judge Munonyedi. The judge
    considered that paragraph 39E of  the  immigration  rules  applied  and
    that, accordingly, as the appellant had  made  his  application  within
    fourteen days of his leave expiring, his application was considered  as
    having  been  made  in  time  and  he  was  able  to  comply  with  the
    requirements of paragraph 276B. On that basis his removal from  the  UK
    would be disproportionate and in breach of Article 8. The judge allowed
    the appeal on human rights grounds.

 7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the respondent
    on the grounds that  the  judge  had  erred  by  considering  that  the
    appellant had made his application in time and that, in accordance with
    the case of Ahmed, R (on the application of) v The Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 1070, he could not  demonstrate
    ten years of continuous lawful residence. The  judge's  proportionality
    assessment was infected by the incorrect finding that the appellant met
    the requirements of the immigration  rules  and  there  was  no  proper
    assessment of proportionality.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted in the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    decision to that effect was sent to the appellant on 5 September  2019,
    together with the standard directions  from  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The
    matter then came before me for a hearing.

 9. Mr Clarke relied upon the decision in  Ahmed  in  submitting  that  the
    judge was wrong to find that the appellant met the requirements of  the
    immigration rules.

10. Mr Kannangara accepted that he was bound by Ahmed  but  submitted  that
    the judge was not at fault as the judgment in that case post-dated  the
    hearing before her. In the event  that  an  error  of  law  was  found,
    however, he asked that the case be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for the appellant's Article 8 claim to be considered.

11. I reminded Mr Kannagara of the Upper Tribunal  directions  issued  with
    the grant of permission and the presumption that the decision would  be
    re-made at the same  hearing.  I  asked  for  clarification  about  the
    evidence  in  support  of  the  appellant's  human  rights  claim.   Mr
    Kannangara confirmed that  the  only  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was the appellant's statement of 13 May 2019, that he  had  no
    further evidence or  instructions  from  the  appellant  and  that  the
    appellant was not present to give oral  evidence.  He  had  no  further
    submissions to make in the event that the decision was to be re-made by
    myself, but he repeated his request that the case be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal as the appellant had previously been  pursuing  his
    appeal on the basis of  the  long  residence  grounds.  Mr  Clarke  was
    content for me to re-make the decision on the  basis  of  the  evidence
    available.



Discussion and Conclusions

12. Whether or not the case of Ahmed was before the judge at  the  hearing,
    it pre-dated the date of her decision and was relevant to her decision-
    making. In any event the judge was  clearly  wrong  to  find  that  the
    appellant met the requirements of  paragraph  276B  on  long  residence
    grounds, for the reasons given by the Court of Appeal. The  appellant's
    continuous lawful residence ended on 13 October  2017  when  he  became
    appeal rights exhausted. Paragraph 39E of the immigration rules did not
    operate so as to make the appellant's fourteen days of overstaying into
    lawful  residence,  as  the  judge  wrongly  believed  that   it   did.
    Accordingly, from entering the UK on 21 May 2008 until the end  of  his
    leave on 13 October 2017 the appellant had not accumulated ten years of
    continuous lawful residence and  could  not  meet  the  long  residence
    requirements in paragraph 276B. The judge did not go on to consider the
    appellant's family and  private  life  since  she  concluded  that  the
    immigration rules had been  met  and  therefore  there  was  no  public
    interest in removing him from the UK. That conclusion, and the  Article
    8 assessment, were therefore plainly flawed and  the  judge's  decision
    has to be set aside.

13. I do not agree with Mr Kannangara that the matter ought to be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal to enable the appellant  to  re-present  his
    Article 8 claim. There is no evidence to  suggest  that  there  is  any
    further meaningful fact-finding to be made in the appellant's  case  so
    as to justify  such  a  course.  The  only  evidence  produced  by  the
    appellant before the First-tier Tribunal, just five months ago,  was  a
    witness statement which he adopted as his oral evidence. The statement,
    dated 13 May 2019, referred to a relationship with a partner but  there
    were no details and no accompanying evidence,  despite  the  respondent
    noting the absence of  such  evidence  in  the  refusal  decision.  The
    appellant mentioned his private life in  his  statement,  but  only  in
    vague terms, referring to family and friends who were  supportive.  The
    appellant did not seek to adduce any further evidence for  the  hearing
    before me, despite the directions issued with the grant  of  permission
    expressly stating that there was a presumption that  the  re-making  of
    the decision would take place at  the  same  hearing  and  inviting  an
    application  under  Rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 for further evidence to be admitted. Mr Kannangara
    had no instructions from the appellant about  further  evidence  to  be
    submitted and the suggestion that there may be a case to present to the
    First-tier Tribunal was purely  speculative.  As  for  Mr  Kannangara's
    submission that the appellant had previously  only  been  relying  upon
    paragraph 276B and had therefore  not  submitted  further  evidence  in
    relation to his Article 8 claim, that cannot be correct as  the  appeal
    was  against  the  respondent's  decision  of  5  October  2018   which
    considered   Appendix   FM,   paragraph   276ADE(1)   and   exceptional
    circumstances outside the immigration rules and  indeed  the  appellant
    addressed those issues in his grounds of appeal and statement.

14. In all the circumstances I see no reason for the matter to be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal and no reason why I am not able  to  re-make
    the decision myself.

15. There is no evidence of any relationship which meets  the  requirements
    of Appendix FM and there is nothing  to  suggest  that  there  are  any
    obstacles to the appellant's integration in India for the  purposes  of
    paragraph  276ADE(1)  and  certainly  no  very  significant  obstacles.
    Neither is there any evidence of compelling circumstances justifying  a
    grant of leave outside the immigration rules. The appellant has had  no
    leave to remain in the UK since 13 October 2017 and there is no  reason
    why he cannot return to India and re-establish his private life in that
    country.  His claim in regard to his relationship is vague and  without
    any detail and no reason has been offered as  to  why  that  could  not
    continue in India or why an entry clearance application  could  not  be
    made if the relationship develops in the future.  The  public  interest
    factors in section 117B of the Immigration, Nationality and Asylum  Act
    2002 do not apply  in  the  appellant's  favour  and  the  respondent's
    decision is plainly a proportionate one. The decision does  not  breach
    the appellant's Article 8 rights and his appeal against the refusal  of
    his human rights claim is accordingly dismissed.



DECISION

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an error
    on a point of law. The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is  accordingly
    allowed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. I re-
    make the decision by dismissing Mr Paulose's appeal.


Signed:  [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 7 October 2019
