
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/21408/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 28th June 2021                       |                              |
|                                            |On the 5th July 2021          |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     ak
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent



    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant
    or members of her family. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
    all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise
    to contempt of court proceedings.



Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr R Sharma, Counsel, instructed by Visa Legal
For the respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. This is the re-making of the decision  in  this  appeal  following  the
    decision of a panel  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Upper  Tribunal  Judges
    Kopieczek and Norton-Taylor), promulgated on 28 February 2020, by which
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  found  to  have  contained
    errors of law and was accordingly set aside. The error of law  decision
    is appended to this re-making decision.

 2. This appeal concerns a citizen of Cote  d'Ivoire,  born  in  2007,  who
    applied for entry clearance in July 2018 to join her mother, Ms K  (the
    sponsor) in the United Kingdom.  That  application  was  predicated  on
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules (the Rules) and was  treated  by
    the respondent as a human rights claim. The  claim  was  refused  by  a
    decision dated 20 September 2018. It was not accepted that the  sponsor
    had sole responsibility for the  appellant's  upbringing,  nor  was  it
    accepted that  there  were  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations making the exclusion of the  appellant  undesirable.  No
    other aspects of paragraph 297 of the Rules were disputed.

 3. In brief summary, the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing
    the appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal  of  the  human
    rights claim was set aside because the  judge  failed  to  take  proper
    account of medical evidence relating to the  appellant's  grandmother's
    state of health. This error had a material bearing  on  both  the  sole
    responsibility and serious and compelling reasons issues. A finding  of
    fact that the sponsor had been in regular contact  with  the  appellant
    was preserved.



The evidence

 4. At this re-making stage of proceedings,  I  have  been  provided  by  a
    bundle from the appellant, indexed and paginated 1-106  (this  includes
    the insertion of an additional items of evidence extracted from an  old
    the bundle), together with evidence provided with  the  original  human
    rights claim, and the respondent's refusal of that claim.

 5. Although it had been contemplated that oral  evidence  might  be  taken
    from a number of individuals, in the event only  the  sponsor  attended
    the hearing. A full note of her  oral  evidence  is  contained  in  the
    record of proceedings. In essence, she answered questions  relating  to
    her involvement in the appellant's upbringing over the course of  time,
    and explanation why her brother had been named on the appellant's birth
    certificate, and the appellant's current living arrangements  in  light
    of the grandmother's deteriorating health.



Findings and conclusions

 6. I can set out my findings and conclusions in this appeal briefly.  This
    is because, having considered the documentary evidence  and  heard  the
    sponsor's oral evidence, Mr Lindsay accepted the following:

          a) that the DNA report proved that Mr KFK (the sponsor's brother)
             was not the appellant's father;




          b) that the sponsor had given clear and credible evidence on  all
             relevant issues;


          c) that there were no outstanding concerns  on  the  respondent's
             part;


          d) that all constituent elements of paragraph 297  of  the  Rules
             were satisfied; and


          e) that the appeal should be allowed.

 7. I have  no  hesitation  in  concluding  that  Mr  Lindsay's  considered
    concessions were properly made, having regard  to  the  evidence  as  a
    whole. Whilst there had indeed been a number of  controversial  matters
    in the lead up to the resumed hearing, the DNA report,  other  evidence
    contained in the appellant's bundle, and the sponsor's compelling  oral
    evidence, were  in  my  judgment  clearly  sufficient  under  paragraph
    297(i)(e) of the Rules, as  regards  sole  responsibility.  By  way  of
    example, the sponsor had clearly articulated her directing role in  all
    matters going to the  core  of  the  appellant's  upbringing,  such  as
    education and health, and her explanation for why her brother had  been
    named on the birth certificate was consistent and plausible.

 8. Therefore, I find that the appellant's biological father has played  no
    role in her life whatsoever, that  the  sponsor  has  indeed  had  sole
    responsibility for the appellant's upbringing throughout, and that  all
    other criteria under paragraph 297 of the Rules are satisfied.

 9. It follows from this, and in light of TZ  (Pakistan)  [2018]  EWCA  Civ
    1109, that the respondent's refusal of  the  appellant's  human  rights
    claim constitutes a disproportionate interference with the family  life
    enjoyed with the sponsor, and that the refusal  is  therefore  unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

10. The appellant's appeal is accordingly allowed.

11. I wish to add a further  comment  on  Mr  Lindsay's  approach  in  this
    appeal. It is in my view highly commendable on his part to have adopted
    the position that he did. His  cross-examination  of  the  sponsor  was
    entirely appropriate and was directed at  the  matters  of  outstanding
    controversy  between  the  parties.  He  quite  clearly  absorbed   and
    considered the sponsor's responses and placed these in the  context  of
    the documentary evidence as a whole. Fair and realistic positions taken
    by representatives are always appreciated by the Upper Tribunal.



Anonymity


12. Given that the appellant is still a child, it is appropriate to
    maintain the anonymity direction made when this appeal was at the error
    of law stage.



Notice of Decision

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law and that  decision  has  been  set
    aside.

14. I re-make the decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.



Signed: H Norton-Taylor                 Date:  29 June 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make a reduced  fee
award of �70.00. Whilst the appellant has succeeded in her  appeal,  certain
aspects of the case have required  the  consideration  of  evidence  is  not
provided to the respondent when the  application  for  entry  clearance  was
made.

Signed: H Norton-Taylor                      Date:  29 June 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


APPENDIX: THE ERROR OF LAW DECISION


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/21408/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated          |
|On 14 February 2020                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |................              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     A k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, Counsel instructed by Visa Legal
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Cote d'Ivoire born in 2007.   On  2  July
    2018 she made an application for entry clearance as a dependent  child.
    On 20 September 2018 that application was  refused  with  reference  to
    paragraph  297(i)(e)  and  (f)   of   the   Immigration   Rules   (sole
    responsibility   and   serious   and   compelling   family   or   other
    considerations).  In addition, the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not
    satisfied as to the relationship between the appellant and the sponsor,
    PK, her mother.  The application was also  refused  with  reference  to
    paragraph  A39  of  the  Immigration  Rules  because  an  approved   TB
    certificate was not provided.

 2. On review by the Entry Clearance Manager, the refusal  in  relation  to
    the TB certificate was withdrawn.

 3. The appellant appealed against the decision to refuse  entry  clearance
    and her appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kimnell  ("the
    FtJ") at a hearing on 26 July 2019. In the light of  DNA  evidence,  at
    the hearing before the FtJ the relationship between the  appellant  and
    the sponsor was no longer contested and that  matter  was  resolved  in
    favour of the appellant.

    The FtJ's decision

 4. The FtJ summarised the evidence given by the sponsor. She said that  it
    was her brother's name on the  appellant's  birth  certificate  (rather
    than the appellant's father's).  That was because the sponsor  did  not
    know the whereabouts of the appellant's real father (Jacque) and it was
    a requirement in Cote d'Ivoire for the father's name to be given on the
    birth certificate.  Hence the sponsor's brother, KFK, was named as  the
    father.  The FtJ noted that although KFK was present in the UK  he  did
    not attend the hearing to give evidence.

 5. The sponsor's evidence was that the appellant's  grandmother  had  been
    acting as guardian under a formal arrangement and money had  been  sent
    to support the appellant.  It was her mother who had day-to-day care of
    the appellant but she had now fallen ill and was  unable  to  care  for
    her.

 6. The FtJ referred to two documents dated 23  April  2018  in  which  the
    sponsor  and  KFK  are  named  as  parents,  delegating   the   rights,
    obligations and interests in the appellant to her grandmother, in terms
    of  custody,  care,  instruction,  education,  supervision  and   legal
    administration.  A second document of  the  same  date  refers  to  the
    sponsor's responsibility for the appellant.  The FtJ also  referred  to
    the evidence that KFK's name as the  appellant's  father  is  given  in
    school documents, the explanation being that this was  taken  from  the
    birth certificate.  The FtJ noted that there was  no  DNA  evidence  in
    relation to KFK.

 7. There was evidence of money having been sent by the  sponsor  for  rent
    and support, both for the appellant and her grandmother.   The  sponsor
    also said that she helped her brother who assisted with the appellant's
    care when not studying.  However, he had returned  to  school  as  from
    September 2018.  The sponsor's evidence was that she was last  in  Cote
    d'Ivoire in 2017 and had returned twice since coming to  the  UK.   She
    came to the UK as a spouse but that relationship was now finished.

 8. In his conclusions, the FtJ said that the issue of paternity was  "very
    murky", noting that there  was  no  DNA  test  to  provide  independent
    evidence as to the true relationship between KFK and the appellant, but
    again noting that he did not attend the  hearing  to  give  any  direct
    evidence on the point.

 9. The FtJ found that the explanation for KFK  being  on  the  appellant's
    birth certificate as the father was "unpersuasive".  He said that there
    was no evidence to establish that it was a legal  requirement  in  Cote
    d'Ivoire to nominate a father on the birth  certificate,  much  less  a
    person who is not in truth the father of the  child  in  question.   He
    found that it would have  been  possible  to  nominate  Jacque  as  the
    father, since that is who is said to be the real father.

10. He went on to find that it was not possible on  the  evidence  to  find
    that KFK was the appellant's father and he could not, therefore, make a
    finding that both parents are present and settled in the UK.  He  found
    it more likely that the  appellant's  father  remains  living  in  Cote
    d'Ivoire.

11. He decided that  given  the  production  of  false  information  in  an
    official document, that is the birth certificate, it was  difficult  to
    accept other parts of the sponsor's evidence unless supported  by  some
    reliable independent document or other material.

12. Nevertheless, he concluded that it was more probable than not that  the
    father, whoever he may be, has  not  played  much  of  a  role  in  the
    appellant's upbringing because one of the documents dated 23 April 2018
    from the Office of the Guardianship Judge clearly states that it is the
    grandmother who has custody and care  of  the  appellant  and  who  has
    provided for her education and so forth.

13. The FtJ accepted that the sponsor had  been  in  regular  communication
    with the appellant and that she had provided monetary support.   Noting
    the sponsor's contention that she has had sole responsibility  and  had
    always taken the major decisions in her daughter's life, he  said  that
    she plainly knew that one of the requirements of the  Rules  was  'sole
    responsibility', she having said as much in  her  closing  submissions.
    However, he found that the evidence did not support that contention.

14. He concluded that the evidence is clearly that she  has  not  had  sole
    responsibility and that the appellant's grandmother over  the  last  10
    years  has  had  more  responsibility  for  the  appellant's  care  and
    direction of her life than the sponsor in the United Kingdom, who  left
    her daughter when she was only 8 months old.

15. He found that the evidence of the second document dated 23  April  2018
    from the Office of the Guardianship Judge was "highly  unsatisfactory".
    Both documents, he observed,  were  made  long  after  the  appellant's
    grandmother took  responsibility  for  her  upbringing  and  were  thus
    somewhat in conflict.  Referring  to  the  decision  in  TD  (Paragraph
    297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006]  UKAIT  00049,  the  FtJ
    concluded that the appellant had failed to show that  the  sponsor  had
    had sole responsibility as explained in TD.

16. Referring to paragraph 297(i)(f)  (serious  and  compelling  family  or
    other considerations  making  the  child's  exclusion  undesirable)  he
    referred to evidence that the appellant's grandmother was unwell.   The
    evidence he referred to is a medical certificate dated 25 October  2017
    which states that the appellant's grandmother had been  suffering  from
    bile infection with spontaneous  fits,  since  19  October  2017.   The
    certificate confirmed that she had viral hepatitis with  decompensating
    anaemia and yellowing of the extremities.  At that time, she  was  said
    to be unable to work  for  an  indeterminate  period  until  completely
    cured.

17. The FtJ  noted  the  sponsor's  evidence  that  the  medical  situation
    remained  unchanged.   However,  the  FtJ  concluded  that  given   the
    sponsor's unreliability as a witness he was unable to accept the  truth
    of that assertion without  further  medical  evidence  from  a  medical
    practitioner in Cote d'Ivoire.  In any event, he said that the  sponsor
    had not been present in Cote d'Ivoire over recent months and thus could
    give no direct evidence on the point because  of  a  lack  of  personal
    knowledge.  He also pointed out that there was a full-time paid servant
    living in the house and the appellant's  grandmother  was  sufficiently
    recovered  to  enable  the  appellant's  brother,  who   was   offering
    assistance, to return to his  studies.   He  thus  concluded  that  the
    appellant  had  not  established  that  she  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297(i)(f).

18. In relation to Article 8 of the ECHR, he found that  there  was  family
    life  between  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor   because   they   are
    biologically mother and daughter.  He also accepted  that  because  the
    sponsor had sent money from the UK and communication had  taken  place,
    there was a bond of dependency and affection.

19. Nevertheless, he pointed out that since leaving in 2008 the sponsor had
    returned to Cote d'Ivoire only twice to see the appellant who was  left
    in the care of her grandmother at the age of only 8 months.   He  found
    that the appellant has a  very  strong  family  relationship  with  her
    grandmother as well as with the sponsor.

20. In summary, he concluded that  there  were  not  "sufficiently  serious
    consequences" arising from the decision to refuse entry clearance  such
    as to engage Article 8. The appellant would  remain  in  Cote  d'Ivoire
    being brought up by the person who has had sole responsibility for  her
    care  and  upbringing  since  she  was   8   months   old.    Even   if
    proportionality did need to be assessed, he found  that  the  appellant
    coming to the UK would disrupt her  life  significantly,  removing  her
    from the home in which she has had a stable upbringing since the age of
    8 months, and removing her from the care of  her  grandmother  who  has
    been her de facto parent.  Her maintenance, accommodation and education
    would continue.  Bearing in mind the legitimate aim of the  maintenance
    and enforcement of immigration control in  the  public  interest,  that
    being  a  weighty  factor,  the  decision   did   not   amount   to   a
    disproportionate interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights.

    The Grounds of Appeal

21. The grounds in relation to the FtJ's decision, in summary, contend that
    his conclusions in relation to sole responsibility fail  to  understand
    the cultural issues surrounding the need for the name of  a  father  on
    the birth certificate in Cote d'Ivoire.  He  thus  failed  properly  to
    assess the evidence in relation to why  the  sponsor's  brother's  name
    appeared on certain documents as the appellant's father, in  particular
    the birth certificate.

22. It is also argued that the FtJ failed to  place  "due  weight"  on  the
    sponsor's financial contributions towards  the  appellant's  care  when
    determining the issue of sole responsibility.

23. It is further contended that the FtJ misunderstood the documents  dated
    23 April 2018 in concluding that those documents from the Office of the
    Guardianship Judge were in conflict with one another.

24. As regards  the  issue  of  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations, the grounds argue that the FtJ failed to have regard to
    the full extent of the medical evidence.  He  had  only  mentioned  the
    medical certificate dated 25 October 2017 but did  not  consider  later
    medical evidence dated 4 October 2018 which referred to, amongst  other
    things, the  appellant's  grandmother  suffering  from  a  neurological
    condition described as a Meningeal Syndrome caused  by  a  subarachnoid
    haemorrhage.  Thus, the FtJ had not assessed the issue of  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations in the  context  of  all  the
    evidence as to the seriousness of her condition.

25. The grounds also take issue with the FtJ's conclusions in  relation  to
    Article 8 in terms of the best interests of the appellant.

    Assessment and Conclusions

26. At the hearing before us, Mr Jarvis accepted that the FtJ had failed to
    take into account the full range of medical evidence in relation to the
    appellant's grandmother's health.  It was further  accepted  that  this
    amounted to a material error of law requiring the decision  to  be  set
    aside.  Although  primarily  relating  to  the  issue  of  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations, it  was  accepted  that  the
    error of law had a potential impact on the issue of sole responsibility
    and thus the FtJ's findings on both issues could not stand. However, it
    was not conceded that in a re-making of the decision the appeal  should
    be allowed.

27. Whilst the FtJ's decision otherwise constitutes a detailed and thorough
    assessment of the evidence, we agree that the  decision  is  marred  by
    error of law in its failure to consider all the medical  evidence  that
    was before the FtJ.  In addition to the medical report to which the FtJ
    referred there is a report dated 4 October 2018 which states  that  the
    appellant's grandmother suffers from a neurological condition and  that
    she has suffered from severe headaches for  a  number  of  years.   Her
    neurological history is said to date to 4 October 2018 and  is  "marked
    by left hemicranias associated with a right-sided hemicorporal  deficit
    with aphasia.  The brain scan  shows  intracranial  suppuration".   The
    report continues in stating that she was hospitalised from 19 September
    2018 with a left frontal abscess associated  with  a  frontal  subdural
    empyema.  In April 2018 there was an  abrupt  recurrence  of  headaches
    associated with  grand  mal  epileptic  seizures  and  the  examination
    revealed "discreet meningeal syndrome  with  no  sign  of  localisation
    deficit suggesting  a  subarachnoid  haemorrhage  confirmed  by  lumbar
    puncture".  The report states that her very impaired general  condition
    meant that there was an indefinite total incapacity for work.

28. A further report of the same date refers to her suffering from discreet
    meningeal syndrome such that she is unstable and  does  not  understand
    the  meaning  of  questions  and  that  this  is  associated   with   a
    neurological  condition.   The  report  continues  that  her  condition
    requires immediate care accompanied  by  constant  surveillance  in  an
    authorised hospital.

29.  All  the  medical  reports  are  both  in  the  appellant's  and   the
    respondent's bundles.

30. In the light of the respondent's concession as to the error of law, and
    our own assessment of the FtJ's decision in that context,  we  conclude
    that the decision must be set aside and re-made.  We  do  not  consider
    that it is appropriate for the appeal to be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal, having regard to the Senior President's Practice Statement at
    paragraph 7.2.

31. For the avoidance of doubt, we should say that we do not consider  that
    there is any merit in the complaint about the FtJ having failed to take
    into account cultural issues in relation the appellant's  uncle's  name
    being on her birth certificate.  The FtJ was right to point  out  there
    was no  evidence  to  support  the  contention  that  it  was  a  legal
    requirement to nominate a father on  the  birth  certificate.   He  was
    entitled to find that the evidence in this respect  was  not  credible.
    Nevertheless, given that the decision is to be re-made, it is a  matter
    for those representing the appellant as to whether any further evidence
    in this respect is to be forthcoming.

32. As to what findings of fact are to be preserved,  the  parties  are  to
    have regard to the directions set  out  below.   As  indicated  at  the
    hearing, however, we do not  accept  Mr  Sharma's  submission  that  it
    should be a preserved finding as set out at [27] of the FtJ's  decision
    that it is more probable than not that the appellant's father  has  not
    played much of a role in the appellant's upbringing.  That is a  matter
    which will require further assessment at the resumed hearing.   We  do,
    however, agree that one of the preserved findings will be as  contained
    in the first sentence of [28], namely that  the  sponsor  has  been  in
    regular communication with the  appellant  and  has  provided  monetary
    support.

33. Again, it is necessary to record in this decision the  observations  we
    made at the hearing in relation to KFK and our view that  at  the  next
    hearing consideration will be given not only to the fact that his  name
    appears on the appellant's birth certificate but also on the  documents
    dated 23 April 2018 recording him as the appellant's father,  and  that
    at questions 46 and 80 of the Visa Application Form, he is confirmed as
    the appellant's father. If KFK does not  attend  the  hearing  to  give
    evidence in support of his witness statement, that is a matter that  is
    likely to affect the weight to be attached to his evidence.

34. The parties are to have careful regard to the directions set out below.








                               DIRECTIONS




      1) In respect of any person whom it is proposed to call to  give  oral
         evidence, there must be a witness  statement  drawn  in  sufficient
         detail to stand as evidence-in-chief such that there is no need for
         any further examination-in-chief.  Any such witness statement  must
         be filed and served no  later  than  seven  days  before  the  next
         hearing.

    (3)    All further evidence relied on by either party must be contained
         within a supplementary, paginated and indexed bundle  and  must  be
         filed and served no later than seven days before the next hearing.

    (4)    No interpreter will be provided by the  Tribunal  for  the  next
         hearing unless specifically requested on behalf  of  the  appellant
         with reasons being given for that request.

    (5)    At the next hearing, the parties must be in a position  to  make
         submissions as to what findings of fact made  by  the  FtJ  can  be
         preserved.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                     24/02/2020


