
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/21852/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunals|Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11th September 2018                  |On 5th October 2018                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [A S]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       entry clearance officer, amman
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Row, promulgated on 20th September 2017, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 12th September 2017.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of  Yemen,  and  was  born  on  18th
    January 2001.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent Entry
    Clearance Officer dated 17th August 2016, which had been upheld by  the
    Entry Clearance Manager on 21st December 2016 in Amman.   The  decision
    in question was to refuse the application  of  the  Appellant,  as  the
    nephew of a [GS], a British citizen, who had been born on  15th  August
    1975, and was settled in the UK,  and  had  allegedly  exercised  "sole
    responsibility" over the upbringing of the Appellant, his nephew.   The
    applicable Immigration Rule was paragraph 297 of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that his father was dead.   His
    only  surviving  relative  was  the  Sponsor.   He  could  satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraph 297(f) of HC 395.

 4.  The  Respondent  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  disagreed  with  this
    suggestion.  She had even doubted that the Appellant was the nephew  of
    the Sponsor.  However, by the time of the  hearing  before  Judge  Row,
    there had been produced DNA evidence, which had established  that  this
    was indeed the case, and the judge had so accepted it to be  the  case.
    It had been argued on the Appellant's behalf that  if  his  father  was
    dead then there was no reason  why  his  uncle,  [GS],  should  not  be
    allowed to look after the Appellant.  The Respondent for her part,  had
    stated that even if the Appellant's father was dead, the Appellant  had
    been living in Egypt with a family friend and he was  being  maintained
    there by the Sponsor who was paying money to that friend.  There was no
    reason to consider that the current arrangements were unsuitable.   The
    Appellant was being brought to a country in the United Kingdom of which
    he knew nothing, just .in order to live with an uncle  whom  he  hardly
    knew.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge began his consideration by looking at the  basic  facts.   He
    noted that the Appellant was temporarily being looked after by a family
    friend called Ahmed, in Egypt, but the Appellant was now claiming  that
    Ahmed could no longer continue to do this.  Ahmed and the Appellant had
    actually moved to Egypt from Yemen to make the  application  for  entry
    clearance.  They had been allowed to  remain  there  temporarily.   The
    Sponsor had been making payments to Ahmed to maintain the Appellant  in
    the meantime.

 6. The judge went on to make a finding that,

         "... that if it is the case that the Appellant has no one  to  look
         after him apart from the Sponsor and that he faces  destitution  it
         would clearly be in his interest to join the Sponsor in the  United
         Kingdom.  This much is taken into account under  paragraph  297(f)"
         (see paragraph 10)."

 7. However, the judge went on to say that  the  Appellant's  circumstances
    were being disputed by the Respondent.  The Respondent did  not  accept
    that  the  Appellant's  partner  was  dead,  or  that  the  Appellant's
    situation was as it was being claimed.  The Appellant had said that his
    father died on 16th October 2010 while he was living in Yemen.  At  the
    time the Appellant continued to live with his mother until she died  on
    16th January 2016.  It was not in dispute that the  Appellant's  mother
    was dead (see paragraphs 10 to 11).   A  copy  of  his  father's  death
    certificate had been produced by the Appellant  (see  page  17  of  the
    Appellant's bundle), and it recorded  the  fact  that  the  Appellant's
    father was 48 years old  at  his  death.   However,  according  to  the
    Appellant's application, the date of death of  the  Appellant's  father
    should have been 42 years, and not 48 years.  Moreover, the spelling of
    the father's name was slightly different to  that  in  the  application
    (paragraph 12).

 8. The judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant because "the difference
    in the age  of  the  deceased  is  significant"  (paragraph  14).   The
    Appellant also could not succeed under Article 8 ECHR (paragraph 15).

 9. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that, in dismissing  the  appeal,  the
    judge had concluded that "the central issue" was whether the  Appellant
    had established that his father was dead, it having been accepted  that
    his  mother  had  died  in  2016.   However,  in  concluding  that  the
    Appellant's father had not died as claimed, the judge did not  consider
    all the relevant evidence.  There was not only the  death  certificate,
    but also evidence from the Sponsor, in which she had explained that the
    Appellant's father had died in 2010, and that since  then  the  Sponsor
    had been responsible for maintaining the Appellant.  This evidence  was
    corroborated by money transfer receipts which was sent  to  Ahmed,  who
    was caring  for  the  Appellant  following  his  mother's  death.   The
    conclusion by the judge that the Appellant's father had not died failed
    to give regard to the Sponsor's evidence.

11. Moreover, although the judge had  concluded  that  the  money  transfer
    evidence  (at  paragraph  22)  did  not  alone  demonstrate  that   the
    Appellant's father had died, he had not considered this evidence in the
    context  of  the  Sponsor's  evidence,  or  as  part  of  the  holistic
    assessment of the evidence.

12. Second, given that the judge had accepted that the  Appellant's  mother
    had died in 2016, there was no logical reason  for  why  the  Appellant
    would be untruthful about the death of his  father  in  2010,  and  the
    judge did not give this  consideration  proper  regard  in  making  his
    findings of fact.  Finally, against all of this, the judge had come  to
    a clear finding that if the circumstances  of  the  Appellant  were  as
    claimed that it would be in his  best  interests  to  reside  with  the
    Sponsor in the United Kingdom, and that there  was  no  reason  why  he
    could not avail himself of the  Immigration  Rules  or  precisely  this
    affect.

13. On 8th January 2018, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.



Submissions

14. At the hearing before me on 11th September 2016, Mr Vokes, appearing on
    behalf of the Appellant,  submitted  that  when  the  ECO  refused  the
    application, he had done so on the mistaken basis that there  had  been
    no death certificate for the father (but see page 17) which was plainly
    wrong.

15. Second, he had done so on the mistaken basis that the Appellant and his
    sponsoring uncle in the UK were not related, which was  also  incorrect
    given the DNA evidence which proved precisely the opposite.

16. Third, he had done so on the basis that the Appellant's best  interests
    did not require him to be in the United Kingdom, which  was  belied  by
    the express findings of Judge Row (at paragraphs 9 to 10) where he  had
    concluded that if  the  Appellant  faces  destitution  then  "it  would
    clearly be in his interests to join the Sponsor in the United  Kingdom"
    (paragraph 10).  Given these background considerations, the judge ought
    to have given some proper consideration to the  Sponsor's  evidence  in
    relation to the death of the Appellant's father.  However, there is  no
    assessment whatsoever of the evidence given by the Sponsor.  This could
    not be unimportant.  This is because the sponsoring uncle in the UK had
    maintained the Appellant and his mother, right up  to  2016,  when  the
    mother died, and thereafter maintained the Appellant by  sending  funds
    to Ahmed in Egypt.   This  was  accepted  by  the  judge.   It  was  an
    important finding which carried significant weight.

17. Finally, that left the  question  of  the  difference  in  age  of  the
    Appellant's father from 42 years (which ought to have  been  the  case)
    and 48  years  (which  was  recorded  in  the  death  certificate)  (at
    paragraph 12).  However, whilst the judge does deal with the  "spelling
    mistake of the name [S]" (at paragraph 14), in order  to  clarify  this
    particular discrepancy, the judge does not in the same  paragraph  give
    consideration to what the Sponsor's evidence was in relation to the age
    discrepancy of the Appellant's father.  All  that  the  judge  does  is
    simply to state the conclusion that, "the difference in the age of  the
    deceased however is significant" (at paragraph 14).  Without  assessing
    the evidence of the Sponsor, this conclusion could  not  properly  have
    been arrived at.

18. For her part, Ms Aboni submitted that,  even  though  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and his sponsoring uncle in the UK had  now  been
    cleared up by virtue of the DNA evidence  produced,  nevertheless,  the
    Respondent still believed that the  Appellant's  father  was  alive  in
    Egypt.  It had never been accepted that he had died.  This is  why  the
    discrepancy in the age was significant (at paragraph 12)  and  why  the
    death certificate was disbelieved by the judge.   The  judge  gave  his
    reasons for not finding the death certificate to be  credible.   Having
    found that the Appellant's father "was not necessarily dead".

19. In reply to  Ms  Aboni's  submissions,  Mr  Vokes  submitted  that  the
    fundamental question in this appeal was  "hardly  know  what  the  oral
    evidence was from [GS], the Appellant's sponsoring uncle?"  We  cannot,
    he submitted, know the answer to this question because  the  judge  did
    not sufficiently address this very issue.   The  judge  simply  assumed
    that the evidence was not material.  One has to come to this conclusion
    if one looks at the explanation given by the  judge  at  paragraph  14,
    which is simply a conclusion in terms that, "the difference in the  age
    of the deceased however is significant".

Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  In what is a relatively short decision of just over two and a
    half pages, the judge nowhere deals with  the  evidence  of  [GS],  the
    Appellant's sponsoring husband.  Yet, I have noticed that the Record of
    Proceedings make it clear that  "the  Sponsor  gave  evidence  at  some
    length", followed by submissions from the representatives.  The fact is
    that the Sponsor's evidence is simply not recorded.  This impacts  upon
    the question of  whether  the  evidence  that  the  Appellant  and  his
    sponsoring uncle  relied  upon,  was  credible  or  not.   It  is  also
    procedurally unfair to the Appellant because he does not  know  why  he
    has lost his appeal.  These matters are ultimately material because the
    judge had accepted that the sponsoring uncle has been  maintaining  the
    Appellant in Egypt through a man by the name of Ahmed.  The  judge  has
    also accepted that the Appellant's mother died in 2016, but has  failed
    to explain why it is not accepted that the Appellant's father  died  in
    2010, if that is the evidence that is presented by the  Appellant,  and
    is then  also  ultimately  backed  by  a  death  certificate  from  the
    hospital.  On top of this, the judge accepted that, "if it is the  case
    that the Appellant has no one to look after him apart from the  Sponsor
    and that he faces destitution it would clearly be in his  interests  to
    join the Sponsor in the  United  Kingdom.   This  much  is  taken  into
    account under paragraph 297(f) as the judge explained at  paragraph  10
    of the determination.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is  allowed
under Practice  Statement  7.2(b)  because  the  nature  or  extent  of  any
judicial fact-finding which is necessary in order for the  decision  in  the
appeal to be remade is such that, having regard to the overriding  objective
in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the  First-tier  Tribunal,
to be determined by a judge other than Judge Row.  I give a  direction  that
those matters that have been found to be in the  Appellant's  favour  should
stand as they are when the matter is reconsidered again.

No anonymity direction is made.

This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 28th September 2018
