
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22373/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6 November 2017                           |On 8 November 2017             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                            Syed Awais Ali Haider
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini of Counsel instructed by Gulbenkian
                    Andonian Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 24 August 2017  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge I Ross which refused the appeal against deportation
    on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 2. The background to this matter is that the appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan, born on 4 March 1980.  On 10  October  2003  he  entered  the
    United Kingdom having been granted entry clearance as the spouse  of  a
    British citizen.  That leave was valid until 1  January  2005.   On  17
    December 2004 the appellant applied  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    (ILR) as the spouse of a settled person and was granted ILR on 6  April
    2005.

 3. On 18 September 2015 the appellant was convicted of  importation  of  a
    controlled drug class A with intent to evade a prohibition/restriction.
     He was sentenced on the same day to six years' imprisonment.

 4. Following that conviction, on 12 October 2015 the  respondent  notified
    the appellant of a decision to deport him and  invited  representations
    as to why he should not be deported.

 5. The appellant's objection to deportation centres on his three children.
    He has a son born on 4 June 2003, a daughter born on 15 April 2006  and
    a second daughter born on 20 May 2010.  The children  are  all  British
    nationals, as is the appellant's partner.

 6. In his decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross identified correctly at
    [25] that because the appellant had received a sentence  of  more  than
    four years he could only defeat the public interest in  deportation  if
    he could show  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
    described in paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules.

 7. At [29]-[42] the judge considered the appellant's family life with  his
    wife and children.  At the date of the hearing the children  were  aged
    14, 11 and 7 years old respectively.  At [29] the judge referred to the
    independent  social  work  report  setting  out  the  difficulties  the
    children had experienced after their father was sent to  prison.   That
    consideration  continues  over  paragraphs  [29]-[34].   At   [36]   he
    considers the index offence in which the  appellant  played  a  leading
    role in the importation of a large amount of heroin.

 8. At [37], the First-tier Tribunal Judge indicates that  the  appellant's
    "very serious criminal offending" had caused significant damage to  the
    family.  This damage was noted to be particularly serious for  the  14-
    year-old son.  The judge concluded at [38], however, that the  children
    were cared for and supported financially by their mother  albeit  their
    best interests were for their father not to be deported.  At  [40]  the
    judge concluded that the  adverse  effects  on  the  children  was  not
    sufficient to show very compelling circumstances when  weighed  against
    the very high degree of public interest given the appellant's offending
    behaviour.

 9. The grounds of appeal submit firstly, at paragraph 3, that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider at all  a  further  social  work
    report contained at pages 100 to 133 of the bundle which gave  detailed
    consideration to the difficulties faced by the appellant's  family  and
    the adverse impact his absence was having on his wife and children. The
    serious concerns raised in the second social work report  were  capable
    of having led the judge to  make  a  different  decision  in  the  very
    compelling circumstances assessment.

10. The grounds at paragraph 3 note that the judge  also  had  reservations
    about the independent social work report that was considered,  that  of
    Ms Seymour. In that context, the second report which was not  addressed
    was additionally capable of making a material difference.

11. Further, paragraph 14 of the grounds challenges the reduction of weight
    at [34] given to the independent social work report of Ms Seymour, that
    finding being made as "this is not an independent report,  having  been
    commissioned by the children's mother".  That, argue the  grounds,  was
    in contradiction of the declaration by the  social  worker  as  to  her
    independence in preparing her report.

12. A further ground of appeal is contained in paragraph 4 of  the  written
    grounds and submits that the determination discloses  legal  error  for
    failing to take into account another report  that  of  a  psychologist,
    contained at pages 1 to 22 of the supplementary bundle, prepared by  Dr
    Latif in June 2017.

13. Amongst the conclusions reached by the psychologist, paragraph 13.1(ix)
    stated:

         "If Mr Haider was removed to Pakistan, it is more than likely  that
         the family situation could worsen drastically  and  the  children's
         behaviour and emotions would further deteriorate, causing Mrs S  to
         experience further deterioration in her own  wellbeing.   There  is
         also a risk that in  the  event  that  she  is  unable  to  provide
         sufficient care for her children, due  to  her  own  mental  health
         being poor, that the children would be at risk of being removed  by
         the local authority."

14. A third ground is contained in paragraph 9 of the written  grounds  and
    concerns the absence of consideration of the physical medical condition
    of the  appellant's  12-year-old  son.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    evidence about that condition at  page  100  of  the  bundle  from  the
    child's consultant paediatrician  confirming  that  he  has  an  enzyme
    deficiency which "can cause him to become very  unwell  needing  urgent
    medical attention".  The grounds maintain  that  no  consideration  was
    given  to  this  further  material  factor  in  the  "very   compelling
    circumstances" consideration.

15. Argument at the hearing before me  focused  on  these  aspects  of  the
    written grounds. Mr Duffy accepted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
    times took an incorrect approach to the evidence.  There  were  obvious
    mistakes  in  failing  to  address  the  additional  social  work   and
    psychology reports but they were not material errors as the contents of
    those  reports  at  their  highest  could  not  have   outweighed   the
    appellant's very serious 6 year sentence.

16. Having set out the written grounds in some detail above, I can set  out
    my error of law decision relatively briefly.  The report  of  Dr  Latif
    dated 23 June 2017 on  the  psychological  difficulties  faced  by  the
    appellant's family as a result of the appellant  being  imprisoned  and
    facing deportation was potentially  material  to  the  very  compelling
    circumstances assessment.  As set out above, she raised concerns  about
    the family breaking down to the extent that the children might go  into
    care.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  was  not  obliged  to  accept   that
    conclusion but it was evidence capable of having a material  impact  on
    the very compelling circumstances assessment. The same  is  so  of  the
    second social worker report contained at pages 100 to 113 of the bundle
    from two registered social workers, both of whom declare  at  page  113
    their independence and proper approach as expert witnesses in preparing
    their  report.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   omitted
    consideration of both of those potentially material documents  and  for
    that reasons discloses a material error on a point of law.

17. It is also my judgment that placing less weight on Ms Seymour's  social
    work report might have been an option open to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but  not  without  taking  into  account  her  declaration  as  to  her
    independence rather than presuming an absence of  independence  because
    of instructions coming from the  appellant's  wife  and  assessing  the
    contents of the report in light of that declaration.

18. Having found an error in those  terms  it  is  not  necessary  to  look
    further at the alternative grounds as the error is sufficient  for  the
    holistic assessment of whether very compelling circumstances to be  set
    aside and all of the evidence and arguments from both sides taken  into
    account in a re-making de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.

19. For these reasons I find that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    discloses an error on a point of law such that it is set  aside  to  be
    remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-made de novo.


Signed   [pic]                               Date 7 November 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
