

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal No:
HU/22639/2016

                                            HU/22647/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |     Decision and Reasons           |
|On 28th November 2017                     |Promulgated                         |
|                                          |On 7th December 2017                |
|                                          |                                    |
|                                          |                                    |

                                   Before

                              Mr Justice Morris
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                              MD Shofikul Islam
                              MD Zahidul Islam
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M K Mustafa instructed by Kalam Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless for the purposes of this decision we shall  refer
    to the parties as they were described before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh and appealed against an Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision dated 15th September 2016 to  refuse  them
    Certificates of Entitlement to  a  Right  of  Abode  ("the  Decision").
    Their appeals were allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Onofriou, in  a
    decision promulgated on 7 September 2017 ("the FTT Decision").

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer, through the offices of  the  Secretary  of
    State appeals to the Upper  Tribunal  on  the  following  ground.   The
    applications were made on 1st September 2016.  As of 6th April 2015 the
    appellants had no right of appeal under Section 82 of  the  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   The  appeal  provisions  had  been
    amended.  The appellants had  not  made  protection,  or  human  rights
    claims (or had any protection revoked) and therefore had  no  right  of
    appeal from the outset.  It was submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law in entertaining the appeals.

 4. At the hearing before us, Mr Mustafa accepted that there were no rights
    of appeal.  He acknowledged that the grounds of appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not engage any human rights grounds.  Nonetheless  he
    invited us to make  a  recommendation  that  the  'Appellants  are  the
    legitimate children of their parents  pursuant  to  Section  1  of  the
    Legitimacy Act 1976'.

 5. Mr Tarlow commented that was 'not an unreasonable request', so that the
    matter may be put in full before a caseworker.

 6. We reserved our decision.

Conclusions

 7. A right of appeal  to  the  Tribunal  stems  from  Section  82  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.  A  person  may
    appeal to the Tribunal where the Secretary  of  State  has  decided  to
    refuse a protection claim, a human rights claim  or  the  Secretary  of
    State has decided to revoke  a  person's  protection  status.   In  the
    present case, the appellants' original application did not amount to  a
    claim in the first two categories and the Secretary of  State  has  not
    revoked the appellants' protection status.

 8. The applications were made for a Certificate of Right of Abode  on  1st
    September 2016 and therefore after the implementation of the  amendment
    made to the basis of an  appeal  in  the  Nationality  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

 9. The applications were indeed made for Certificates of Entitlement to  a
    Right of Abode not on any protection or human rights basis.  As such we
    have no founding decision on which to  base  any  jurisdiction.  Albeit
    that the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer purported  to  furnish
    the appellants with a  restricted  right  of  appeal,  nowhere  in  the
    grounds of appeal to the First-Tier  Tribunal  were  any  human  rights
    grounds advanced.

10. In conclusion, as indicated in the Entry Clearance Officer's grounds of
    appeal, the appellants had no right of appeal against the  Decision  to
    the First-Tier Tribunal.  It follows  that  his  consideration  of  the
    appeal was outwith his jurisdiction and his ensuing decision a nullity.



11. Since there was no valid appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal, we consider
    that it is not appropriate for us to make any recommendation or comment
    about the underlying merit of the appellants' claim (assuming  we  have
    power to do so).   We  have  nevertheless  recorded  the  Secretary  of
    State's observations at paragraph 5 above.

Decision

It is declared that:

      (a)   The First-Tier Tribunal had no  jurisdiction  to  entertain  the
           Respondents' appeal against the decision of the Entry  Clearance
           Officer dated 15 September 2016 to refuse their Certificates  of
           Entitlement to a Right of Abode.

      (b)   The decision of First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Onoufriou  dated  7
           September 2017 is a nullity.



Signed                 Helen Rimington   Signed 28th November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

Dated       6th  October

