
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22636/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 July 2019                       |On 14 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                 Samkelo [B]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Holt instructed by Turpin & Miller LLP (Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of South Africa.  He appealed  to  a  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal against  the  respondent's  decision  of  10
    October 2018 making a deportation order and a decision  of  11  October
    2018 refusing his human rights claim.

2.   The issue in this  matter  as  it  developed  before  me  concerns  the
    judge's decision to refuse to adjourn the appeal.

3.   There were two bases upon which this was made, and noted by  the  judge
    at paragraph 10 of his decision.  First was the appellant not attending
    and the second related to proceedings under the Children Act 1989 filed
    by the appellant at Stoke-on-Trent Combined Court on 8 October 2018.

4.   As the judge's decision records, the  appellant  was  detained  at  HMP
    Huntercombe in  Oxfordshire  and  was  to  have  been  brought  to  HMP
    Nottingham on the day before the appeal hearing, which  was  listed  at
    the Nottingham Justice Centre on 15 April 2019.  It became clear during
    the morning that the appellant was still at Huntercombe and  apparently
    was refusing to leave his  cell.   There  was  an  exchange  of  emails
    between the  judge's  clerk  and  a  member  of  the  prison  staff  at
    Huntercombe.  The prison staff were asked to confirm what they had said
    and the reason why the appellant had refused to leave the prison as the
    judge required a reason.  The reply was that the appellant had  refused
    to leave HMP Huntercombe to go to HMP  Nottingham  and  thereby  attend
    court.  The importance of attending had been explained to  him  but  he
    had still refused.

5.   Counsel, (Mr Holt) told the judge that his instructing  solicitors  had
    been expecting the appellant to attend and asked the judge  to  adjourn
    in case the appellant's refusal to be  transported  was  based  on  the
    belief that he was going to be moved to HMP Nottingham and  not  return
    to HMP Huntercombe where he might have built up good relations.

6.   As regards the application under the Children Act,  Mr  Holt  told  the
    judge that his instructing solicitors had heard  no  more  about  those
    proceedings since the appellant started them in October 2018.  Although
    he was without instructions on this aspect he said he would  have  been
    asking the appellant about the current position  and  advising  him  to
    seek an adjournment to await the outcome of proceedings  in  accordance
    with the principles in RS [2012] UKUT 00218 (IAC).  He argued that  the
    outcome  of  those  proceedings  was  likely  to  be  material  to  the
    immigration decision and asked the judge  to  take  into  account  with
    regard to the timing of the application that the child  had  been  born
    while the appellant was in custody.

7.   There was then a further exchange via  emails  with  the  prison.   The
    prison staff were asked what the specific reason was why the  appellant
    refused to leave prison and was he aware that moving him to  Nottingham
    was necessary for him to attend his appeal today.  The  reply  was  "He
    was aware of the need to go to court via another  prison.   The  reason
    for non-attendance according to  him  was  that  he  was  told  by  his
    solicitor that he was going to get it re-scheduled and that  there  was
    not enough evidence".

8.   The judge noted that this reply was inconsistent with what Mr Holt  had
    earlier  told  him  about  the  instructing  solicitors  expecting  the
    appellant to attend the appeal hearing.  The judge noted  a  letter  on
    the  file  showing  that  the  solicitors  had  been  representing  the
    appellant since his signed authorisation to that effect of 29  November
    2018.  At the Case Management Review hearing on  18  January  2019  the
    original substantive date of 8 February 2019 was adjourned to 15  April
    2019 to give the appellant's solicitors time to prepare.

9.   The judge noted that  the  subsequent  letters  from  Turpin  &  Miller
    enclosing the appellant's bundle and then the supplementary bundle  did
    not seek a further adjournment and contained nothing  to  suggest  that
    they and the appellant were not ready to proceed.  The  judge  came  to
    the conclusion that the appellant had on  his  own  initiative  decided
    that his case was not ready to proceed  and  that  by  refusing  to  be
    transported to the hearing he hoped to secure  a  further  adjournment.
    On that basis, the judge considered that his failure to attend was  not
    in itself a reason to  adjourn,  but  an  adjournment  might  still  be
    appropriate as in any appeal  where  further  relevant  evidence  about
    family court proceedings involving a child of an appellant was not  yet
    available was expected to become available within a reasonable time  an
    adjournment might be justified.

10.  The judge went on  to  consider  whether  this  was  such  a  case  and
    concluded that it was not,  and  no  issue  has  been  taken  with  the
    findings in that regard.

11.  The judge dismissed  the  appeal  and  the  appellant  sought  and  was
    granted permission to appeal by the First-tier Tribunal.

12.  The first ground, was that the judge's decision  was  contrary  to  the
    guidance in Khmelkevich (00/TH/01718) in that the judge had  failed  to
    say whether or not he was satisfied that due notice  of  the  time  and
    place of  the  hearing  had  been  given  and  this  was  a  procedural
    requirement which if breached amounted to an error of law, as was found
    by the Tribunal in Khmelkevich.

13.  Mr Holt argued both in the grounds and in his oral submissions that  it
    was clear what the reasoning behind the strictness of  the  requirement
    to make clear findings as to the satisfaction of the first Rule was, in
    that proceeding in the absence of an appellant was an  action  carrying
    severe consequences and therefore it  was  strictly  incumbent  upon  a
    decision-maker to indicate that the Rule had been complied  with.   The
    judge had failed to say specifically whether or not due notice  of  the
    time and place of the hearing had been given to the appellant and  that
    in fact the second communication received from the appellant  seems  to
    suggest the contrary, at least those were the  apparent  assertions  of
    the appellant.

14.  The second ground, as set out and also as developed by Mr Holt  in  his
    submissions was that the judge had given insufficient reasons  for  his
    findings on the appellant's intentions.   He  had  concluded  that  the
    appellant had on his own initiative decided that his case was not ready
    to proceed and that by refusing to be transported  to  the  hearing  he
    hoped to secure a further adjournment.  The judge had  also  noted  the
    apparent contradiction between the communications from the prison (that
    the appellant claimed to be acting  upon  instructions)  and  from  the
    appellant's representatives  (that  the  appellant's  absence  was  not
    instructed).  He argued that the appropriate  remedy  to  resolve  this
    conflict was to adjourn and allow the appellant to give evidence on the
    matter.

15.  Rule 28 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014 states as follows:-

         "Hearing in a party's absence


         28.  If a party fails to attend a hearing the Tribunal may  proceed
             with the hearing if the Tribunal -


             (a)  is satisfied that the party  has  been  notified  of  the
                  hearing or that reasonable steps have been taken to notify
                  the party of the hearing; and


             (b)  considers that it is  in  the  interests  of  justice  to
                  proceed with the hearing."

16.  Khmelkenich concerned a refusal by a Special Adjudicator to adjourn  an
    appeal where it was said that the appellant would not be fit to  attend
    the hearing due to illness and that  a  medical  certificate  would  be
    provided to substantiate this.  The Adjudicator noted that the  medical
    certificate  referred  to  the  appellant's  unfitness  to  attend   an
    interview rather than referring to an appeal hearing and exercised  his
    discretion to hear  the  appeal  in  the  absence  of  the  parties  in
    accordance with Rule 33 of the Asylum Appeals (Procedure) Rules 1996.

17.  The Immigration Appeal Tribunal criticised the  judge  for  not  saying
    under which of the sub-Rules of Rule 33 he decided to proceed  and  had
    not said whether or not he was satisfied that new notice  of  the  time
    and place of the hearing had been  given  and  that  it  was  at  least
    incumbent on the Adjudicator to make it clear that the  formalities  of
    the Rules had been complied with.  It also noted that the mandatory sub-
    Rule (3) applied only if there was no satisfactory explanation for  the
    absence  of  the  party  concerned  and  there  was  in  fact  such  an
    explanation.  It was considered that the doctor's  certificate  stating
    that the appellant was not fit to attend an interview as  a  matter  of
    common sense must extend  to  a  court  appearance  at  which  evidence
    subject to cross-examination was to be given.  Accordingly the decision
    was set aside and remitted for a fresh hearing.

18.  With regard to ground 1 in  the  instant  appeal,  the  judge  did  not
    specifically state that he was satisfied that due notice  of  the  time
    and place of the hearing had been given.  However, as was  pointed  out
    by Mr Clarke, it is abundantly clear from the  documentation  that  the
    appellant and his representatives were aware  of  the  date,  time  and
    place of hearing.  As the judge noted at paragraph 15, at the  CMR  the
    original substantive hearing date was adjourned to 15 April 2019.  That
    the appellant was aware of the hearing date for 15 April 2019 is  amply
    testified to by  the  letter  he  sent  on  5  April  2019  seeking  an
    adjournment of the hearing listed for 15 April 2019.  That  application
    was refused on 11 April 2019 where it was  said  that  the  application
    could be renewed at the outset of the hearing.  The appellant had  said
    that he requested an extension of time to submit a witness statement in
    support of his appeal and sought an extension of four months.  In  fact
    there was a witness statement in the bundle before  the  judge  in  the
    hearing at any event.  The covering letter to the  bundle  referred  to
    the hearing date of Monday 15 April at the Nottingham  Justice  Centre.
    Accordingly, I agree with Mr Clarke that it is entirely clear that  due
    notice of the time and place of the hearing had been given and  it  was
    in my view unnecessary for the judge formally to refer to that  in  the
    circumstances where documentary evidence made it abundantly clear  that
    that was the case.

19.  As regards the second ground, again it does not seem  to  me  that  the
    judge erred.  The evidence relayed from the prison staff was  that  the
    appellant was aware of the need to go to court via another  prison  and
    said that he was not attending because his solicitor had  told  him  he
    was going to get the hearing re-scheduled  and  there  was  not  enough
    evidence.  That as the judge noted, was inconsistent with what Mr  Holt
    on instructions had told him in that they were expecting the  appellant
    to attend the appeal hearing.  In my view it was a perfectly reasonable
    inference for the judge to draw from the account  being  given  by  the
    appellant that he had on his own initiative decided his  case  was  not
    ready to proceed and that by refusing to be transported to the  hearing
    he hoped to secure a further adjournment.  He must have known that  his
    earlier adjournment request had been refused since the refusal was sent
    to him.  Clearly he had not been told by his solicitor that the hearing
    was going to be re-scheduled and that there was  not  enough  evidence.
    The bundle including his own witness statement had been provided to the
    Tribunal.  I do not think the judge erred in  refusing  to  adjourn  in
    light of the apparent contradiction between what was said by the prison
    staff  on   the   appellant's   behalf   and   what   the   appellant's
    representatives said.  It was fully  open  to  the  judge  rather  than
    resolving this  conflict  by  an  adjournment  to  decide  as  he  did.
    Although he did not refer to it, the overriding objective as set out at
    Rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014 sets  out  the  purpose  of
    enabling the Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly and includes
    ensuring so far as practicable that the parties are able to participate
    fully in the proceedings but also involves avoiding  delay  so  far  as
    compatible with proper consideration of the issues.  Here the appellant
    had made a deliberate choice not to attend.  He was  not  prevented  as
    appears that may well have been the case in Khmelkevich, by  reason  of
    inability to attend.  He made a deliberate choice which the  judge  was
    entitled to find was not as a  consequence  of  anything  that  he  had
    notified to his solicitors.  The decision involved a proper exercise of
    the use of the judge's discretion with regard to proportionality  which
    is another relative element of Rule 2.  I  do  not  consider  that  any
    error of law in the refusal to adjourn in this case has been identified
    and as a consequence the appeal is dismissed.

20.  No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date 10 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and therefore there can be no fee award.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date 10 July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
