

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
HU/22209/2016

                                                   HU/22213/2016

                                                   HU/22215/2016

                                                   HU/22217/2016

                                                   HU/22222/2016

                                                   HU/22223/2016

                                                   HU/22227/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6 December 2017                         |On 12 December 2017              |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     NF
                                     NG
                                     AG
                                     ASG
                                     GG
                                    ASAG
                                     FG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Naz, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
Appellants
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants appeals with permission  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal   (Designated   Judge   Woodcraft)   who,   in   a
    determination  promulgated  on  26th  July  2016  dismissed  the  first
    Appellant' appeal against the decision to refuse entry clearance as the
    spouse of her Sponsor and husband and the appeals of the minor children
    (who are the remaining 6 appellants) for family reunion.  The decisions
    that were made by the Entry Clearance Officer on the 31st August 2016.



    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

 2. Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants
    are granted anonymity as the claim concerns minor children.  No  report
    of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them.   This
    direction applies  both  to  the  Appellants  and  to  the  Respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 3. The background is set out in the  determination.   The  main  appellant
    together with her six children had applied for entry clearance to  join
    her husband in the United Kingdom. Those applications are  made  on  20
    July 2016. On 31 August 2016 the Entry Clearance Officer refused  their
    respective applications under  paragraph  320  (3)  and  on  Article  8
    grounds.

 4.  The refusals in respect of all the appellants are in the  same  terms.
    It was noted that the  applicants  were  currently  in  Greece  and  as
    evidence of their identity and status had submitted a photo copy  of  a
    Greek document which detailed the lodging of an application  in  Greece
    and contained their photographs, names and date of  birth.  However  it
    was also noted that none of the appellants had  submitted  any  further
    evidence  of  their  identity  or  nationality  in   support   of   the
    application. It was stated that it was not known  what  documents  were
    provided to  the  Greek  authorities  in  order  to  demonstrate  their
    identity. If no original identity documents are available the  onus  is
    on the applicant to provide a reasonable alternative or to  provide  an
    explanation for the absence. There had been no explanation  as  to  why
    any of the applicants had not been able to  provide  original  identity
    documents.  Thus  it  was  refused  under  paragraph  320(3)   of   the
    Immigration Rules.  As  to  Article  8,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    considered   whether   the   circumstances   constituted   "exceptional
    circumstances" to warrant the grant of entry clearance outside  of  the
    rules, but decided that they did not.

 5. The appellants filed notices of appeal   stating  that  the  appellants
    were  not  able  to  provide  identity  documentation  as   they   were
    undocumented Bidoons who have no access to identity documents and  made
    reference to reliance on the Greek issued identity  document  that  had
    been presented. The grounds also made reference  to  the  DNA  evidence
    which confirmed the family relationships to the sponsor.

 6. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Woodcraft) on the
    3rd April 2017.  The respondent was not represented at that hearing. In
    a decision promulgated on the 6th April 2017, the judge  dismissed  the
    appeals both under the Immigration Rules and Article 8.

 7. Permission to appeal that decision  was  granted  by  Designated  Judge
    Murray on the 26th October 2017. The  grant  of  permission  states  as
    follows:

    "the grounds of application state that there is a misdirection  by  the
    judge when he finds that the appellants are not undocumented Bidoons as
    he has come to this decision based on speculation and although he  made
    reference to the case of MN he did not  note  that  in  that  case  the
    appellant had been working illegally. They state  that  the  judge  was
    wrong when he found the sponsor not to be  an  undocumented  Bidoon  at
    paragraph 26 as the respondent has accepted that he is an  undocumented
    Bidoon and the relationship of the family to  the  sponsor  is  not  in
    dispute. They state that the judge failed to grapple with  whether  the
    appellants are part of  the  sponsor's  pre-flight  family  and  it  is
    difficult to follow paragraph 29 of the decision. They state  that  the
    judge should not have used such a strict application of  paragraph  320
    (three) the rules as he failed to find that undocumented dudes have  no
    documents (BA and others, SA and NA (Kuwait).

    Why is there no evidence the sponsor was granted refugee status on  the
    basis that he is an undocumented Bidoon? The judge  found  the  sponsor
    not be credible but the respondent has found him credible enough to  be
    granted refugee status. Undocumented Bidoons do work in Kuwait although
    they may do so illegally. They do not have documents to produce to  the
    authorities. The appellants have been granted international  protection
    cards by Greece so the Greek authorities must have been satisfied  with
    their account. The sponsor is a refugee  and  the  appellants  have  no
    documents which would be the case if  they  are  undocumented  Bidoons.
    This should have been taken into account by the judge when  considering
    paragraph 320 (3). The appellants of the family members of the  sponsor
    who was a refugee.

    There are arguable errors of law in the judge's decision."

 8. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal. After hearing from  the
    advocates I informed the parties that I was satisfied  that  the  judge
    had made a material error  of  law  in  his  decision  and  that  as  a
    consequence the decision should be set aside and none of  the  findings
    of fact  made  should  be  preserved.  My  reasons  for  reaching  that
    conclusion are set out below.

 9. The sponsor appeared before the judge and gave oral  evidence  that  he
    had left Kuwait on 13 July 2015 following persecution there and applied
    for asylum in the United Kingdom and was subsequently  granted  refugee
    status on 21 March 2016 by the UK authorities. He had been  married  in
    Kuwait (although they could not marry at an official marriage  registry
    because they were undocumented Bidoons) and during  their  relationship
    six children were  born.  The  DNA  evidence  that  had  been  produced
    demonstrated that they were related as claimed. He confirmed  that  the
    family members were living together before he left his home country  to
    enter the United Kingdom. It appears the family members left Kuwait and
    travelled to Greece and it was there that they had  applied  for  entry
    clearance. It is also clear that  they  had  been  provided  with  some
    documentation by  the  Greek  authorities.  Since  their  arrival,  the
    sponsor had travelled  to  see  his  family  on  three  occasions  (see
    paragraph 12).

10. The judge's findings are set out at paragraph 21 - 31. As to the  issue
    concerning the inability of the applicants to submit documents of their
    identity and nationality, he did not consider that there had  been  any
    reasonable explanation. He considered  the  applicant's  case  that  as
    undocumented Bidoons they could not provide such  documentary  evidence
    as they had no access to official documentation. However, it  is  plain
    from reading the findings of fact that he did  not  find  the  sponsors
    evidence to be "straightforward" (see paragraph  23)  when  considering
    how the family had travelled to Greece and in particular the funding of
    their travel. The judge made reference to the funding of the journey at
    paragraph 25 and reach the conclusion that if  such  funding  had  been
    raised it must follow that they had been working  and  could  therefore
    not be undocumented Bidoons.

11. The judge recorded at [26] that there was a  document  from  the  Greek
    authorities (international  protection)  but  that  it  was  not  fully
    translated. The judge also recorded at paragraph 26  that  the  sponsor
    claimed that he was an undocumented Bidoon but that  he  had  not  been
    very forthcoming about his claim and did not produce the full  text  of
    interview and thus it was difficult to see the  basis  upon  which  the
    Secretary of State had granted him refugee status. At paragraph  28  he
    reached  the  conclusion  given  the  unreliability  of  the  sponsor's
    evidence, he was not prepared to accept that he had established that he
    was an undocumented Bidoon.

12. Since the appeal was dismissed it as been confirmed by  the  respondent
    that the sponsor was granted refugee status as an undocumented  Bidoon.
    As I understand it, this was a grant on the papers and not following  a
    court hearing (see rule 24 response and submissions of Mr Bates).

13. Furthermore I was informed that the hearing that the appellant and  her
    children  were  now  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom   having   been
    transferred here from Greece with the assistance of the UK authorities.
    No documentation was produced but I understand form Miss Naz that  this
    was under the Dublin III Regulations. The  claim  for  asylum  was  now
    under consideration based on their relationship to the sponsor and  his
    refugee status as an undocumented Bidoon. Mr Bates had  no  information
    concerning these recent events and the Tribunal  only  learnt  of  this
    when I enquired of Miss Naz as to how the appellant was now in the  UK.
    I would have expected that one of the parties would have provided  this
    information in advance.

14. However I am satisfied that the judge fell into material error  in  his
    decision  and  reaching  the  conclusion  that  the  sponsor  had   not
    demonstrated that he was an  undocumented  Bidoon  which  affected  the
    reasoning process in the rest of the determination.  As  set  out,  the
    judge was not assisted by the lack of a presenting  officer  who  would
    have been able to inform the Tribunal as to the basis  upon  which  the
    sponsor had indeed been granted refugee status. The judge  recorded  at
    [26] there had been no evidence as to the basis of his  status  and  at
    [28] the judge was not prepared to accept  that  he  had  been  granted
    status on the basis as claimed. This is a material error  as  it  is  a
    clear mistake of fact and I am satisfied that if  the  judge  had  been
    furnished with this evidence that  he  may  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion. It did not assist the Tribunal  that  there  was  no  fully
    translated document from Greece.

15. In my view the mistake of fact wholly undermines any findings  of  fact
    made concerning the appellants, their journey and in any  such  funding
    and is so fundamental that the decision cannot stand.

16. The  grounds  and  grant  permission  also  identify  other  issues  of
    relevance. In particular the applicant's solicitors  provided  material
    to the judge to consider including country information and the  country
    guidance decision of NM  and  others  (documented/undocumented  Bidoon:
    risk)  [2013]  UKUT.  The  country  material  makes  reference  to  the
    children's nationality being derived from their father. However as  the
    judge did not accept that their father was an undocumented  Bidoon,  he
    attached no weight to that material.

17. A further issue related to the ability to work.  The  country  guidance
    decision makes reference to only those with legal  residency  or  civil
    status being able to hold employment (see paragraph 42) but  also  goes
    on to say that private employers have grown  in  confidence  in  hiring
    stateless persons as employees despite their lack of legal status. This
    does not appear to have been taken into account either.

18. Consequently for the reasons I have given, I am satisfied that there is
    a material error of law in the decision of the first Tier Tribunal  and
    that it should be set aside. None of the findings of fact are preserved
    and the matter shall be remitted for further hearing before  the  first
    Tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error on a point  of  law;
it is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal) to hear the appeal afresh.

An anonymity direction is made.



Signed [pic]                            Date: 7/12/2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
