


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number: HU/22585/2018
                                                            HU/22587/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 September 2019                 |On 13 September 2019          |
|                                    |                              |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    H. W.
                                    J. C.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Haidar, Counsel, instructed by AA Immigration
                    Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellants are mother and daughter,  who  are  nationals  of
           China. Their sponsor, who  is  respectively  their  husband  and
           father, is also a national of China who entered the UK illegally
           in 2002 and was only granted  leave  on  a  discretionary  basis
           outside the Immigration Rules  on  12  May  2011,  when  he  was
           granted ILR. Although he had claimed to be a refugee from China,
           he has never been recognised as such, and indeed having acquired
           immigration status in the UK he took the opportunity  to  travel
           to that country in 2012 and 2015.
        2. The Appellants entered the United Kingdom legally on  23  August
           2015 with leave as spouse and  daughter  of  the  sponsor.  That
           grant of leave expired on 10 May 2018, and on 17 April 2018  the
           Appellants made in-time applications for the variation of  their
           leave. At this date the Second Appellant was still a child.
        3. These applications were both refused on  15  October  2018  with
           reference to paragraphs 276ADE and R-LTRP.1.1.(c)(i) and  (d)(i)
           of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules. By this date the Second
           Appellant was no longer a child.
        4. The Article 8 appeals of the Appellants were linked for  hearing
           together since each relied upon the  evidence  that  was  relied
           upon by the other. Moreover, the prospects  of  success  of  the
           First Appellant's appeal were in large part dependent  upon  the
           outcome of the Second Appellant's appeal. The appeals were heard
           together on 21 May 2019 by a panel of Designated Judge Woodcraft
           and First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Raymond,  and  they  were  then
           dismissed in  a  joint  decision  upon  both  appeals  that  was
           promulgated on 26 June 2019.
        5. The  Appellants  were  both  granted  permission  to  appeal  by
           decision of 30 July 2019 of Designated Judge  Macdonald  on  the
           basis it was arguable the approach of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
           ["FtT"] to the evidence of the Second Appellant had rendered the
           hearing of both appeals procedurally unfair.
        6. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further evidence.  Thus,  the
           matter came before us.


      Undisputed matters
        7. It was not in dispute before the FtT that  the  First  Appellant
           did not  hold  the  necessary  language  qualification  for  the
           application she had made for a  variation  of  her  leave  as  a
           spouse. She did not hold an English qualification at A2 level in
           the Common European Framework  of  Reference  for  Languages  as
           required by Appendix O to the Immigration Rules.
        8. It was also not in  dispute  before  the  FtT  that  the  Second
           Appellant could not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
           Rules if her mother's application failed; E-LTRC.1.16. Moreover,
           she had never been a "qualifying  child"  for  the  purposes  of
           section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
           2002, as amended, or paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), and  she  had  not
           lived half of her life in the UK by the date of  the  hearing  ,
           with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(v).
        9. It was also not in dispute  that  although  now  an  adult,  the
           Second Appellant remained a  member  of  the  household  of  her
           parents. Whilst there had been an extended period of  separation
           from her father from 2002 to 2015 as a result of his decision to
           travel to the UK, the three members  of  the  family  had  lived
           together as a family unit in the UK since August 2015,  so  that
           "family life" was established between them at the  date  of  the
           hearing.


      The adverse findings of fact made by the FtT
       10. Having  heard  evidence  from  the  sponsor,  and  each  of  the
           Appellants, the FtT identified a number  of  inconsistencies  in
           the evidence, and made a number of adverse findings.
       11. The sponsor was found to have no genuine  or  objectively  well-
           founded fear of a risk of harm  at  the  hands  of  the  Chinese
           authorities, either when he had left China in 2002, or, when  he
           had returned in 2012 and 2015, or, at the date of  the  hearing.
           He was currently able to live in China without any risk of harm.
           There were no insurmountable obstacles that prevented  him  from
           living in China with the Appellants, and no good reason had been
           provided as to why he  would  be  unable  to  secure  employment
           there.
       12. The sponsor and the First Appellant had a wide range of extended
           family members living in China with whom they were  in  contact,
           who included their respective parents and siblings.  The  Second
           Appellant therefore had a wide range of family members living in
           China. The sponsor and  the  Appellants  also  had  a  range  of
           economic and other ties to China.
       13. The Second Appellant had been educated in China to  the  age  of
           15. She would face no difficulties in re-integrating  into  life
           in China, and nor would either of her parents.
       14. The First Appellant's claim to be illiterate was untrue.


      The challenge to the decision in relation to the First Appellant based
      upon the language requirement
       15. It is accepted before us that there is no  merit  in  the  third
           complaint;  that  the  First   Appellant   had   a   "legitimate
           expectation" that she would always be able to vary her leave  to
           remain without  having  to  secure  any  language  qualification
           beyond that which had been demanded of her in the course of  her
           2015 entry clearance application.
       16. We note that at the  time  of  her  successful  entry  clearance
           application the First Appellant needed, and  must  be  taken  to
           have demonstrated, that she held an A1  language  qualification.
           Any suggestion by the FtT to the contrary must be  an  error  of
           fact, since she was plainly granted leave to enter, and produced
           the appropriate vignette entered into her passport  in  evidence
           [Respondent's Bundle p79]. The  core  of  the  second  complaint
           (that the FtT proceeded upon the basis of an error of  fact)  is
           therefore made out, although we are satisfied  for  the  reasons
           set out below that nothing turns upon this error.
       17. There was, however, a change  in  the  Immigration  Rules  on  3
           November 2016, with the result that since her  period  of  leave
           expired after 1 May 2017 (hers expired  on  10  May  2018),  the
           First Appellant was required  to  demonstrate  she  held  an  A2
           English language qualification. She did not, and indeed there is
           no evidence to suggest that she has ever attempted to gain  this
           qualification.
       18. The First Appellant's approach to  the  lack  of  the  requisite
           language qualification was not to argue that she was  exempt  by
           reason of age,  or  disability  (see  E-LTRP.4.2(a)  or  (b)  of
           Appendix FM), but rather to assert that since she was illiterate
           there were exceptional circumstances  that  prevented  her  from
           being  able  to  do  so  (E-LTRP.4.2(c)).  Literacy,  or  rather
           illiteracy, means different things to different people, as amply
           demonstrated in this appeal. The First  Appellant  did  not  for
           example claim that she was unable to read or write  anything  in
           any language, and so it would appear that a  good  part  of  the
           hearing before the FtT was taken up in an attempt  to  ascertain
           precisely what skills she admitted to,  and  what  she  actually
           held.
       19. It is the approach of the FtT to the issue of whether or not the
           First Appellant had made out on the balance of probabilities her
           claim to be illiterate, that is the focus of the third complaint
           in the grounds. As drafted, it is asserted  that  the  FtT  made
           speculative  and  contradictory   findings   in   reaching   the
           conclusion that she was not illiterate.
       20.  We  reject  that  complaint;  the  conclusion  that  the  First
           Appellant was not telling the truth about  her  literacy  levels
           was one that was well open to the FtT on the evidence,  and  was
           adequately  reasoned,  relying  as  it  did  upon  discrepancies
           between the evidence given by the First Appellant, the  sponsor,
           and the character witness. It is extremely difficult to see  how
           the First  Appellant  could  use  social  media  or  search  the
           internet to  find  material  she  wished  to  view  if  she  was
           completely unable to read  and  write,  as  she  had  sought  to
           portray herself.
       21. In any event, even if an error of fact  were  made  out,  it  is
           quite clear to us for the  reasons  give  below,  that  whatever
           level of "illiteracy" the First Appellant claimed, she failed to
           provide any evidence to demonstrate a causal nexus  between  the
           cognitive abilities and literacy levels she did admit to having,
           and her inability to train for and pass an A2  English  language
           test.
       22. It is accepted before us that the A2 qualification, like the  A1
           qualification, has neither a writing nor a reading test element;
           as is the case with the A1 test, the A2 test is a  speaking  and
           listening  test.  Beyond  the  bald  assertion  that  the  First
           Appellant  was  illiterate  there  was  no  attempt  to  provide
           evidence  to  explain  why  she  was  able  to  acquire  an   A1
           qualification, but should be excused from making any attempt  to
           acquire an A2 qualification,  as  demanded  by  the  Immigration
           Rules. There was, for example, no evidence from anyone  who  had
           assessed her cognitive abilities, or, from anyone who had sought
           to train her for the A2 test to explain why she  was  unable  to
           engage with that training in the absence of a written component.
           When we sought to explore with Ms Haider why the First Appellant
           was said to be unable to engage with an  A2  test  she  accepted
           that these were simply her instructions.


      The challenge of procedural unfairness
       23. The first complaint advanced in the  grounds  is  that  the  FtT
           denied both Appellants a procedurally fair hearing, as a  result
           of the decision to attach no  weight  to  the  evidence  of  the
           Second Appellant upon the issue of whether she was illiterate as
           claimed, since she had been present throughout her mother's oral
           evidence and could have tailored her own  as  a  result  of  the
           exchanges she had heard.
       24. Ms Haidar argued that the course taken by the FtT was sufficient
           to  render  the  entirety  of  the  hearing   of   the   appeals
           procedurally unfair, so that the only course open to us  was  to
           remit both the appeals for fresh hearing.
       25. For the reasons given above we are satisfied that this would not
           be  the  appropriate  course.  In  short,  the  first  complaint
           discloses no material error of law. Given the lack  of  evidence
           to show why she was unable to engage with  training  for  an  A2
           language test, and was thus unable to  meet  such  a  test,  the
           First  Appellant  was  always  bound  to  fail   to   meet   the
           requirements of the Immigration Rules because she was unable  to
           demonstrate that there  existed  any  exceptional  circumstances
           which allowed her to  gain  an  A1  language  qualification  but
           prevented  her  from  being  able  to  gain   an   A2   language
           qualification. Given the nature of the A2 test, and the lack  of
           a written component, the FtT was bound to reach that  conclusion
           whatever  its  views  of  the  First  Appellant's  claim  to  be
           illiterate.
       26.  What  appears  to  have  happened   is   that   there   was   a
           misunderstanding between Counsel for the Appellants and the FtT.
           Counsel thought that she had explained  that  upon  professional
           advice, the Second Appellant had decided to absent herself  from
           the hearing whilst her mother gave evidence, in  order  that  no
           argument could be advanced against her to the  effect  that  her
           oral evidence had been tailored as a  result  of  what  she  had
           heard. It would appear that the FtT may have mis-understood her,
           and thought it was believed that the Second Appellant was unable
           to be present during her mother's  evidence  (see  [5]).  As  an
           Appellant in a linked appeal, the  FtT  were  quite  correct  to
           state that she was entitled to be present throughout the hearing
           to hear all of the evidence that was adduced in  the  course  of
           the linked appeals. Equally, of course, Counsel was quite  right
           to advise her client that an Appellant in a linked appeal  might
           choose to absent themselves from part of  the  hearing  to  deny
           their opponent the opportunity to make a submission  that  their
           oral evidence had been tailored to what they had heard.  It  was
           unfortunate that this misunderstanding  was  compounded  by  the
           approach then taken to the weight that could  be  given  to  the
           Second Appellant's evidence on the issue of whether  her  mother
           was illiterate or not (see [22]), but as set out above,  nothing
           turns on this.


      The approach to the assessment of proportionality
       27. The fifth, and final, complaint raised in the  grounds  is  that
           the  FtT  erred  in  its   approach   to   the   assessment   of
           proportionality, having found that  Article  8  was  engaged  by
           virtue of the "family life" and "private  life"  established  by
           the Appellants since their entry to the UK in August 2015.
       28. As the hearing before us progressed it became  clear  that  this
           was in reality the strongest ground of challenge. The  focus  of
           the assessment of proportionality  should  have  been  upon  the
           nature and strength of the  Second  Appellant's  "private  life"
           which in reality meant focusing upon the educational course upon
           which she was actually enrolled, and when she had enrolled  upon
           it, since no material evidence was offered of any  other  aspect
           to her "private life".
       29. With a degree of hesitation, and as announced to the parties  at
           the hearing, we conclude that the FtT  did  err  in  failing  to
           adequately   consider   the   Second   Appellant's   educational
           circumstances as a specific element of her private life  in  the
           UK. What is said in [29] does not address the fact that,  as  at
           the date of hearing, she was enrolled on a course of studies and
           that removal would disrupt this.
       30. Whilst on reflection we consider that the error was not, in  all
           the circumstances, material to the outcomes of the  appeals,  we
           nonetheless abide by our initial decision, as announced  at  the
           hearing, that it was.
       31. Therefore, we set the  FtT's  decision  on  both  appeals  aside
           solely  in  relation  to  the  error   concerning   the   Second
           Appellant's education, as it went to her private life in the  UK
           and, in  turn,  the  potential  impact  of  this  on  the  First
           Appellant's case. For reasons set out previously,  there  is  no
           basis on which to disturb any of the other findings  reached  by
           the FtT.


      Remaking the decision
       32. Whilst Ms Haider suggested that these appeals should be remitted
           to the FtT, we agreed with Mr Bramble's position that there  was
           no justification for this course  of  action.  In  view  of  the
           limited basis upon which we have set the FtT's  decision  aside,
           these cases are eminently suited to a remaking decision  in  the
           Upper Tribunal.
       33. In the absence of any Rule 15(2A) application at any  stage,  we
           remake the decision in these appeals on the evidence before us.
       34. In summary, Ms Haider submitted that it would be very  difficult
           for the Second Appellant to restart her education in China, that
           the disruption to her current course of studies by  removal  was
           highly relevant, that the fact of her  being  an  adult  is  not
           fatal to her Article 8 claim, and that she  continued  to  enjoy
           family life in the UK. These factors combined to render  removal
           disproportionate. This in turn was of  relevance  to  the  First
           Appellants case.
       35. Mr Bramble noted the absence of independent evidence relating to
           educational possibilities in China. The  immigration  status  of
           both Appellants in this country had always been precarious. They
           could return to China together, with or without the sponsor, who
           could make a choice as to whether he would go,  since  he  could
           plainly do so in safety.
       36. For the reasons set out below, and having had full regard to the
           evidence, relevant findings of the FtT, and the applicable legal
           framework,  we  conclude  that  both  of  the  appeals  must  be
           dismissed.
       37. The FtT had already determined that neither  Appellant  met  the
           requirements of the Immigration Rules, and, that the sponsor was
           perfectly capable of living in safety with his wife and daughter
           in China (there has of course been no  challenge  to  the  FtT's
           conclusion on the  absence  of  insurmountable  obstacles).  The
           inability  of  the  Appellants  to  meet  any  of  the  relevant
           provisions of the  Rules  is  of  itself  a  significant  factor
           weighing against them (see, for example, Agyarko  [2017]  1  WLR
           823).
       38. Beyond the length of time spent in the UK, and the  evidence  of
           his employment, there was no other evidence of  the  nature  and
           strength of the "private life" established by the sponsor in the
           UK since his illegal entry in 2002. Moreover, the FtT found that
           both he and the First Appellant had a number of members of their
           extended family in China (including their own parents).
       39. The First Appellant has not attempted to adduce  evidence  of  a
           "private life" of sufficient strength  to  outweigh  the  public
           interest in removal, and so her Article  8  appeal  is  squarely
           based upon the "family life" she had pursued  with  her  husband
           and daughter in  the  UK  since  August  2015.  Thus  the  First
           Appellant's Article 8 appeal  essentially  continues  to  depend
           upon the success or failure of the "private life" appeal of  her
           daughter, since that would open up to her the argument that  the
           decision to refuse to vary her  leave  would  prevent  her  from
           enjoying "family life" with her daughter, if, her daughter  were
           granted discretionary leave to remain in the UK.
       40. Although the FtT referred to the Second Appellant from  time  to
           time as if she were a child at the date of the hearing, she  was
           in fact already  an  adult  by  the  date  of  the  Respondent's
           decision.
       41. She sat her GCSEs at the age of 17 in June 2017, but she had not
           achieved the grades she had hoped for (Appellants' Bundle  p43).
           In consequence, in September 2017 she  enrolled  at  the  Bishop
           Laney Sixth Form College upon a "transition year" as a result of
           which she resat an English  GCSE,  and,  also  enrolled  upon  a
           Mandarin A-level course, which she completed within the year  so
           that she sat the relevant examinations in June 2018.
       42. At the age  of  18,  in  September  2018  the  Second  Appellant
           enrolled upon a new course. This was a Level 3  Business  course
           and an  A-level  Mathematics  course.  Her  aim  was  to  access
           enrolment in a University in the UK in September 2020.  However,
           these were new courses upon which she had enrolled as an  adult,
           and not simply a continuation of  courses  upon  which  she  had
           already been enrolled  prior  to  attaining  18.  This  fact  is
           important. The weight to be given to the decision to enrol  upon
           those courses, as an adult, when on  any  view  her  immigration
           status was "precarious" has to be considered in the light of the
           guidance to be found in  Rhuppiah  [2018]  UKSC  58,  Nasim  and
           others (Article 8) Pakistan [2014] UKUT  25,  and  Patel  [2013]
           UKSC 72. We conclude that the Second  Appellant's  private  life
           is, in the  absence  of  any  compelling  circumstances  to  the
           contrary, liable to be accorded little weight. On  the  evidence
           before us, there are no such circumstances. Whilst  we  conclude
           that it is appropriate to reduce the weight to be given  to  her
           private life we have taken into account the fact  that  she  was
           still a child until June  2018,  and  have  concluded  that  the
           appropriate  reduction  is  not  as  significant  as  it   might
           otherwise be. On the other hand we have reminded ourselves  that
           the Second Appellant enjoys no right to education as  such,  and
           none at public expense. The combination  of  these  two  factors
           weighs heavily against the Second Appellant's Article 8 claim.
       43. The FtT accepted that the  Second  Appellant  had  not  attended
           three years of high school education in China, because  she  had
           been living in the UK since the age of 15, and, that neither  of
           her parents were resident at the date of the hearing  in  China.
           It is the Second Appellant's case that she  will  be  unable  to
           enrol at a Chinese University as a  result.  Ms  Haider  accepts
           that this proposition  is  based  entirely  upon  assertions  of
           belief by the Appellants, which have not  been  corroborated  by
           way of independent evidence. We note that even  taken  at  their
           highest, those beliefs appear to have been only that the  Second
           Appellant's ability to gain entry to a Chinese University  would
           be delayed in the event of  the  return  of  the  Appellants  to
           China, rather than being  prevented  absolutely.  Moreover,  the
           evidence before us does not engage with the  Second  Appellant's
           ability to continue any of the studies she had already  embarked
           upon in the UK, once in China, through the international schools
           based in China, or the internet, so as to allow her to  complete
           the courses upon which she is currently enrolled. This is not  a
           case of a young adult being able to demonstrate  that  they  are
           entirely unable to follow their chosen path in their own country
           of origin. This is a further weighty factor against  the  Second
           Appellant's claim.
       44. We have taken into account the uncontroversial  point  that  the
           Second Appellant's removal from the UK would cause a  disruption
           to her educational progress. However, on the evidence before us,
           this has not been shown to be of a significant nature.
       45. We have also taken into account the Second Appellant's age  when
           she entered the UK in 2015. That is  a  factor  that  carries  a
           degree of weight in  respect  of  her  private  life,  but  when
           balanced against the relatively short length of  residence,  the
           precariousness of her status, the fact that she is now  19,  and
           that her current course of study was only commenced once she was
           no longer a child, that weight does not advance her claim to any
           significant extent.
       46. There is no  suggestion  that  the  Second  Appellant  would  be
           separated from her mother as a result  of  the  decisions  under
           appeal. In the absence of any free-standing basis upon which the
           First Appellant can make out a successful Article 8  claim  (and
           we can identify none) both would return to China together.  Thus
           Ms Haider focused upon whether the  Second  Appellant  would  be
           separated from her father, the sponsor, in the  event  that  she
           were removed from the UK. We are satisfied that in reality, this
           would be a matter of choice on his part. Although we accept that
           it may be a difficult choice,  there  is  no  challenge  to  the
           conclusion of the FtT that there are no insurmountable obstacles
           to him returning to China with his family. As noted  previously,
           there is virtually no evidence detailing the sponsor's  ties  to
           the UK, other than his  length  of  residence,  his  immigration
           status, and his employment in a  takeaway  restaurant.  None  of
           these, in isolation, or in combination, disclose any  basis  for
           concluding that his  links  to  this  country  are  sufficiently
           strong that it would be disproportionate for him to be  required
           to make that choice (bearing in  mind  that  the  focus  of  the
           insurmountable obstacles test is on the country of relocation).
       47.  The  FtT  addressed  the  issue  of  whether  entry   clearance
           applications could be made  by  the  Appellants  from  China  in
           future. It was right to do so, and we follow this  approach.  It
           is quite clear, as the evidential picture  before  us  currently
           stands, that such applications would not  be  certain  (or  even
           close to being certain) of success. No proper attempt  has  been
           made to demonstrate evidentially that this would  be  the  case.
           Therefore, the principle established by Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40
           is  not  engaged.  Furthermore,  we  can  see  nothing  remotely
           disproportionate in  requiring  the  Appellants  to  make  entry
           clearance applications if the sponsor does decide to  remain  in
           the UK, given that the original separation of the family was the
           result of his  decision  to  migrate  to  the  UK  illegally  in
           circumstances which did not give rise to a protection claim.  As
           discussed above, there is nothing to  indicate  that  the  First
           Appellant cannot take steps to pass the A2 English language test
           in the future. Equally, there  is  no  obvious  reason  why  the
           Second Appellant will be unable in due course to apply to  study
           at a British university.
       48. We have of course borne in mind the significant public  interest
           in maintaining effective immigration controls,  as  mandated  by
           section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act.
       49. The ability of the Appellant's to speak  English  is  a  neutral
           factor, as is  the  issue  of  financial  independence;  section
           117B(2) and (3).
       50. Bringing all  of  the  relevant  factors  together,  whilst  the
           Respondent's  decision  constitutes  an  interference  with  the
           private  life,  and  the  family  life  enjoyed  by  the  Second
           Appellant with her mother and  father  in  the  UK,  it  is  not
           disproportionate, and it is therefore not unlawful under section
           6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. Her  appeal  must  therefore  be
           dismissed.
       51. It follows that the Article 8 appeal of the First Appellant must
           also be dismissed.



   DECISION


   The decision of the First Tier Tribunal, promulgated on 26 June 2019, is
   set aside on the basis that it contains a material error of law.


   We remake the decisions in these appeals and dismiss them both.



   Direction regarding  anonymity  -  Rule  14  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
   Tribunal) Rules 2008

   Unless and until the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellants  are
   granted anonymity throughout  these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
   proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them.  This  direction
   applies both to the Appellants and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
   with this direction could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt
   of court.


   Signed

   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

      Dated 6 September 2019





