

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
HU/22424/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6th December 2019                    | On 20th December 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                  KIRAN RAI
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop instructed by Arkas Law
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lucas  promulgated  on  30th  July  2019  whereupon  he  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer
    made on 14th September 2018 to refuse  to  grant  the  appellant  entry
    clearance as the adult dependent child of his mother - the widow  of  a
    Ghurkha soldier.

 2. It was recorded at paragraph 10 the appellant had shown that the mother
    came to the UK in 2015 but did not apply to enter between 2009 and 2015
    as all of her children had turned 18 years. Once the  policy  had  been
    amended, she and her daughters made a successful application to come to
    the UK in 2015 and they entered on 12th September 2015.

 3. The relevant findings of the judge ranged from paragraph 17 to  23  and
    particularly at paragraph 20, she found  that  arrangements  must  have
    been in place to look after the appellant  and  that  he  was  in  good
    health and a 35-year-old adult.  The judge found that the  relationship
    with the appellant and his mother was not unusual and did not go beyond
    the normal bond between a mother and son, and at paragraph 22 the judge
    found the appellant was clearly resourceful and able to  relocate  from
    Nepal to seek employment as he did in the UAE if that was  his  choice.
    The judge recorded "To suggest that he continues to be  dependent  upon
    his mother despite taking the choice to move and work  in  the  UAE  is
    neither plausible nor credible".

 4. At paragraph 23 the judge recorded:

         "It is accepted that there is family life between the Appellant and
         sponsor.  That is to be expected between a  mother  and  her  adult
         child.  However, she chose to relocate to the UK in 2015  and  that
         choice was  made  in  the  knowledge  that  the  Appellant  had  no
         automatic right to join her here.  It  is  not  accepted  that  the
         relationship between this adult Appellant in his  mid-thirties  and
         his mother goes above or beyond the normal relationship  between  a
         mother and son.  There is no reason why  the  present  arrangements
         cannot continue".

 5. The grounds of appeal at ground (i) stated that the  judge  focused  on
    irrelevant matters in assessing Article 8 such that:

      a) the sponsor chose to leave her son in Nepal;

      b) that the mother chose to relocate in 2015 but it was accepted  that
         there was family life but;

      c) that the sponsor in choosing to come  to  the  UK  was  a  material
         matter.  Rai v Entry Clearance Officer [2017] EWCA Civ  320  stated
         at paragraphs 38 and 39 that  to  concentrate  on  the  appellant's
         parents' decision to leave the UK and that the  decision  had  been
         freely made and voluntarily undertaken "having made the  choice  to
         come to the United Kingdom" was not  to  confront  the  real  issue
         under Article 8(1), which was:

             "Whether as a matter of fact, the appellant  had  demonstrated
             that he had a family life with his parents, which had  existed
             at the time of their departure to settle in the United Kingdom
             and had endured beyond it, notwithstanding their  having  left
             Nepal when they did".

 6. It was clear that in the light of Rai the issue was not  the  sponsor's
    willingness to leave the appellant or whether the  sponsor  voluntarily
    left the appellant in Nepal.  The focus on  the  sponsor's  choice  was
    unlawful and a material error of law.

 7. Ground (ii) advanced that the findings at paragraphs 20, 21 and 22 were
    also contrary to Rai v Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 320:

         "17.     In Kugathas v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
             [2003] EWCA Civ 31, Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 17  of  his
             judgment)  that  'if  dependency  is  read  down  as   meaning
             'support', in the personal sense, and if one adds, echoing the
             Strasbourg jurisprudence, 'real' or 'committed' or 'effective'
             to the word 'support' then it represents ...  the  irreducible
             minimum of what family life implies'.   Arden  L.J.  said  (in
             paragraph 24 of her judgment) that the 'relevant  factors  ...
             include  identifying  who  are  the  near  relatives  of   the
             appellant, the nature  of  the  links  between  them  and  the
             appellant, the age of the appellant, where and  with  whom  he
             has resided in the past, and  the  forms  of  contact  he  has
             maintained with the other members of the family with  whom  he
             claims to have a family life'.  She acknowledged (at paragraph
             25) that 'there is no presumption of family  life'.   Thus  'a
             family life is not established between an adult child and  his
             surviving parent  or  other  siblings  unless  something  more
             exists than normal emotional ties'.  She  added  that  '[such]
             ties might exist if the appellant were dependent on his family
             or vice versa', but it was 'not ... essential that the members
             of the family should be in the same country'.   In  Patel  and
             others v Entry Clearance Officer, Mumbai [2010] EWCA  Civ  17,
             Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 14 of his judgment, with  which
             Longmore and Aikens L.JJ. agreed) that 'what may constitute an
             extant family  life  falls  well  short  of  what  constitutes
             dependency, and a good many adult children ... may still  have
             a family life with parents who are now  settled  here  not  by
             leave or by force of circumstance but by long-delayed right'".

 8. It was held that there was no need for exceptional circumstances as  to
    what may constitute  an  extant  family  life.   The  judge  needed  to
    establish whether the sponsor provided support to the  appellant.   The
    judge did not dispute that the sponsor provided financial  support  but
    did not properly address the test  established  in  Rai.   The  sponsor
    currently supports the appellant and  the  appellant  was  in  the  UAE
    working but returned to Nepal, where he continued with family life  and
    where he was presently unemployed; the  judge  failed  to  consider  or
    properly consider the appellant was currently unemployed and needed the
    financial support from the sponsor.

 9.  If  Article  8  was  engaged  in  the  light  of  Ghising  and  others
    (Gurkhas/BOCs - historic wrong - weight)  [2013]  UKUT  567  (IAC)  the
    appellant and family would have come to the UK but  for  the  injustice
    that prevented them from settling here earlier and these matters should
    be given appropriate weight.

10. I find there is an error of law in  this  decision.   There  was  clear
    reference to the choice of the sponsor to leave the UK contrary to  Rai
    and the approach to the family life  was  contradictory,  finding  that
    family life existed on the one hand but that he could be independent on
    the other and there was an over emphasis  on  the  mother's  choice  of
    leaving Nepal.  That was an error of law.

11. It was made clear that the appellant had left for the UAE but  returned
    to the family home prior to the  departure  of  the  remainder  of  his
    family for the United Kingdom and until that time he remained with  the
    family.  The statements of the appellant and his mother confirmed  that
    he remains dependent upon his mother.  In fact, the judge, at paragraph
    21, stated  that  it  was  accepted  that  the  sponsor  supported  and
    communicated with the appellant on a regular  basis  but  thought  that
    this arrangement could continue. Family life between the appellant  and
    the sponsor was accepted by the judge at paragraphs 23 and that finding
    I preserve.

12. As indicated, it would  appear  that  the  judge  understood  that  the
    seeking of employment in the UAE was post- rather than pre-departure of
    the family to the UK which it  was  not.   The  appellant  had  resumed
    living with the  sponsor  prior  to  her  departure  and  had  remained
    unmarried  (although  it  appears  that  it  had   had   a   girlfriend
    previously).  The documentation supported the witness statement of  the
    sponsor, which appeared  to  be  consistent,  confirmed  that  she  had
    visited her son in Nepal since her departure, and  that  she  supported
    him  financially.  There  were  Western  Union  and   other   financial
    remittances from the sponsor to the appellant as  acknowledged  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer from 2016  onwards.   There  was  documentation
    demonstrating electronic and phone communication between the  appellant
    and sponsor. The document from the Lilitpur  Metropolitan  City  Office
    dated 29th October 2017 confirmed that the appellant was unemployed  at
    that time and the sponsor confirmed he remained so.  She  was  his  one
    source of financial income and he had no one else in Nepal.  His mother
    and siblings had  married  and  relocated  abroad.   Family  life  thus
    continued to the date the mother left Nepal

13. Jitendra Rai confirms  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the  historic
    injustice  in  these  matters,  there  would  appear  to  be  no  other
    countervailing  factors.  There  was  no  bad  immigration  history  or
    criminal behaviour such that the public  interest  would  outweigh  the
    historic injustice and I find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal should be set aside (with the preserved finding of family life
    in the first sentence of paragraph 23), and re-made and, in  the  light
    of family life and the weight to be accorded to the historic injustice,
    I allow the appeal.

Order

Appeal Allowed.


Signed      Helen Rimington             Date 17th December 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

.
