
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22933/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 19th February 2018                |On 6th April 2018                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                              MR BIKALPA GURUNG
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER FOR NEPAL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. R. Jesurum, Counsel, instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr. L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

      1. The appellant is a national of Nepal, born on the 23rd  June  1989.
         He applied for entry clearance for the purposes of settlement as  a
         dependent of his father, a former Ghurka. This was  refused  on  15
         September 2016.

      2. His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Mace  at
         Hatton Cross on 14 September 2017. In a decision promulgated on  22
         September  2017  it  was  dismissed.   It  was  accepted  that  the
         appellant could not succeed under the rules. The judge did not find
         family life existed within the meaning of article 8.

      3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was  arguable  the
         judge applied too high a threshold and erred in  concluding  family
         life did not exist.

    The First tier Tribunal

      4. The appellant's parents came to the  United  Kingdom  in  May  2012
         .When they left the appellant would have been almost  23  years  of
         age. He is now approaching his 29th birthday.

      5. The appellant's sponsor and his mother gave evidence at the  First-
         tier hearing. The judge found inconsistencies in the  evidence  and
         did not accept the situation was  as  dire  as  described.  It  was
         claimed for instance, that the appellant's home had been  destroyed
         in the earthquake which affected Nepal and that he was living in  a
         makeshift hut. However, the judge noted that he  shared  this  with
         his married brother and his wife and their three children. When the
         sponsor and his mother visited  they  stayed  with  the  appellant.
         Whilst the judge accepted the family home had  been  destroyed  the
         parlous existence described was not accepted.

      6. The judge also did not accept the appellant  had  never  worked  as
         originally suggested. From the evidence  of  the  sponsor  and  the
         appellant's mother the sponsor-retained land  which  the  appellant
         worked. The sponsor acknowledged that the appellant also  did  some
         work for which he was paid.

      7. It was accepted that the sponsor  sent  money  to  the  appellant's
         sister and found that this was used by her and  the  appellant  and
         was also used towards paying off debt the sponsor had  incurred  in
         coming to the United Kingdom.

      8.  The judge accepted there was ongoing contact between the appellant
         and his parents but noted that the majority of the entries  in  the
         bills provided related to Internet data.

      9. The judge referred to limited evidence as to emotional support. The
         appellant's sponsor had visited from January to March 2016 and  the
         judge accepted they would have visited more often had they been  in
         a financial position to do so.  However,  they  were  reliant  upon
         benefits.

     10. The judge did not accept that the appellant was  reliant  upon  the
         money sent to him by the sponsor and found the  evidence  at  times
         inconsistent and contradictory. The judge found that the  appellant
         did work and this went against a claim he could not support himself
         without his sponsor. Rather, the judge  concluded  the  money  sent
         supplemented his income.

     11. At paragraph 18 the judge considered whether family life within the
         meaning of article 8 existed. The judge pointed out that whether or
         not it did was specific to the  circumstances  of  each  individual
         case. The judge set out the case law. The judge concluded that  the
         appellant, then aged 28,  had  not  established  the  existence  of
         family life within the meaning of article 8. The judge pointed  out
         that he was healthy and worked to support himself and farmed  land.
         The property he lived in was of sufficient standard for his parents
         to have stayed there  when  they  visited.  The  judge  accepted  a
         genuine bond of love between them but the  circumstances  were  not
         such as to constitute family life. Consequently, the judge did  not
         proceed to a proportionality assessment.

    The Upper Tribunal

     12. The grounds contend that the  judge  erred  by  focusing  upon  the
         situation at the date of the decision rather than the  family  life
         which had existed before the sponsor's  departure  and  whether  it
         continued. Reference was made to the acknowledged  contact  between
         the appellant and his parents; the visit by  the  sponsor  and  the
         fact that visit more often if they were financially able to do  so;
         the  provision  of  accommodation  owned  by  the  family.  It  was
         suggested because the appellant continue to live in  what  was  the
         family home he was not living independently. It was  suggested  the
         judge applied too high a threshold.

     13. The sponsor's service in the Army and the argument that but for the
         laws  then  he  would  have  settled  earlier  and  the   appellant
         consequently would have been born here, were  highlighted.  It  was
         also pointed out that the considerations in section  117  A  and  B
         would not affect the outcome in line with the comments at paragraph
         55 onwards of the Court of Appeal in Rai -v- ECO  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
         320.

     14. At hearing, Mr Jesurum referred again to the  service  the  sponsor
         had provided to the Crown and that but for the treatment of Gurkhas
         he would have settled in the United Kingdom and his children  would
         now be British. He submitted therefore that this was not  something
         to be decided upon traditional article 8 grounds but  consideration
         should be  modified  because  of  the  historical  background.  The
         skeleton argument provided refers to a restitutionary approach.  He
         submitted it was wrong to focus upon the sponsor's choice in coming
         to the United Kingdom. He acknowledged that the judge did cite  the
         correct test but questioned  whether  it  had  been  applied.  With
         regard to the appellant's employment he submitted that it  was  not
         necessary for dependency to be total to exist. He referred  to  the
         continuing contact between the appellant and his parents.

     15. In response, the presenting officer submitted  that  the  challenge
         made was no more than a disagreement with the  outcome.  The  judge
         had found discrepancies in the evidence presented.  The  judge  has
         set out the relevant considerations.

    Consideration.

     16. The judge has made clear findings of fact. The  evidence  has  been
         analysed and tested. The judge  found  numerous  discrepancies  and
         concluded that the appellant's circumstances were not  as  dire  as
         portrayed. These have not been challenged. The judge made a rounded
         assessment setting out the chronology and  moving  forward  to  the
         present  situation.   The  judge  has  not  decided  the  case   on
         generalities but has focused upon  the  evidence  relating  to  the
         strength of the family life. The judge concluded for  the  purposes
         of article 8 the appellant was leading an independent life and  the
         notion of family life within the meaning of  article  8  no  longer
         existed. In line with this, the judge correctly did not  go  on  to
         consider proportionality. At paragraph 18 and 19 the judge sets out
         the proper legal  principles.  The  judge  does  not  draw  adverse
         inferences from the fact that the sponsor and  his  wife  made  the
         choice of coming to the United Kingdom.

     17.  Mr Jesurum has submitted that the balance in relation to article 8
         must take into account historic injustice and there is reference to
         the restitution approach. However, in my view whether  family  life
         within the meaning of  article  8  exists  is  dependent  upon  the
         individual facts. In this appeal this is exactly what the judge has
         analysed. Absent family life then  the  proportionality  assessment
         does not arise.

     18. I find no material error of law established.

    Decision.

    No material error of law has been established in the decision of  First
    tier Tribunal Mace. Consequently, that decision dismissing  the  appeal
    shall stand.


F.J.Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge            19th March 2018

