
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  HU/22520/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 17 January 2019                   |on 28 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 B T ESHEFU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, Pretoria
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms N Loughran, of Loughran & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated 5 September  2016,  refusing  entry
         clearance.

     ii) The appellant's grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
         contained in his application dated 23 September 2016.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Fox, promulgated  on  14  February  2018,
         dismissing the appeal.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal made to the FtT, dated 2 March
         2018.

      v) The refusal of permission by the FtT, dated 7 June 2018.

     vi) The application for permission to appeal made to  the  UT,  on  the
         same grounds, dated 25 July 2018.

    vii) The grant of permission by the UT, dated 20 August 2018.

   viii) The respondent's response under rule 24, dated 11 October 2018.

 2. Ground (a) challenges [24] of the FtT's decision, where the judge said,
    "There has been no family life identified in  the  evidence  before  me
    today that would suggest family life has been interfered with."

 3. Although the immigration rule was relevant, the  appeal  was  on  human
    rights grounds only.  The first matter to  decide  was  whether  family
    life for article 8 purposes was established, and the second was whether
    any interference was proportionate.  Ms Loughran was able to point to a
    body of evidence from which it might have been held  that  family  life
    falling  within  article  8  (i.e.,  the  equivalent  of   a   parental
    relationship) did exist.  At other points in  his  decision  the  judge
    accepted that there was some evidence  of  relationship.   Perhaps  the
    judge over-compressed the questions  whether  there  was  any  evidence
    tending to show family life; how far any evidence took  the  appellant;
    and if there was family life, the extent  and  proportionality  of  the
    interference.  The judge's expression is  unclear.   Family  life,  and
    interference, were certainly identifiable in the evidence.

 4. Grounds (b) is somewhat confusing in referring to  an  adoption  order.
    What the appellant produced at inventory III item C was evidence not of
    adoption but of guardianship.  (The originals  of  this  and  of  other
    items are with the appellant's solicitors.)  This brings  an  error  to
    light. As identified by the judge granting permission, the judge failed
    to make any reference to this item.

 5. As Ms Loughran submitted, this omission  becomes  more  significant  in
    context of the rest of the reasoning.  The judge declined to give  much
    weight to birth and death records from a church, because these were not
    official government records, but has not mentioned evidence  which  did
    appear to come from official records.

 6. A linked error is apparent from [4] of  the  decision.   Although  this
    paragraph is set out as a summary of the ECO's reasons, the 7th "bullet
    point" is not from the ECO's decision, but a  record  of  a  submission
    made at the hearing.  It was said that the  evidence  did  not  confirm
    guardianship or responsibility and did not  refer  to  the  appellant's
    father not caring for him.  That conflicts with the terms of the  court
    decision on guardianship.  It may be that a flawed submission,  or  the
    judge's misunderstanding of a  submission,  played  some  part  in  his
    decision.

 7. I  am  not  persuaded  that  ground  (c)  demonstrates  error.   It  is
    understandable  that  the  sponsor   might   wish   to   emphasis   her
    responsibility for the appellant, but the judge was  entitled  to  take
    the answer as not meeting the question.

 8. Ground (d) essentially says only that the judge should have given  more
    weight to the evidence of birth, baptism and death from church records.
     That is disagreement  rather  than  error  of  law,  and  the  judge's
    evaluation was within reason.  However, that is not reasoning  of  such
    force that the decision survives excision of errors  on  other  points.



 9. The decision at [25] I find cryptic at best, but it is  unnecessary  to
    take that any further.

10. The errors shown by grounds (a) and (b), and which  are  apparent  from
    the 7th "bullet point" of [4], are such that the decision  of  the  FtT
    falls to be set aside. It stands only as a record of what was  said  at
    the hearing.

11. The nature of this case is such that it is appropriate under section 12
    of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, to remit to the  FtT
    for an entirely fresh hearing.

12. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Fox.

13. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      17 January 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




