
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22042/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford via Skype          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 January 2021                   |On 16 February 2021                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     ZB
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee instructed by Sabz Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. By a decision promulgated on the 13 October 2020 the Upper Tribunal
        set aside the decision of a judge of the First-tier Tribunal  which
        dismissed  the  appellants  appeal  against  the  order   for   his
        deportation from  the  United  Kingdom.  It  was  accepted  by  the
        respondent's representative that the failure of the judge  to  have
        considered the evidence properly amounted to a  material  error  of
        law.



Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on the 2 December 1984.
     3. The parties were directed by the Upper Tribunal to file a statement
        of agreed preserved finding which resulted in a  joint  note  being
        submitted on 23 October 2020 in the following terms:


        "Pursuant to the directions made by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hanson
        that by 4pm on the 23rd October 2020, the parties are to agree,  if
        possible, the factual findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        that are to be preserved, the joint position of the parties is that
        none of the material findings as to the Appellant and his  family's
        situation can be preserved in light of the errors  of  law  in  the
        Judge's approach to the evidence."


     4. The appellant is subject to an order for his deportation  from  the
        United Kingdom, served on  20  March  2018,  as  a  result  of  his
        conviction at Snaresbrook Crown Court. The appellant made  a  human
        rights claim on 21 March 2018 and 10 April 2018 which  was  refused
        by the respondent on the basis it is was not  found  the  appellant
        fell within any of the exceptions set out in section 33 UK  Borders
        Act 2007. The date of that decision is 15 October 2018.
     5. In his sentencing remarks  dated  21  February  2018  HHJ  Southern
        outlined in detail the nature of the appellant's  offending  noting
        communication between the appellant and a neighbour on the  evening
        of 12 October 2017, which initially appeared amicable, and in which
        the appellant demanded his neighbour  apologise  to  his  wife  for
        disturbing her when he called round to see whether his cat  was  in
        their garden. The sentencing remarks record:


        "Having returned to [the neighbours] home, where you briefly  spoke
        to his partner, you then asked him to return with you  once  again,
        to offer a further apology to your wife, which again, he agreed  to
        do. This time your mood was different. You produced a  hammer  that
        [your neighbour] describes as having been tucked into your trousers
        and you struck [your neighbour] twice, once on his face and once on
        the top of his head.


        [Your neighbour] lost consciousness and when he came to he was able
        to escape by running away to seek help at a local shop where police
        were called. He was taken to hospital, where a cut  was  glued  and
        where, fortunately, a scan confirmed that there had not  been  more
        serious injury such as a fracture or a bleed to the brain.


        Meanwhile, officers attended at your home and  in  a  vigorous  and
        drunken attempt to avoid the inevitable arrest that was to  follow,
        you assaulted two female police officers as you  sought  to  resist
        being placed in handcuffs by  struggling  furiously  and  thrashing
        about with your arms and legs. The assaults left one  officer  with
        painful tendons or tendon and the need  to  take  anti-inflammatory
        drugs and to wear a form of hand support for a while, and the other
        officer suffered bruising.


     6.  Having  considered  the  circumstances  of  the  offence  and  the
        mitigation advanced on behalf of the appellant the Sentencing Judge
        concludes that the appropriate sentence in relation to the  offence
        of unlawful wounding was 15 months imprisonment. In relation to the
        common assault against the police  officers  the  sentencing  judge
        concludes that for each of  the  two  assaults  the  appellant  was
        sentenced to three months imprisonment concurrent with  each  other
        but consecutive to the sentence for unlawful wounding,  making  the
        overall sentence one of 18 months imprisonment.
     7. In relation to the appellants claim to have family  life  with  his
        children and to be  entitled  to  benefit  from  the  exception  to
        deportation set out in paragraph 399(a) of  the  Immigration  Rules
        the respondent wrote in the decision to  refuse  the  human  rights
        claim:


        You claim to have family life in the UK with four children  in  the
        UK. You have provided their detail as follows:


        1. SaB, British, born in UK on 3 November 2016.
        2. ZB, British, born in UK on 30 January 2013.
        3. AB, British, born in UK on 23 December 2010.
        4. SB, British, born in UK on 22 May 2009.


        ...


        It is accepted that your four children are  under  the  age  of  18
        because their birth certificates show their dates of birth and they
        are all under 18 years.  It is not disputed that your four children
        are in the UK.


        It is accepted that SaB, ZB, AB and SB are British citizens because
        their passports have been provided.


        It is not accepted that SaB and ZB have lived  in  the  UK  for  at
        least the seven  years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  this
        decision because they are only 2 and 5 years old respectively.


        It is not accepted that you have a genuine and subsisting  parental
        relationship  with  your  children.  A   genuine   and   subsisting
        relationship means more than a  biological  relationship  and  more
        than presence in a child's life.  It  requires  a  significant  and
        meaningful  positive  involvement  in  a  child's   life   with   a
        significant degree of responsibility for the child's welfare.  Your
        wife in her letter dated 28 March 2018 writes of  the  support  and
        love you give to the children and how distressed the  children  are
        in your absence. However, it is noted that you have an  issue  with
        substance abuse and you were  under  the  influence  of  drugs  and
        alcohol when you committed your latest offence. In  addition,  your
        family has been known to the London Borough of Barking and Dagenham
        (LBBD) Children's Services since October 2008 due to concerns about
        domestic violence in relation to your verbal and physical abuse  of
        the children's mother. Your battle with substance  abuse  and  your
        propensity in the past towards domestic violence is not  considered
        as indicators of positive involvement in your children's lives.  In
        2017 LBBD Children's Services  were  involved  following  your  son
        disclosing that you had punched his mother and  she  was  bleeding.
        Your wife and children were separated from you due to violence  and
        they were moved into a different property. The case was  progressed
        to a Child in Need Plan by  the  authorities,  due  to  the  mother
        having to care for four children, being visually  impaired  and  to
        increase her confidence and self esteem as well as to  protect  her
        and the children. Therefore there is no evidence that  you  have  a
        positive involvement in your children's lives and at  present  your
        ability to provide physical, emotional  and  financial  support  is
        impaired by the criminal act you convicted which has  led  to  your
        incarceration.


        It is accepted that it would be unduly harsh for your  children  to
        live in Pakistan because they are British children who  have  spent
        their entire lives in the UK. It is accepted that not seeing you in
        the short term will be upsetting for them  although  they  will  be
        able to maintain their relationship with you using modern means  of
        communication and visits.


        It is not accepted that it would be unduly harsh for your  children
        to remain in the UK even though you are to be deported. As they and
        their mother are British, they would have the range of benefits and
        support available to them as British nationals and  would  continue
        their relationships with extended family members. They  would  also
        not be exposed to domestic violence or witness your substance abuse
        in the event that  treatment  you  receive  is  not  successful  in
        helping you change your behaviour.


        Therefore, having considered all available information, it  is  not
        accepted  that  you  meet  the  requirement  of  the  exception  to
        deportation on the basis of family life with a child.


     8. In  relation  to  the  appellants  claim  to  have  a  genuine  and
        subsisting relationship with his wife, NS, it  is  written  in  the
        refusal:

        It is accepted that NS is a British citizen and is settled  in  the
        UK because passport has been provided.


        It is accepted that you have a genuine and subsisting  relationship
        with NS because she has written in  support  of  your  relationship
        with her and the children. However, it is also noted that  she  has
        been exposed to domestic violence by you over the years of marriage
        to you and Social Services have had to intervene  on  occasions  in
        the past and she and your children have lived  apart  from  you  to
        escape domestic violence at your hands. Your  wife  claims  in  her
        letter of support that she is blind and  that  you  have  been  her
        carer as well as a  carer  for  your  mother.  However,  since  her
        registration as partially sighted, she is in  receipt  of  Personal
        Independence  Payment  and  LBBD  Social  Services   will   provide
        rehabilitation training for her when she is ready to undertake it.


        It is accepted that your relationship with NS was formed  when  you
        were in the  UK  lawfully  and  your  immigration  status  was  not
        precarious.


        It is accepted that it would be unduly harsh  for  NS  to  live  in
        Pakistan with you due to record indicating that you  separated  due
        to domestic violence against her by yourself. If she  chose  to  do
        accompany you to Pakistan, it is considered that you would be  with
        her and support her to adjust and settle into the way  of  life  in
        Pakistan. You both originate from Pakistan and  therefore  you  are
        not totally alien to Pakistani  language  or  culture  as  you  are
        likely to have integrated in your local Pakistani  community  where
        links with the language and culture of Pakistan is maintained.


        It is not accepted that it would be unduly harsh for NS  to  remain
        in the UK even though you are to be deported. As a British citizen,
        she is familiar with the British way of life. She would be able  to
        continue to access support from relevant authorities  in  order  to
        support herself and the children along with assistance from  family
        members so that she is able to lead a normal life in the event that
        you were deported. It remains upon NS to choose to maintain contact
        and relationship with you.


        Therefore, having considered all available information, it  is  not
        accepted that  you  meet  the  requirements  of  the  exception  to
        deportation on the basis of family life with a partner.




The evidence


     9. Within the appellant's original bundle is a copy email written by a
        Senior Social Worker, Mr Taylor, dated 25 October 2018 to NS in the
        following terms:


        "As you are aware I attended your house on  08.10.18.  The  purpose
        was to complete a Single Assessment.


        I observed that the children were extremely affected by the absence
        of their father as they were crying and asking  when  their  father
        will return home. There is a likelihood that the children may  have
        long-term psychological effects if their father is deported.


        Additionally as discussed during my visit, father is your carer  as
        you are registered blind. The local authority intends  to  continue
        working family (CIN Plan) to ensure that appropriate  services  are
        made available to provide the support that is required."


    10. A further letter written by Mr Taylor dated 13 June 2019 reads:


        To whom it may concern


        RE; [B] family.


        I was allocated the case in November 2018 as  the  local  authority
        received a referral from Mr [B] Probation Officer reporting that Mr
        [B] was due to be released from prison on 06.12.2018 and there were
        concerns that he would be spending a  significant  amount  of  time
        with his family unsupervised. I was required to complete  a  Single
        Assessment, assessing the family's need and making a recommendation
        regarding the level of intervention that the family may require.


        I attended my initial home visit on 08.10.2018 and observed clearly
        distressed, she  was  crying  and  expressing  concerns  about  the
        prospect of Mr [B] being deported back to Pakistan and the negative
        impact that it would inevitably have upon herself and the children.
        She explained that extended  family  members  have  generally  been
        supportive during Mr [B] imprisonment however say  have  their  own
        commitments  and  the  support  will  stop  once  he  is  released.
        Additionally, she explained that she did not want to put  too  much
        pressure on her family. During  visit,  the  children  were  to  be
        distressed and were asking when their father was coming home.


        Mr [B] has been attending the  family  home  frequently  since  his
        released on 06.12.2018. During all  my  home  visits  it  has  been
        observed that Mr [B] has interacted with wife and  children  in  an
        appropriate  way.  Mr  [B]  has  been  observed  preparing  dinner,
        cleaning and supporting  the  children  with  their  homework.  The
        children and mother have appeared  happy  and  relaxed  in  Mr  [B]
        company during home visits.


        I have been liaising with Mr [B]  Probation  Officer  and  positive
        reports have been received about Mr [B] progress which  contributed
        to the local authority closing decision to close the case.


        It is evident that Mr [B]  support  is  essential  to  the  family,
        especially within the context  of  his  wife's  disability,  it  is
        likely that without support it  may  be  difficult  for  mother  to
        fulfil her parental duties. His wife and children depend upon  him,
        deporting him may cause the family serious distress.


    11. There is also within the bundle a letter from  The  Surgery  (Dewey
        Road) written by Dr C Ola to the appellant's solicitors, dated  the
        24 October 2018, in the following terms:


        RE   1.   NS
                  Date of Birth 02-Jun-1989
             2.   SB
                  Date of Birth 22-05-2009.


        I am  the  registered  General  Practitioner  of  NS,  SB  and  her
        siblings.


        NS is registered as being blind; and her husband [ ]  is  currently
        in prison. She is struggling mentally and physically  to  care  for
        herself and her children, as her relatives cannot always assist  in
        areas of childcare, cooking and other  domestic  matters,  as  they
        have their own families and lives to live.


        I was shown a video of SB wailing on her mother's smart  phone  and
        SB's other three siblings  express  their  emotions  in  a  similar
        fashion.


        NS has been depressed since the incarceration of  her  husband  and
        this has worsened her existing migraines. She has been referred for
        counselling.


        SB and her siblings were born in the UK and  have  known  no  other
        culture than the British one.


        There has been a serious negative impact psychologically on NS  and
        her children. They miss their father's presence and cry  daily.  He
        would take them to school, take them out and do other things  as  a
        loving father would, when he was at home.


        SB, I was told would talk to her father's picture and ask  when  he
        would be back. She at times throws tantrums stating that she  won't
        go to school unless he is back home.


        NS and her children simply will not be able to  cope  if  [  ]  her
        husband is deported.


        I have always known [ ] to  be  a  caring  and  loving  father  and
        husband. He would bring the members of his family  to  the  surgery
        appropriately.


        Yours sincerely.


    12. A further letter from Dr Ola dated 15 September 2020 reads:


        Dear Sir/Madam


        I am  the  registered  General  Practitioner  of  the  above  named
        gentleman, his wife and his four children. I have  known  them  for
        almost ten years now. [ZB] has always brought his wife and children
        for their GP appointments.  The  recent  devastating  news  of  his
        deportation  has  brought  tremendous  distress  to  his  wife  and
        children (that ranges range from ten years to four years). His wife
        has been registered as  being  severely  virtually  impaired  since
        2009. His incarceration impacted very negatively on  his  wife  and
        children. I understand that when he was  incarcerated,  his  oldest
        daughter would cry whilst looking for her father's  picture,  smell
        his clothes and say that life is not worth living, if  he  did  not
        come back. His wife struggled physically and  emotionally  to  look
        after the children when he was in prison and her mental health also
        deteriorated. She was commenced on antidepressants. I  have  always
        known [ZB] to be a loving and caring father.


        If [ZB] were to be deported, his  wife  and  children  will  suffer
        tremendously in emotional and mental  health  terms.  His  visually
        handicapped wife will not  get  regular  assistance  from  extended
        family members as they have their own families and lives to run.


        I would be grateful if the above will be taken  into  consideration
        in letting [ZB] remain in the UK. He  has  learned  from  his  past
        errors.


        Yours sincerely
        Dr Ola


    13. A report of Dr Latif, described as  an  Independent  Psychologist's
        Report dated 16 October 2019,  dealing  with  the  appellants  role
        within the family is also relied upon.  Section  8  of  the  report
        deals with the appellants wife NS. Section 9 with the elder  child,
        SB, section 10 with SK the appellants mother and section 11 with Dr
        Latif's conclusions, in which a number of specific questions  asked
        by the appellants solicitors and the replies are set out.  As  this
        is key evidence in this appeal, I set  out  the  content  of  these
        sections in full.

        8.0  Ms NS (wife)


        8.1  NS  explained  to  me  that  she  is  registered  with  severe
             blindness and lost her eyesight completely following the birth
             of her first child. She said the loss of eyesight  is  gradual
             and a hereditary condition in her family. She told me that she
             is also concerned that her children may  have  inherited  this
             condition, as two of them have poor eyesight and as her mother
             and one of her siblings is also severely blind.


        8.2  NS said her permanent blindness early on in  life  has  caused
             her to experience depression and  she  told  me  that  she  is
             taking prescribed medication. In addition  she  experiences  a
             spinal deformity which she said limits her mobility and causes
             her daily pain. NS takes  a  range  of  daily  medications  to
             include  Amitriptyline  10mg,  Metoclopramide  10mg,  Naproxen
             500mg and Promethazine Hydrochloride 20mg. NS  reported  great
             difficulty with her sleep at night due to  her  blindness  and
             disturbance in sleep/wake cycle and her  depressive  disorder,
             which  causes  her  to  experience  ruminating  and  intrusive
             thoughts (medical letters verify this information).


        8.3  NS said she is fully reliant on her husband for her  care  and
             received PIP benefit for this. NS described  how  her  husband
             dresses her, helps her to  wash  and  shower,  undertakes  her
             personal hygiene, undertakes  the  cooking,  domestic  duties,
             cares for the children and take them to school and brings them
             back.


        8.4  NS stated that she is emotionally reliant on her  husband  for
             support and without him she said she fears her life would come
             to nothing.


        8.5  NS said she struggled with the care of her  children  when  Mr
             [B] was in prison and became heavily reliant upon  her  eldest
             daughter who found  it  very  difficult  to  cope  and  became
             emotional. She also described how she was unable to  feed  the
             children and take them to school and had  to  wait  for  other
             family members to do this.


        9.0  Miss SB (Daughter)


        9.1  [SB] is a 10 year old girl who appear to be  very  mature  for
             her age. She attends year 6 of primary school. She stated that
             she did not like her father not being at home for many months.
             She said that she would cry every night.  She  explained  that
             her mother found it very hard to look after them and relied on
             her a lot. She also stated that her mother relied on her a lot
             and she was always tired. She said  she  missed  her  father's
             cooking and now that he is back she does not ever want him  to
             leave and wants him to stay with them as a family.


        10.0 Ms SK


        10.1 Mr [B] mother was also interviewed.  She told me that she  has
             severe mental health problems and suffers from depression  and
             is under the care of a psychiatrist. I have noted from medical
             records that  she  has  been  diagnosed  with  depression  and
             psychosis and has other physical conditions.


        10.2 Ms [SK] explained that her son is the only person  who  really
             cares for her on an emotional level, although  she  does  have
             other children who care for her and  she  explained  that  she
             spends most of her time at Mr  [B]  home,  because  her  other
             children are in education. Ms [SK] reported a  high  level  of
             emotional dependency upon her son. She explained that her  son
             provides her with practical and emotional  support  and  takes
             her out. She  explained  that  without  him  she  would  'kill
             myself'.


        11.0      CONCLUSION


        11.1  In  reviewing  this  case  through  psychological  interview,
             psychometric measures and  supporting  documentation.  I  have
             considered all the relevant sources of information and  issues
             with great care and my answers to the  instructions  from  the
             instructing solicitors:


          1. What level of role is our client playing in the lives  of  his
             children and his wife who is registered as blind?


             Mr [B] has a close attachment and bond with his  children  and
             he has been a part of their lives  and  the  main  care  giver
             since their birth and since his release from  custody.  He  is
             their full time carer and undertakes  all  of  the  tasks  and
             duties of daily care for them. He also  undertakes  all  daily
             care for his wife who is registered  as  severely  permanently
             and blind and qualifies and received PIP benefits to allow him
             to do this.


         2.   Can the role that he is playing be dispensed with by  him  and
             if so, what impact would it have on his children and his wife?




             In my opinion it would not be in the  best  interests  of  the
             children if Mr [B] was removed from the  UK  and  it  is  most
             likely that  there  would  be  an  enormous  impact  upon  the
             psychological, emotional, social and  educational  development
             of the children. It is difficult to  say  whether  this  could
             ever be recovered, because it may be recovered and has seen to
             be, in some cases, however, it may also deteriorate and  never
             be recovered to  the  same  levels  as  before  (psychological
             health). It is not correct to assume though that children  are
             young and can always adapt and adjust well to changes in their
             lives, of course, they can at times, but as childhood  can  be
             impressionable  and  a  vulnerable  and  fragile   time,   any
             influence   can   cause   deterioration   in   physical    and
             psychological health quite easily. It would also mean that the
             children's education would be detrimentally impacted  upon  as
             his wife would rely on them, particularly [SB], to provide her
             with care and for the rest of the children.

         3.   Can the children be expected to relocate with  the  client  in
             Pakistan  and  the  impact  on  their   mental,   social   and
             educational development?


          NS and the children are British Citizens and it  would  be  unfair
             for them to  give  up  her  future  in  Britain  as  they  are
             entitled, in order to live  in  Pakistan.  They  also  have  a
             private life and are integrated into British society and would
             find relocation difficult, not to say  that  this  would  also
             impact on their education and learning.


         4.   What, in your professional opinion would constitute  as  being
             in the best interests of the children?


          In my professional pinion (sic), it is the best  interest  of  the
             children to remain in the UK and in the care of their  father,
             who has been their main caregiver  from  birth.  It  would  be
             unfair to remove them from the UK or to remove Mr [B] from the
             UK.


          In my professional opinion and on balance and I have looked at the
             pros and cons of both sides of the argument, I  consider  that
             to deport Mr [B] to  Pakistan  expecting  him  to  live  there
             without his children  and  also  expecting  them  to  live  in
             Pakistan with him, would not be in their best interests at all
             as both  scenarios  have  a  number  of  factors  which  would
             significantly impact on the children's development  and  well-
             being to cause deterioration rather than an improvement.


         5.   What impact would there  be  on  the  client  if  he  was  now
             required to leave his children and relocate to Pakistan?


          If Mr [B] is removed to Pakistan, he is unlikely  to  be  involved
             daily in the development and  progression  of  his  children's
             life and being able to watch them grow up and this would  come
             as a large blow to him and would only  contribute  to  further
             deterioration of his already affected mental health and  well-
             being, which has improved considerably.


         6.   What impact there would be on the  family  unit  in  terms  of
             their well-being, if the client was deported from  the  United
             Kingdom?


          If Mr [B] if deported, the children would lose  their  father  and
             main caregiver, there would be a disruption to the  attachment
             process for the younger children, which is most important from
             the years of 1 to 5, as research has shown that  a  disruption
             in the early years can cause significant impact on development
             and later life in  adolescence  and  adulthood.  NS  would  be
             unable to work due to her disability and  she  would  have  to
             raise the children as a single parent  and  in  poverty.  This
             would no doubtedly impact upon her own mental health and well-
             being. In addition, the children would be  at  risk  of  being
             removed from their mothers care as she  has  severe  blindness
             and would experience difficulty in caring for them.


         7.   What impact would there be on the client's mother  if  he  was
             now deported from the United Kingdom?


          Mrs [K] is also heavily  reliant  on  Mr  [B]  for  emotional  and
             practical  support  and  she  is  likely   to   experience   a
             detrimental blow to her emotional well-being  if  her  son  is
             removed to Pakistan. She has a history of  self-harm  and  she
             may possibly act impulsively increasing risk to herself.


    14. [ZB] and his wife have filed witness statements and [ZB] was  cross
        examined by Mrs Petterson. That evidence has been noted.
    15. There is also within the bundle a letter  dated  16  November  2020
        written by the child SB in the following terms:


        Dear Judge/Home Office


        My name is [SB] and I am the daughter of [ZB]. I am  11  years  old
        and I'm currently in year seven at [   ]  secondary  school.  I  am
        writing this letter in support of my father who  I  know  is  under
        deportation. My dad is one in a million and I cannot imagine a  day
        without him. Since I have been told this devastating  news  I  have
        been unable to sleep at night, I sometimes cry that if my  dad  was
        to be separated from us, who will look after us, who will cook  for
        us, help us in our home work and love us the way he does. It at all
        times I need my father's support and from the time of my  childhood
        my father has always been with us. My little brother won't  eat  if
        dad is not around. I fear sometimes that I might be the unlucky one
        with no dad, my friends and cousins will have their dad and I went.
        My father is very close to me I can share all my feelings with him.
        I feel very secure when he is around me.  I  really  love  my  dad,
        don't take him away from us. I won't be able to live, we don't have
        nobody apart from him. If my dad goes to Pakistan how will  I  meet
        him I have never been to Pakistan this is my  country,  I  love  my
        school and I want to be here. I want to become a lawyer  and  I  am
        working hard towards it and I  don't  want  anything  affecting  my
        education. Please whoever is reading the letter please help  me  to
        save my dad my family will break  please  support  us  in  any  way
        possible. Nobody deserves to be without a father and I will  cry  a
        lot if you take my dad away. I will become depressed I  will  never
        be able to move on in life and achieve my dreams. My dad is my  dad
        I am my daddy's girl and he is my love and means everything  to  me
        in the world. I will never have him in  any  circumstances.  Please
        help me to save my dad. Can you please pass this letter on  to  who
        that can help me to save my dad.


Discussion


    16. The existence of a "genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship"
        between the appellant and  the  children  or  such  a  relationship
        between the appellant and his wife is a question of  fact.  It  was
        not  disputed  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  that  a  genuine   and
        subsisting relationship exists between both groups  of  individuals
        and ZB.
    17. It was also not disputed that it  will  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
        appellant's wife and children to relocate to Pakistan with ZB if he
        is deported.
    18. It was not disputed that the core issue in this appeal  is  whether
        it will be unduly harsh for the appellant's wife  and  children  to
        remain in the United Kingdom if ZB is deported to Pakistan.
    19. In relation to the assessment of whether the appellants deportation
        will result in "unduly harsh" consequences for  the  children,  the
        matter is to be evaluated only with reference to the child  him  or
        herself. To weigh the impact of deportation on  the  child  against
        the criminality of the parent would be to offend  against  the  7th
        principle in Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
        [2013] UKSC 74 that a child cannot be blamed for matters for  which
        he is not responsible: KO (Nigeria) & Ors v Secretary of State  for
        the Home Department (Respondent) [2018] UKSC 53.
    20. It is therefore not permissible to weigh the impact of  deportation
        against either the offences for which the appellant was  sentenced,
        which it is accepted arose as a result of ZB's substance  abuse  of
        alcohol and cannabis taken at home, or the further more recent  act
        of criminality disclosed in reply to a question put to him in cross
        examination and in his witness statement of  November  2020,  which
        shows the appellant was arrested in July 2019 and charged with  the
        offence of dangerous driving. The appellant  confirmed  he  pleaded
        guilty and that his case had been adjourned to 26 February 2021 for
        sentencing before the Crown Court.
    21. I do not find the appellant has  established  that  the  impact  of
        removal on his mother will be unduly harsh, for although  I  accept
        that it is likely to be something she does not want,  the  evidence
        is that there are family members in the United  Kingdom,  including
        ZB's brothers and a sister who also live in London, and it was  not
        made out they will be unable  to  provide  the  necessary  support,
        together with the medical professionals,  she requires as  they  do
        at this time.
    22. In relation to the appellant's wife  and  children,  Mrs  Pettersen
        accepted in her submissions that  the  impact  of  the  appellant's
        removal from the United Kingdom will be harsh and  possibly  result
        in very harsh consequences for them but submitted that the required
        threshold of unduly harsh had not been met.
    23. The MK (Sierra Leone) formulation stating that unduly harsh "is  an
        elevated threshold denoting something severe or bleak" was approved
        in KO (Nigeria) (supra) although in HA (Iraq) v Secretary of  State
        for the Home Department (Rev 1) [2020]  EWCA  Civ  1176  the  court
        cautioned against conflating "undue harshness" with the far  higher
        test of "very compelling circumstances". The underlying concept  is
        of an "enhanced degree of  harshness  sufficient  to  outweigh  the
        public interest in the medium offender category" [44-56].
    24. Whilst a lot of the evidence related to what previously might  have
        been categorised as the normal distress caused by separation  of  a
        partner or children from the appellant, it is no longer correct for
        the respondent to rely upon this and to claim that such distress is
        insufficient to meet the test, as it could be.  The  correct  focus
        should be on the emotional impact on the individual child: HA(Iraq)
        (supra) [Underhill LJ 44-56, Peter Jackson LJ 157-159].
    25. In HA (Iraq) it was found that in evaluating undue harshness for  a
        child,  decision  makers  should  take  into  account  the  Zoumbas
        principles [55, 84, 114, 153], the  best  interests  of  the  child
        [55], emotional as well as physical harm [159], relationships  with
        other family members in the UK [120] and where applicable "the very
        significant and weighty" benefits of British  citizenship  [112-116
        cf. Patel (British citizen child  -  deportation)  [2020]  UKUT  45
        (IAC)].
    26. There has been specific focus in this case upon the impact upon the
        older child SB if the appellant is deported.  It  is  not  disputed
        that NS is registered with severe blindness and nor is  it  claimed
        before the Upper Tribunal that her evidence regarding the extent of
        her dependency upon the appellant to meet her personal needs and to
        provide care for both her and the children was exaggerated.
    27. NS was registered as of 1 July 2005  with  the  London  Borough  of
        Barking and Dagenham as disabled on the basis of the  diagnosis  of
        being partially sight impaired and there is evidence NS receives an
        advanced rate of PIP and the appellant a cares allowance payment as
        a result of her disability.
    28. Whilst there are organisations such as the Royal National Institute
        for the blind, RNIB, who can provide guidance  and  assistance  for
        blind or partially sighted to attain the many helpful benefits  and
        support available to make life for them, the  appellant's  evidence
        was not challenged before the Upper  Tribunal  that  although  some
        care provision could be made by  Social  Services,  24-hour  social
        care was not available.
    29. If the appellant is deported, even with the assistance from  family
        members in the UK, it is highly likely that NS will  be  forced  to
        call upon SB to meet both her needs and to assist with the care  of
        her siblings.
    30. The child was born on the 22 May 2009 and is therefore 12 years  of
        age at the date of the hearing.
    31. It cannot be disputed that parents, whether they  are  disabled  or
        not, need to feel in control of their families, and  children  need
        to perceive them as being in control in a  normal  balanced  family
        environment. Whilst the evidence indicates this  is  the  situation
        prevailing whilst the appellant remains in the family  home  it  is
        clear that if he is deported and NS is the only  remaining  parent,
        she does not have the capacity or ability to be in control  of  the
        family unit.
    32. Studies have also shown that social exclusion can be a  significant
        issue for a disabled parent who may find it difficult to access the
        type of support required to enable them and their families to  live
        "normal" lives.  NS is not the parent  who  currently  assists  the
        children with their  homework  or  attends  school  or  deals  with
        educational matters to the  extent  that  the  appellant  does,  as
        evidenced by the material in the appellant's bundle.
    33. Dr Latif raises the issue of the impact of the standard of care  NS
        is able, or more likely unable, to offer the children leading to  a
        loss  of  custody  of  the  children,  through   child   protection
        proceedings. It is not made out it will be in the best interests of
        the children if the appellant is deported, especially if there is a
        real risk of them loosing not only the  family  unit  that  he  has
        provided for them but also the family they know with their mother.
    34. There are  a  number  of  studies  by  organisations  such  as  the
        Children's Commissioner that recognises that the mental health of a
        young person providing care for a disabled parent  is  affected  by
        their caring role without the  required  support  they  need  being
        available.
    35. The Childrens Commissioner in  a  report  records:  "68%  of  young
        carers told us they are bullied in school, so it  is  essential  we
        give them the support they need to  feel  safe  and  achieve  their
        goals. And yet we know there is a support gap.  We  estimated  that
        approximately 4 out of 5 young carers are not receiving  help  from
        their local authority, and not all  local  authorities  are  taking
        steps to provide support for the children  who  may  be  carers  in
        their area". The evidence provided from the local authority in this
        case says nothing about the support that will be made available  to
        the family and ,in particular, SB if she has to take on this role.
    36. Young carers often take on their caring role with love and  without
        complaint, as I am sure SB does, but can pay a price in poor health
        coupled with lower school results and long-term life chances.  Even
        if SB accepts her situation with a sense of  duty  and  compassion,
        there is a real risk she will be denied the  chance  to  enjoy  her
        childhood with a risk of related adverse developmental issues.
    37. Studies show that not only are young carers  more  likely  to  fall
        behind in education and  experience  mental  health  issues,  their
        caring role can sometimes prevent them from making and  maintaining
        friendships. This isolation can easily be exacerbated: young carers
        often won't ask for help for fear of being taken into care.
    38. If this was a case in which NS did not suffer  the  extent  of  the
        disability she suffers,  which  has  a  material  impact  upon  her
        ability to care for the children, which will clearly result on  the
        evidence in an enhanced degree of harshness, this appeal is  likely
        to have been dismissed. But she does.
    39. I find that such enhanced degree of harshness resulting  from  NS's
        inability to care for the children and  impact  upon  the  children
        within this family unit following the loss of the  main  caregiver,
        who cannot  realistically  be  replaced  within  the  immediate  or
        extended family sufficient to meet the needs of  the  children,  is
        sufficient to outweigh the public interest in the  medium  offender
        category; based in particular upon the impact upon SB of having  to
        become a child carer responsible for meeting the unmet support need
        of her mother and in trying to replicate the role of her father  by
        having to deliver both the physical and/or emotional  care  to  her
        mother and three  younger  siblings  in  place  of  that  currently
        provided by ZB. The report of Dr Latif highlights SB  being  mature
        for her age which I find is indicative of the impact of her  having
        to take on responsibility to date when the core  provider  of  care
        and support within the family, her father, was imprisoned.
    40. On that basis I find the appellant is  entitled  to  rely  upon  an
        exception to the order for his deportation from the United  Kingdom
        at least  during  the  time  the  children  remain  dependent  upon
        parental care and support and assistance. Whilst this  may  not  be
        the case as the children become older and more  independent  it  is
        clearly the situation that prevails at the date of this hearing.

Decision

    41. I allow the appeal.

Anonymity.

    42. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

    43. I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


        Signed...............................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 25 January 2021





















