

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22540/2016
                                                               HU/22539/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6th November 2017                     |On 6th November 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                            SAROJ SATYARAM KATRE
                               SATYARAM KATRE
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms U Sood, instructed by Trent Centre for Human
Rights
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant sought and was granted permission  on  the  grounds,  in
      essence, that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had  failed  to  have
      adequate regard to the evidence before her.


   2. The First-tier Tribunal judge set out  the  evidence  before  her  but
      either failed to acknowledge in her decision that it was  evidence  or
      failed to reach a decision  on  which  element  of  the  evidence  she
      accepted. For example she set out the  oral  evidence  of  the  failed
      attempts made by the UK based family to find  suitable  care  for  the
      appellants in India (paragraph 26) but then stated that there  was  no
      evidence to show that care and support  could  not  be  accessed  from
      other sources (paragraph 27); that treatment has been paid for by  the
      family to date and the "suggestion is that they will continue to do so
      rather than depend on the NHS" (paragraph 21) and that they had signed
      an undertaking  to  that  effect  (evidence  in  the  bundle)  yet  in
      paragraph 21 notes the consultant's comment about the NHS.  The  judge
      does not make a reasoned finding, or indeed a finding, that there will
      in fact be a drain on NHS public services, yet holds that there  is  a
      drain on public services which weighs heavily against the appellants.


   3. Mr Tarlow acknowledged that the decision was, overall,  unsustainable.
      It is not sufficient for a First-tier Tribunal to recite the  evidence
      and fail to reach a reasoned decision.


   4. The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law in failing to have adequate
      regard to the evidence before her  and  failing  to  give  reasons  or
      adequate reasons for findings made.


   5. I note that there have been concerns expressed as  to  the  manner  in
      which the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  took  place.  Those
      expressed concerns have played no part in my decision to set aside the
      First-tier Tribunal decision but  it  may  well  be  that  there  were
      difficulties in the giving of evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal
      judge. The findings of the First-tier Tribunal are set aside in  their
      entirety. It is not the role of the Upper  Tribunal  to  make  primary
      findings of fact and I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, no
      findings preserved. No doubt the First-tier Tribunal will consider the
      vulnerability of the appellants when they give their evidence  and  in
      the arrangements for the hearing.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the  decision  and  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for rehearing.


                                    Date 6th November 2017
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
