
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/22656/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre|Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15 November 2018                     |On 23 November 2018                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               KARAMJIT SINGH
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (NEW DELHI)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rutherford instructed by SKB Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Moan promulgated on 6 March 2018 in which the  Judge
        dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.






Error of law


     2. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 1 February 1977. On  15
        July 2016 the appellant applied for entry clearance  as  a  partner
        and parent under  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  On  7
        September 2016 the respondent refused the  appellant's  application
        against which the appellant appealed.
     3. It is  not  disputed  the  appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom
        illegally in 2003. The Judge records at [4] the  respondent's  case
        that the appellant failed  to  report  as  instructed  after  being
        encountered,  was  listed  as  an  absconder,  discrepancies  given
        regarding the appellant's name and date of birth, and an allegation
        the appellant  worked  illegally  in  the  United  Kingdom.  Having
        considered the evidence  the  Judge  noted  the  refusal  was  only
        pursuant to  paragraph  320(11)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which
        provides that entry clearance or leave to enter the United  Kingdom
        should normally  be  refused  where  an  applicant  has  previously
        contrived in a significant way to frustrate the intentions  of  the
        Rules by (i) overstaying; (ii) breaching a  condition  attached  to
        his leave; or  (iii)  being  an  illegal  entrant;  or  (iv)  using
        deception in an application for entry clearance, leave to enter  or
        remain or in order to obtain documents from the Secretary of  State
        or third party required in  support  of  the  application  (whether
        successful or not); and there are other aggravating  circumstances,
        such  as  absconding,  not  meeting  temporary  admission/reporting
        restrictions or bail  conditions,  using  an  assumed  identity  or
        multiple  identities,  switching  nationality,   making   frivolous
        applications or not complying with the redocumentation process.
     4. The Judge notes at [9] the sponsors evidence that the appellant did
        not use false details and that the difference  in  spelling  was  a
        mistake although  it  was  accepted  the  appellant  had  illegally
        entered the United Kingdom, worked illegally (albeit  on  a  casual
        basis), and absconded following a  failure  to  report.  The  Judge
        notes   the   appellant's   representative   conceded   that    the
        circumstances required for a paragraph  320(11)  refusal  had  been
        satisfied. Accordingly, the Judge finds that one of the  provisions
        in paragraph 320 (11) (i) - (iv) had been satisfied and that one or
        more of the aggravating features identified in the  rule  had  also
        been correctly determined by the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO).
     5. The Judge  had  previously,  at  [8],  reminded  herself  that  the
        assessment under this provision is in fact a threefold exercise the
        third aspect being, as it is a discretionary ground of  refusal,  a
        need to consider all other relevant circumstances.
     6. The Judge sets out the correct  legal  self-direction  at  [10]  by
        reference to PS India [2010] UKUT 440 and  the  guidance  given  to
        entry clearance officers of the need to consider other  factors  as
        well as family life before making any decision under 320 (11).
     7. At [13 - 14] the Judge writes:


             13.  There was no reference to  the  Guidance  in  either  the
                  entry clearance officer's decision or the entry  clearance
                  managers review. The reference to  the  Appellants  family
                  life in the entry clearance decision is  brief  and  under
                  the guise of article 8 considerations. I accept  that  the
                  decision-maker  has  considered  many   aspects   of   the
                  Appellant's family life under article 8.


             14.   There  is  little  mention  of  his  family  life  as  a
                  counterbalancing feature in  the  exercise  of  the  entry
                  clearance officer's discretion or that the Appellant  left
                  the UK in 2013. Those issues should have  been  considered
                  and explicitly highlighted. Whilst  that  means  that  the
                  decision  notice   was   unsatisfactory,   it   does   not
                  necessarily mean that the outcome was wrong.


     8. At [17] the Judge writes:


             17.  I consider it highly likely that, even with consideration
                  of the  counterbalancing  factors,  that  entry  clearance
                  would have been  refused  because  of  the  strong  public
                  interest. Whilst it may be the case that the Appellant met
                  the Immigration Rules as far  as  the  other  requirements
                  were concerned, I am also satisfied that  he  came  within
                  the general grounds refusal and  that  there  were  strong
                  reasons for exercising  the  discretion  to  refuse  entry
                  clearance. However, I also acknowledge that at the  appeal
                  hearing, there is significantly more information before me
                  than was placed before the entry clearance  officer  about
                  the counterbalancing factors.


     9. The Judge considers the best interests of the child  which  are  to
        remain with her mother in the United Kingdom. Both the sponsor  and
        child are British citizens and the respondent does not suggest that
        the child leave the UK but that the sponsor and child conduct their
        relationship with the appellant through regular visits to India, as
        they have to date. The Judge notes the appellant  included  in  the
        evidence an independent social worker's report dated  19  September
        2017. This is commented upon by the Judge  at  [27  -  28]  of  the
        decision under challenge. This is not material that was before  the
        entry clearance officer.
    10. Having considered the competing interests the Judge finds  at  [36]
        that the respondent's decision strikes a fair balance  between  the
        article 8 rights of the appellant, sponsor and  their  daughter  of
        the  public  interest,  and  did  not   find   the   decision   was
        disproportionate.
    11. The appellant sought permission to appeal on 6 grounds.  The  first
        of those asserted the Home Office  Presenting  Officer  before  the
        First-Tier Tribunal, a Mr Tallis, had made a concession during  the
        course of the hearing that the Judge had not  taken  into  account.
        The appellant's grounds of challenge assert  the  Judge  failed  to
        record and determine two material concessions made in  the  closing
        submissions in addition to a number of other matters.
    12. The first such concession  is  said  to  be  a  submission  by  the
        Presenting Officer to the effect "if the ECO  had  before  him  the
        detailed evidence that the tribunal now has before it, such as  the
        social worker report, then we could  not  say  that  a  section  55
        compliant decision had been made". The author of  the  grounds  and
        appellant's  representative  before  the  First-Tier  Tribunal,  Mr
        Muman, submits in his grounds that in light of  this  the  impugned
        decision could not be said to be consistent  with  the  section  55
        duty. Mr Muman also records that he asked the Presenting Officer to
        confirm that the above was an accurate recording of his submissions
        which he confirmed it  was  and  that  the  Judge  then  asked  the
        Presenting Officer for clarification given the obvious impact  that
        his statement would have on the way the appellant would  argue  his
        case in reply. The Judge pointed out the fact the  social  worker's
        report was not before the entry clearance officer would not prevent
        her from being able to take it into account.  The  grounds  reflect
        that the Presenting Officer did not resiled from his position  that
        for the reasons set out in the social  worker's  report  the  entry
        clearance officers' decision is contrary to section 55. The grounds
        also assert that there is no  reference  to  the  exchange  in  the
        determination and that the Judge erred or  misdirected  herself  in
        failing to take into account a relevant factor and in  taking  into
        account irrelevant factors.
    13. The second concession said to have been made by the Entry Clearance
        Officer is when it was said to  be  accepted  that  the  notice  of
        decision was  defective  and  that  the  entry  clearance  managers
        generic purported review was equally bad because it did not  engage
        with the third stage of section 320(11). The  grounds  assert  this
        concession, like the first, was not recorded in  the  determination
        and that both documents are arguably defective as at no stage  does
        the ECO or ECM engage with the need to consider all other  relevant
        circumstances, including section 55. The grounds argue the  closest
        the Judge got to addressing the 'not in accordance  with  the  law'
        submission is at [13 - 14] of the decision in which it appears  the
        Judge finds in the appellant's favour yet fails to allow the appeal
        on this basis.
    14. Another judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal  granted  permission  to
        appeal on this ground.
    15. An earlier hearing before the Upper Tribunal, for the  purposes  of
        determining whether an error of law had been made, was adjourned by
        Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on 13  September  2018  and  directions
        given in which it is noted it was agreed by the  parties  that  the
        subject matter of the grant of permission, namely  concession  made
        by the Home Office Presenting Officer at  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
        hearing was a material matter and that the appeal could not proceed
        without further clarification of the concession by way of a Rule 24
        response.
    16. A response has been provided by  Mrs  Aboni,  another  Senior  Home
        Office Presenting Officer which refers to a  conversation  with  Mr
        Tallis on the telephone who was, at that time, on  sick  leave.  No
        witness statement has been provided by Mr Tallis  and  no  evidence
        provided that he accepts that he made any concession.
    17. The appellant has filed a witness statement from Mr Muman, who  has
        recused himself from the proceeding, dated 7 November 2018 in which
        Mr Muman confirms he has read the Rule 24 response. Mr Muman  makes
        it clear he is not intending any criticism of Mr  Tallis  and  that
        the focus of the challenge is to the decision of the Judge. At  [8]
        of Mr Mumans statement he writes:


             8.   After the evidence concluded and during  his  submissions
                  to the First-tier Judge ('the judge') Mr Tallis, the  Home
                  Office Presenting Officer, made the following  concession,
                  of which I made a careful and verbatim note:


                  "If the ECO had before him the detailed evidence that  the
                  tribunal now has before it,  such  as  the  social  worker
                  report, we could not  say  that  a  section  55  compliant
                  decision had been made"


    18. Mr Muman refers to the fact he read the  note  back  to  Mr  Tallis
        across the bench who confirmed it was an accurate response and that
        Mr Tallis did not resile from his position. Mr Muman at  [15]  also
        writes:


             15.  Elsewhere his submissions Mr  Tallis  accepted  that  the
                  ECO's Notice of Decision was defective and that the  ECM's
                  purported review was equally bad because it did not engage
                  with the third stage of the 32 (11) approach. He  went  on
                  to argue, however, that it would not have made a  material
                  difference to the decision.


    19. The assertion in the witness statement that  the  Judge  failed  to
        record either concession is accurate and  that  a  reading  of  the
        decision does not specifically refer to the statements as noted  by
        Mr Muman. The grounds correctly reflect that neither of the alleged
        concessions are specifically referred to by the Judge.
    20. Mr Mills was asked to confirm his position in light of there  being
        no statement from Mr Tallis. Mr Mills confirmed Mr Tallis had  been
        on sick leave and was expected to return shortly but  that  he  was
        not seeking a further adjournment to allow him to attend. Mr  Mills
        did not challenge the accuracy of the note taken by  Mr  Muman  but
        stated his position was that it could not  be  said  that  what  Mr
        Muman had recorded amounted to a concession.
    21. The Upper Tribunal shall therefore proceed on the  basis  that  the
        submissions made by Mr Tallis are as recorded by Mr Muman.
    22. The fact the Judge did not record that a concession had  been  made
        supports Mr Mills position that whatever may have been said it  was
        not understood by the Judge to be a concession.  That  term  has  a
        meaning of importance in legal proceedings for if a concession  had
        been made by a Presenting Officer,  whilst  not  binding  upon  the
        Judge, it would have meant the Judge would have  been  required  to
        follow that concession unless  she  gave  specific  notice  to  the
        advocates that she intended to depart from  it,  which  would  have
        enabled them to make further submissions on the point in hand.
    23. A concession is a thing that is 'granted', especially  in  response
        to demands, such as "the  government  was  unwilling  to  make  any
        further concessions". It is the action  of  conceding  or  granting
        something. It therefore requires a specific intention of the person
        making the concession that they are granting something to  a  third
        party. It is for this reason that one often sees in refusal letters
        statement to the effect that the  decision-maker  concedes  that  a
        situation is as alleged, or a particular fact. The wording referred
        to at [8] of Mr Muman's statement shows that rather  than  granting
        something Mr Tallis is reflecting on a situation  that  might  have
        arisen had the report of the social worker been  before  the  entry
        clearance officer. The first 3 words of the statement by Mr  Tallis
        of "If the  ECO"  clearly  shows  this  is  recognition  that  this
        document was not before the ECO. Mr Tallis is also recognising that
        had that evidence been before the decision-maker it  could  not  be
        said a section 55  compliant  decision  had  been  made,  but  that
        evidence for whatever reason had not been provided by the appellant
        with the application. As the information was not  provided  and  Mr
        Tallis expressed the view that had it been section  55  issues  may
        have arisen this is  clearly  a  restatement  of  the  respondent's
        position that the  decision  of  the  entry  clearance  officer  is
        correct in terms of applying the appropriate legal test, and not  a
        grant of anything such as an acknowledgement that the  decision  is
        not proportionate pursuant to article 8(2).
    24. In relation to the alleged second concession,  that  the  decision-
        maker did not properly consider the third aspect of  the  paragraph
        320 (11) exercise this is  not  a  concession  in  the  appellant's
        favour as clearly the full quote in Mr Mumans witness statement  is
        to the effect that Mr Tallis' view was any error  in  that  respect
        was not material.
    25. I do not find it made out that  there  is  any  arguable  merit  in
        Ground 1 as I do  not  find  it  established  that  the  Presenting
        Officer made any concession upon which the appellant  was  entitled
        to rely, leading to the Judge making legal error in not paying heed
        to and acting in accordance with such concession without giving the
        parties notice of her intention to determine the  matter  otherwise
        if she was not minded to follow a concession.
    26. In respect of the other matters, the appellant asserts there was  a
        factual dispute between the parties in relation  to  the  assertion
        the appellant had entered the United  Kingdom  illegally  in  2003,
        failed to report after being  encountered  in  2007  and  absconded
        thereafter, and had given a false name and  date  of  birth  to  an
        immigration officer and had worked illegally.  The  claim  to  have
        worked illegally in the United Kingdom and to have  given  a  false
        name and date of birth were denied by the appellant. The  appellant
        argues the Judge wrongly  stated  the  appellant  had  accepted  he
        worked illegally and failed to recognise the  burden  of  proof  is
        upon the ECO to prove these matters which were in dispute and  that
        no evidence had been called or produced to  confirm  the  appellant
        had given a false name and date of birth  or  that  he  had  worked
        illegally in the United Kingdom. The appellant  also  asserts  that
        casual employment is  different  from  and  distinct  from  illegal
        employment and that those who are employed  casually  fall  outside
        the nature of employment as there  are  no  mutual  obligations  to
        offer and perform work and no evidence has been produced of illegal
        employment. The appellant denied he had worked illegally  asserting
        that any work undertaken was casual and on an ad hoc basis for  his
        survival.
    27. The finding by the Judge that the appellant has worked illegally in
        the United Kingdom is a finding within the range of those available
        to the Judge on  the  evidence.  Casual  or  irregular  work  is  a
        recognised status and a person is likely to be a worker if most  of
        these apply: (i) they occasionally do work for a specific  business
        (ii) the business doesn't have to offer them work  and  they  don't
        have to accept it - they only work when they want  to  (iii)  their
        contract with the business uses terms like  'casual',  'freelance',
        'zero hours', 'as required' or something similar (iv) they  had  to
        agree with the business's terms and conditions to get work - either
        verbally or in writing  (v)  they  are  under  the  supervision  or
        control of a manager or director (vi) they can't send someone  else
        to do their work  (vii)  the  business  deducts  tax  and  National
        Insurance  contributions  from  their  wages  (vii)  the   business
        provides materials, tools or equipment they need to  do  the  work.
        The appellant admits working on a casual basis and even though  his
        motive may have been to earn money to live on it is clear he had no
        lawful right to work in the United Kingdom on the accepted facts of
        this matter and the  appellant's  immigration  history.  A  foreign
        national has no right to work in the  United  Kingdom  unless  they
        have been given permission to do so but there was no evidence  that
        the appellant had been given any such permission.
    28. Although the appellant claims to have given an explanation for  the
        difference in identity details as a mistake it has  not  been  made
        out that the Judge erred in law in not  accepting  the  appellant's
        explanation. The Judge clearly  records  that  explanation  at  [9]
        given by the sponsor and such a conclusion has not been shown to be
        an arguably perverse or irrational conclusion of the Judge to  have
        reached.
    29. The grounds challenge the exercise of discretion. This is  a  human
        rights appeal. A submission the decision was not in accordance with
        the law is claimed to have been made by Mr Muman but no  ground  of
        appeal on that basis exists since the amendments brought  about  by
        the Immigration Act 2014. The  Judge  took  into  account  all  the
        evidence provided including the social workers report and comes  to
        the conclusion that the respondent had established that the refusal
        and interference in any protected rights was proportionate.
    30. There is a challenge  to  the  finding  at  [20]  where  the  Judge
        mentions an ability to speak  English  and  financial  independence
        which the appellant claims is not only contradictory  but  ambushed
        the appellant as the application to the ECO  included  an  original
        English  speaking  certificate  to  the  prescribed  level  A1  and
        evidence to determine the couple's financial independence, and that
        the ECO did not raise  English  and  financial  independence  as  a
        ground for refusal. It  is  also  said  to  be  the  case  that  no
        submissions were made by  the  Presenting  Officer  suggesting  the
        appellant could not satisfy these requirements and  the  Judge  did
        not ask the sponsor what level of English the appellant spoke.  The
        ability to speak English is a neutral factor and it does not appear
        to be disputed that the ECO did not raise matters relating  to  the
        appellants  English  language  or  financial  independence  in  the
        refusal. No arguable prejudice is made out as the Judge  drew  some
        minor adverse conclusions at [20] but did not find these issues  to
        be determinative, either individual or cumulatively in relation  to
        the decision to dismiss the appeal.
    31. The Judge when considering section 117B at [33] makes the following
        finding:


             33.  The public interest in this case is very strong. Repeated
                  absences and repeated breaches of immigration laws require
                  firm immigration control. That is the deterrent purpose of
                  paragraph 320 of  the  Immigration  Rules.  I  place  less
                  weight on the family life of  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor
                  because of the circumstances in which it  was  cultivated.
                  The  Appellant  had  no  leave  when   entering   into   a
                  relationship with the Sponsor and fathering  their  child.
                  The Sponsor said that she only knew about his  immigration
                  status after they married. The child is wholly innocent of
                  that conduct. There is little that is positively in favour
                  of the Appellant noting the strong public interest.


    32. The appellant asserts the Judge erred in making  such  findings  as
        the tribunal is not required to place 'little  weight'  upon  these
        factors have particular regard to the section 117B factors. It  was
        also argued section 117B(4) does not say 'little weight' should  be
        given to family life established whilst the person was unlawful and
        that section 117B(6) was very material but overlooked by the Judge.
        It is also argued that the statutory factors the Judge referred  to
        have no purchase on this case given the appellant  had  voluntarily
        returned to India in 2013 at his own cost and was making  an  entry
        clearance application to return in accordance with the  immigration
        rules.
    33. Whilst it is accepted that the wording of  section  117B(4)  refers
        specifically to private life  it  has  long  been  a  principle  of
        European law, as far back as cases such as Y v Russia  that  little
        weight should be attributed  to  a  relationship  formed  when  the
        parties are aware that the immigration status of  one  of  them  is
        precarious. The parties were aware that the appellant  was  in  the
        United Kingdom unlawfully and it is not  made  out  the  Judge  was
        required to place any greater weight than she did upon this  aspect
        of the appellant's case.
    34.  The  point  of  construction,  referring  to  [37]   reflects   an
        observation made by the Judge  and  no  more  for  the  appeal  was
        dismissed as a result of the finding of proportionality at [36].
    35. Ms Rutherford submitted the Judge had erred in failing to  properly
        consider the purpose of the decision in PS  (India)  to  which  the
        Judge makes very little reference.
    36. In PS (paragraph 320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT
        440 (IAC) the Tribunal held that, in  exercising  discretion  under
        paragraph 320(11) of HC 395, as amended, to refuse  an  application
        for entry clearance in a case where the  automatic  prohibition  on
        the grant of entry clearance in paragraph 320(7B) is disapplied  by
        paragraph 320(7C), the decision maker must exercise great  care  in
        assessing the aggravating circumstances said to justify refusal and
        must have regard  to  the  public  interest  in  encouraging  those
        unlawfully in the United Kingdom to leave and  seek  to  regularise
        their status by an application for entry  clearance.  The  Tribunal
        noted the guidance on the application of paragraph  320(11)  to  be
        found in Entry Clearance Guidance under the heading "Refusals",  in
        relation to aggravating circumstances, provides as follows.  As  at
        December 2010 this read: "Please note that the list below is not an
        exhaustive list.  Aggravating  circumstances  can  include  actions
        such as: absconding;  not  complying  with  temporary  admission  /
        temporary reporting conditions /  bail  conditions;  not  complying
        with  reporting  restrictions;  failing  to  comply  with   removal
        directions (RDs) after port  refusal   of  leave  to  enter  (RLE);
        failing to comply with RDs after illegal entry; previous working in
        breach on visitor conditions within short time of arrive in the  UK
        (ie pre-meditated intention to work);   previous  recourse  to  NHS
        treatment when not entitled; previous receipt of benefits  (income,
        housing, child, incapacity or otherwise) or NASS benefits when  not
        entitled;  using  an  assumed  identity  or  multiple   identities;
        previous use of a different identity  or  multiple  identities  for
        deceptive reasons; vexatious attempts to prevent removal  from  the
        UK, eg feigning illness; active  attempt  to  frustrate  arrest  or
        detention by UK Border Agency or police; a sham marriage / marriage
        of convenience / polygamous marriage  in  the  UK;   harbouring  an
        immigration offender;  facilitation /  people  smuggling;  escaping
        from  UK  Border  Agency  detention;   switching  of   nationality;
        vexatious  or  frivolous  applications;   not  complying  with  re-
        documentation process." The guidance goes on to state:  "All  cases
        must be considered on their merits, the  activities  considered  in
        the round to see whether they meet the  threshold  under  paragraph
        320 (11), taking into account family life in the  UK  and,  in  the
        case of children, the level of responsibility for the breach. Where
        an applicant falls to be refused under 320(7A) or 320(7B), the  ECO
        must also consider whether it is also  appropriate  to  refuse  the
        applicant under paragraph 320(11).   Where  320(7C)  applies  which
        makes an applicant  exempt  from  320(7B),  an  ECO  must  consider
        whether a refusal under paragraph 320(11) is appropriate."  As  the
        guidance had not be considered the appeal was allowed on the  basis
        that it was not in accordance with the law.
    37. The Judge took into account all relevant aspects and considered the
        discretionary aspect of 320(11) herself. There is, as stated above,
        no longer a ground of appeal that a decision is not  in  accordance
        with the law. In Charles (human rights appeal: scope)  [2018]  UKUT
        00089 it was found that following the 2014 amendments to  the  2002
        Act it is no longer possible for the tribunal to allow an appeal on
        the ground that a decision is not in accordance with the law and to
        that extent Greenwood No 2 [2015] UKUT 00629 should  no  longer  be
        followed. The headnote in Charles also records  that  (i)  a  human
        rights  appeal  under  section   82(1)(b)   of   the   Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA  2002")  can  be  determined
        only through the provisions of the ECHR; usually Article 8 and (ii)
        A person whose human rights claim turns on Article 8  will  not  be
        able to advance any criticism of the Secretary of State's  decision
        making under the Immigration Acts, including the immigration rules,
        unless the circumstances engage Article 8(2).
    38. The Judge in considering the proportionality of  the  decision  was
        therefore entitled to factor into  the  assessment  the  criticisms
        that had been made during the  course  of  the  hearing,  including
        submissions.
    39. The Judge clearly adopted a structured approach to the  matter  and
        it cannot be said that the Judge ignored any  relevant  factors  in
        terms of assessing the competing interests  between  the  appellant
        and Secretary of State. Whilst PS (India) stresses  the  importance
        of encouraging people to return to their home  country  voluntarily
        and make an application to return, such as this appellant  did,  it
        does not say that in any such case the appeal must be allowed.  The
        Judge at [10] correctly records the issue PS was decided to  remind
        us of.
    40. It does not matter whether any other judge would make the  decision
        under challenge for that is not the correct legal test.  The  Court
        of Appeal have reminded us that judges considering whether an error
        of law has been made must not substitute  their  own  view  of  the
        merits of the case and determine the matter  by  reference  to  how
        they would make the decision, but by a proper  application  of  the
        principles of error of law such as set out in R (Iran).
    41. Adopting this approach I make a finding of fact that the  appellant
        has failed to establish that the Judge has erred in law in a manner
        material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  sufficient  to
        warrant of the Upper  Tribunal  interfering  any  further  in  this
        matter.
    42. I say, as an aside, that as noted by Mr  Tallis  there  is  now  in
        existence considerably more evidence  than  that  provided  to  the
        entry clearance officer including the  report  of  the  independent
        social worker. There is also  the  fact  that  the  appellant  left
        United Kingdom a number of years ago and the Judge's comment  about
        the relationship between the proportionality  of  the  decision  to
        refuse and the fact that whilst the decision may  be  proportionate
        when made by the ECO it may not continue to be proportionate in the
        longer term. It may therefore be open to the appellant  to  make  a
        fresh application for leave to  enter  supported  by  all  the  new
        evidence that is available and dealing with  the  concerns  of  the
        entry clearance officer which can be considered on  its  merits  by
        the ECO.


Decision

    43. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    44. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 15 November 2018












