








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23584/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 4 January 2019                   |On: 25 January 2019                  |

                                   Before
                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between
                              Mr Muhammad Bilal
                        anonymity direction NOT made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms K Reid, counsel, instructed by Sky Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan,  born  on  24  May  1987.  He
      appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Shergill, who in a determination  promulgated  on  12  September
      2018, dismissed his appeal against the respondent's decision dated  30
      September 2016 to refuse his human rights  application  for  leave  to
      remain in the UK on the basis of family life with his partner and  her
      daughter.

   2. The appellant came to the UK on 14 December  2011  as  a  student.  He
      renewed his leave in 2013 until 6 November 2915. It was  curtailed  on
      31 March 2015.  Leave expired on 30 May 2015. There was  no  right  of
      appeal. He was encountered working on 9 July  2016.   He  has  had  no
      lawful leave since and made his unsuccessful application  on  26  July
      2016 based on a relationship with Ms Rooma Khalid, referred to by  the
      Judge as P.  He claimed to  have  lived  with  her  since  2014.  Both
      attended the hearing and gave evidence [3].

   3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Shergill  stated  in  his  'conclusions'  at
      [18], that he was 'not persuaded' that the important discrepancies set
      out at paragraph 14 of the refusal had been dealt with in  a  credible
      manner by either of the witnesses.  Other aspects of the  refusal  had
      not been dealt with in a credible manner. All of the  evidence  before
      him had a number of discrepancies '... which have not been  adequately
      explained on balance' and '... there has been active dishonesty in the
      evidence from both witnesses'.

   4. He attached little weight to the evidence before him. An assessment of
      all the evidence led him to conclude that  whatever  the  relationship
      may be between them, the appellant and Ms Khalid do not live  together
      in a relationship akin to marriage. Furthermore, he concluded  on  the
      evidence before him  at  [18],  that  there  is  not  a  "genuine  and
      subsisting parental relationship" between the appellant  and  C,  -  a
      British national child of Ms Khalid, "from her ex-husband" [2].

   5. He then stated that if there is family life in existence,  he  saw  no
      grounds why there could not be an out of country application made  for
      the appellant to join Ms Khalid and that temporary separation will not
      interfere disproportionately with the appellant's rights or  those  of
      his partner or C in the light of his findings [18].

   6. He did not accept that there were very significant  obstacles  to  his
      integration in the light of his active ties to  Pakistan,  his  status
      and age he came here and the comparatively short time he has been here
      [19].

   7. With regard to the Article 8 claim, he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
      appellant's case merited consideration outside the  Rules  because  of
      the concerns he had about credibility and the state  of  the  evidence
      [20]. There are no  sufficient  compelling  reasons  to  consider  his
      private life claims or his relationship claims with Ms Khalid  outside
      the Rules. In any event, his very  poor  immigration  history,  active
      dishonesty, lack of demonstrable English language and  creation  of  a
      private/ family life while he was here precariously/unlawfully,  would
      all weigh against him under s.117B of the 2002 Act. He cannot rely  on
      s.117B(6)  given  his  conclusions  that  there  is  no  'genuine  and
      subsisting parental relationship' [20].

   8. In granting permission  to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  E  M
      Simpson   stated   that   the   decision   "...   arguably   disclosed
      disproportionate focus on the  bona  fides  of  the  appellant's  past
      history as a student, and arising thereto that arguably  undue  weight
      was placed on damaging credibility findings concerning same".

   9. Further, she stated that  "...  when  assessing  whether  he  and  his
      claimed partner were genuinely in  a  relationship  outside  marriage,
      there appeared  that  the  Judge  arguably  materially  erred  in  the
      credibility  assessment,  when  expressly   relying   on   their   own
      assumptions concerning cultural  and  social  norms,  more  especially
      arguably in the absence of objective evidence."  She  noted  that  the
      Judge stated that in his experience it was unusual to  come  across  a
      couple living together without being married for cultural reasons. The
      reason he asked this question was because,  from  his  experience  and
      understanding of Indian sub-continent cultures,  such  behaviour  goes
      against cultural norms [13]. With regard to the judicial assessment of
      the appellant's documentary evidence, '... basis did appear that  that
      assessment arguably further erred in there appearing focus on parts of
      that evidence to the arguable cost of other parts of same".

  10. Ms Reid, who did not appear on behalf  of  the  appellant  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal, referred to the grounds of appeal  set  out  from
      paragraphs 5 to 11.

  11. First, although the precarious status of the appellant  was  relevant,
      it should have been determined "to the limited extent," as paragraph 7
      to 14 of the determination focused on the appellant's past educational
      activities at length. That was only one element in  the  consideration
      of whether the appellant and his  partner  had  lived  together  in  a
      relationship akin to marriage for a period of two years.

  12. Secondly, she submitted that even if the appellant was not a bona fide
      student, there was sufficient documentary evidence submitted to  prove
      cohabitation between them.  She  submitted  that  the  fact  that  the
      appellant applied for another course after  his  first  visa  expired,
      which was based in London even though he was living in Manchester  and
      could not travel, was not inconsistent with his account of  living  in
      Manchester with his partner at the time.

  13. The Judge erred in taking into account that the  bills  relied  on  to
      establish cohabitation together were based on self  reporting  to  the
      companies and  were  accordingly  self  serving.  There  had  been  no
      contention by the respondent relating  to  the  authenticity  of  such
      bills. Various letters from the GP and  other  sources  were  provided
      before the hearing to the  respondent  to  show  that  they  had  been
      cohabiting for more than two years. The Judge however made the finding
      regarding in regard to the documentation on the basis of  his  finding
      that the appellant's status had been tainted.

  14. Thirdly, it was the Judge's personal opinion that it  was  unusual  in
      his experience for them to live together  without  being  married  for
      cultural reasons. That  rendered  the  decision  flawed.  It  was  the
      appellant's and his partner's own choice to live either as married  or
      unmarried partners. The appellant stated that they did not want to get
      married yet. The Judge wrongly determined  how  the  appellant  should
      have behaved culturally. Ms Reid submitted that the  Judge  failed  to
      assess the evidence as a whole.

  15. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Isherwood referred to and adopted  the
      Rule 24 response. She submitted that there has been no material  error
      in the circumstances. The argument is essentially based on the  amount
      of weight that the Judge attached.

  16. She noted that  the  appellant  himself  accepted  that  he  had  been
      encountered illegally and he tried to run  away.  He  was  encountered
      during an enforcement visit to "Steak Out" in Manchester. He  had  run
      to the roof to evade officers, but was  however  apprehended.  He  was
      then served with an enforcement notice as an overstayer  and  detained
      for removal.

  17. She referred to  [5],  where  the  Judge  stated  that,  having  heard
      extensive evidence from the appellant and his partner, and considering
      all the documents before him in the round, he was not  satisfied  that
      he was being given a truthful account.

  18. She noted that the Judge had referred  to  the  appellant's  interview
      record at [7] in which the appellant stated that he had worked at  the
      restaurant since 2012. He admitted to the Judge  during  his  evidence
      that during the time that he should have been studying, he was only at
      college for 18 months but "sometimes fortnights or months".

  19. The Judge found that that was clearly not  the  action  of  a  student
      committed to completing his studies. He gave a  'bizarre  account'  of
      applying for another course after his first  visa  expired.  That  was
      based in London even though he claimed to be living in Manchester  and
      could not travel. He found that the  appellant's  evidence  was  vague
      about the course and he gave a bizarre  account  of  "someone  in  the
      street helping him" apply for the visa. He was asked why  he  was  not
      looking  for  courses  himself  but  gave  an  equally   bizarre   and
      implausible answer - [7].

  20. The Judge noted that he only attended that course  twice  despite  his
      grant running for more than 18 months. He denied that he knew that  it
      would be a requirement of his visa to attend the course and claimed he
      only knew he was illegal when he was caught. The Judge found that  his
      entire account in that respect to be dishonest [7].

  21.  Ms  Isherwood  submitted  that  the  Judge  gave  reasons  for   that
      conclusion. He found at [8] that the appellant had failed to plausibly
      explain why he was unaware of the curtailment.  Further,  he  did  not
      believe the account that he did not know that he  had  to  attend  his
      course for his visa to remain valid.

  22. Further, his partner's accounts before him were also dishonest as  she
      asserted a detailed account that the appellant had been attending  his
      course, clearly contradictory to the appellant's own account. He found
      her evidence to be "simply dishonest  on  an  important  part  of  the
      backdrop to the case"- [8].

  23. Ms Isherwood submitted that the Judge viewed the documentary  evidence
      alongside the other evidence in the round [10]. She  referred  to  the
      Judge's various comments and criticisms relating to the joint Barclays
      statements for four months in 2016. The document from  Halifax  showed
      that the appellant had an  address  on  4  July  2016.  The  assertion
      therefore that the Judge did not consider the documents  is  thus  not
      correct. The assertions amount to a  disagreement  with  the  findings
      relating to the documents.

  24. She referred to paragraph [11] of the decision where the  Judge  noted
      at [11] that the tenancy remains in the appellant's sole name. The  GP
      letter produced was, he found, an advocacy letter on  the  appellant's
      behalf clearly instructed by  information  from  the  appellant.   The
      doctor stated that "she reports". Nor  was  it  stated  how  long  the
      appellant had been identified as the next of kin. The  same  criticism
      was made in respect of the school letter. In any  event,  he  properly
      found that one might have expected it to have addressed issues such as
      parents' meetings and the like.

  25. Nor was the context of photographs showing the appellant, his  partner
      and child  together  in  various  situations  properly  explained.  No
      evidence was given as to when and where they were taken. In any  event
      on their own are not  conclusive  of  family  life,  given  the  other
      discrepancies [12].

  26. The Judge was also concerned that by the appellant's own admission  he
      had applied for a course in London and whilst the reason  for  refusal
      was sent to a Manchester address,  the  partner's  home  address,  the
      appellant's solicitors were based in Ilford. He gave his address where
      he could be contacted as his solicitors' in Ilford [14].

  27. Ms Isherwood referred to [16] where the Judge referred to the evidence
      put forward about the extent of the  appellant's  involvement  in  the
      care and upbringing of his partner's child. He was not persuaded  that
      the documentary evidence supported what was being claimed. The Judge's
      note relating to the occasions that he took the child  to  the  speech
      therapist is set out at [16].

  28. She referred to [17] where the Judge noted that the appellant asserted
      that he mostly went to the language therapist with the child, yet  the
      mother's evidence was that there had been only  one  appointment.  The
      report produced  at  page  90  relating  to  2016  only  refers  to  a
      discussion taking place with the mother. There is  only  reference  to
      her in the 2018 report.

  29. With regard to that evidence, the Judge stated at [17] that  he  would
      have expected the appellant to have been referenced or consulted if he
      was a de facto parent since 2014 as he claims to have been. His  input
      to speech therapy, if he had been a de facto parent  since  the  child
      was  four  years  old  to  age  six  and  eight,  (the  dates  of  the
      appointments), must be highly relevant given the  milestone  ages  for
      the child's development. The fact that the appellant is not  mentioned
      anywhere spoke volumes in his assessment  "that  matters  are  not  as
      claimed." He was accordingly not persuaded on balance by  any  of  the
      other evidence  that  it  was  satisfactory  to  show  a  genuine  and
      subsisting parental relationship between the appellant and  the  child
      [17].

  30. Ms Isherwood noted that in the event, the Judge found  that  requiring
      the appellant to leave the UK either permanently or to make an out  of
      country application did not constitute a disproportionate interference
      with the Article 8 rights [23].

  31. In reply, Ms Reid submitted that had the  Judge  not  wrongly  reached
      conclusions concerning the appellant's credibility, a different  level
      of weight would have been given to the documentation. There has in the
      circumstances not been an adequate consideration and assessment of the
      evidence.

      Assessment

  32. First-tier Tribunal Judge Shergill has given a detailed assessment  of
      the evidence produced in the  appeal.  As  already  noted,  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Simpson  granted  permission  on  the  basis  that  the
      decision arguably disclosed a disproportionate focus on the bona fides
      of the appellant's past history  as  a  student  and  that  there  was
      arguably  undue  weight  placed  on  such  findings  relating  to  the
      credibility  of  the  claim  that  they  have  been   in   a   durable
      relationship.

  33. No issue was taken with the  service  the  Home  Office  minute  sheet
      referred to by  the  Judge  at  [6]  -  purporting  to  represent  the
      circumstances recorded when the appellant was encountered.

  34. In the respondent's Rule 24  response,  there  was  reference  to  the
      presenting officer's post hearing minute notes. Ms Isherwood  produced
      the full minute of the presenting officer's notes, which were provided
      to Ms Reid and myself at the hearing. There was no  objection  to  the
      production of that minute.

  35. In the presenting officer's minute, she noted that she  had  submitted
      that the appellant's evidence that he had not complied with the  terms
      of his visa or  been  truthful  in  his  application,  undermined  his
      credibility of  the  genuineness  of  the  claimed  relationship.  The
      appellant and his representative were given an appropriate opportunity
      to  respond.  The  presenting  officer  stated  that  the  appellant's
      representative asserted that these matters should have been raised  in
      the refusal letter. She stated that  that  was  an  unfair  submission
      given that the evidence of the appellant had only been produced at the
      date of the hearing and therefore could not form part of  the  refusal
      notice.

  36. With regard to the documentary  evidence  of  cohabitation,  the  HOPO
      minute noted that the representative also made submissions  that  this
      and many other documents could not be criticised by the Home Office as
      they had  not  raised  those  concerns  in  the  refusal  letter.  The
      presenting officer noted at the end  of  counsel's  submissions,  that
      these documents had never been served on  the  respondent  before  the
      appeal and therefore could not have been part of the  refusal  notice.
      The Judge noted that this was correct, having regard to  the  covering
      letter.

  37. I accept, as submitted by Ms Isherwood, that the Judge was entitled to
      have regard to the immigration history of the appellant as part of the
      assessment regarding the genuineness of the claimed  relationship.  As
      already noted, Judge Shergill  found  the  whole  of  the  appellant's
      account to be dishonest [7]. She adopted the rule 24 response that the
      appellant had already established a  propensity  to  deceive  and  had
      shown that he was capable of undermining effective immigration control



  38. Judge Shergill has set out the basis for his finding of dishonesty  at
      [8]. I have set out his reasons for these findings. He also found that
      the appellant's partner's evidence before him, where  she  asserted  a
      detailed account that the appellant had been attending his course, was
      clearly contradictory of the appellant's own account.  He  accordingly
      found her evidence "to be simply dishonest" on an  important  part  of
      the backdrop to the case [8].

  39. He was thus satisfied that the appellant was fully aware of  his  need
      to have valid leave; that the second leave was being obtained  in  bad
      faith and that he was aware that his leave had expired well before  he
      was encountered, such that at least from November 2015, he  was  aware
      that he was not entitled to be working.

  40. Judge Shergill has considered the appellant's  current  claim  on  the
      basis of the evidence in the  round.  This  included  the  documentary
      evidence [10]. He has given sustainable reasons  with  regard  to  the
      findings in respect of the documentary evidence. He set  out  in  some
      detail  his  assessment  relating  to  the  various  bank  statements,
      including the joint Barclays statements for four months  in  2016,  at
      [10].  There has been no challenge to his  factual  findings  in  that
      paragraph.

  41. Nor has there been any challenge to the factual findings  at  [11]  in
      respect of the bills produced. He has given  sustainable  reasons  for
      attaching limited weight in particular to the GP letter on  the  basis
      that it was based on information from  the  appellant  [11].  He  also
      considered other documentation submitted including the school  letter.
      He has set out his reasons for concluding that it  only  gave  limited
      information, when it might be  expected  to  address  issues  such  as
      parent's evenings and the like [11].

  42. He also had regard to assertions relating to the appellant's partner's
      health issues. This was relied on by  the  appellant  as  to  why  the
      financial requirements could not be met and why his partner could  not
      work. He asserted that the child is picked up and dropped  off  partly
      due to her work, but then in oral evidence he stated that  she  cannot
      undertake childcare duties due to her health. Moreover, there  was  no
      plausible evidence before the Judge that she was unfit  for  work  and
      indeed despite various references to her health  issues,  she  is  now
      undertaking a full time job in a physical role consisting of long days
      [12]. That, he found significantly undermined the  claims  made  about
      health issues, aside from the implausibility that despite  a  physical
      job she cannot take her own daughter to school on her days off.

  43. He had regard to the evidence of the photos, which he found  were  not
      on their own conclusive of family life given the other discrepancies.

  44. It is also contended that the Judge inappropriately  raised  "cultural
      issues"  which  formed  part  of  his  assessment  relating   to   the
      relationship. I was informed that the appellant's  representative  had
      been given an opportunity  to  respond.  The  Judge  found  that  such
      responses did not satisfactorily explain the position. In  any  event,
      that finding was part of a rounded assessment of the evidence.

  45. Further, he noted  a  significant  discrepancy  at  [17]  between  the
      appellant's account and that of his partner relating to the taking  of
      the child to the speech therapist. The appellant himself asserted that
      he mostly went to the language therapist with the child,  however  his
      partner asserted that they had  only  been  to  one  appointment.  The
      report in 2016 only referred to a discussion  taking  place  with  the
      mother. There is also only reference to the mother in the 2018 report.
      If the appellant were a de facto parent he would have expected him  to
      have been referenced or consulted since the child was four  years  old
      to age six and eight, the dates of the appointments.

  46. At [18] the Judge summarised his findings:  The  evidence  before  him
      contained a number of discrepancies  which  had  not  been  adequately
      explained on balance. Further, there had been active dishonesty in the
      evidence from both witnesses. In the circumstances he attached  little
      weight to the  evidence.  He  found  that  whatever  the  relationship
      between them may be, they did not live together in a relationship akin
      to marriage. Nor did the evidence establish that there  is  a  genuine
      and subsisting parental relationship between  the  appellant  and  the
      child.

  47. Judge Shergill has given sustainable reasons for  those  findings.  It
      was on that basis that he concluded at [19] that there were  not  very
      significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  integration  to  Pakistan.
      Further, the appellant was not able to rely on s.117B(6) having regard
      to his conclusion that there was no genuine  and  subsisting  parental
      relationship. Nor were there any compelling reasons  to  consider  his
      private life claims or his relationship with P outside the Rules [20].
      He considered the  child's  best  interests  at  [21].  He  has  given
      sustainable reasons for  concluding  that  the  respondent's  decision
      requiring the appellant to leave  the  UK  was  proportionate  in  the
      circumstances.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.


      Anonymity direction not made.






                 Signed  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                           Dated: 11 January 2019











