
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/23509/2016
     HU/24742/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th September 2018                        |On 9th October 2018           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Taslima Habib
                                Amzad Hossain
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S Kamal, of ISL Legals Limited


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Rothwell made following a hearing at  Harmondsworth  on  22nd  February
    2018.

Background

 2. The  claimants are both  are  citizens  of  Bangladesh.  They  appealed
    against the decisions of the Secretary of State  dated  23rd  September
    2016 refusing the first claimant's application for indefinite leave  to
    remain based upon ten years' lawful residence in the  UK.   The  second
    claimant was refused in line.

 3. The basis of the refusal was that the Secretary of State believed  that
    the TOEIC certificate which the first claimant produced as part of  her
    application for an entrepreneur application on 30th December  2011  was
    fraudulent. It was withdrawn by ETS and declared  questionable  on  the
    grounds that voice recognition software  detected  the  presence  of  a
    proxy tester who sat the test in her place.  The UKVI was aware of  the
    widespread test fraud that was known  to  have  occurred  at  the  test
    centre.  Although the claimant did not rely on this  TOEIC  certificate
    for the purpose of the application for indefinite leave to  remain  her
    complicity in the fraud  contributed  to  an  attack  upon  immigration
    controls.

 4. The judge considered the evidence.  She said  that  the  only  evidence
    produced by the Secretary of State consisted of general assertions made
    in the refusal letter and the generic evidence  from  Peter  Millington
    and Rebecca Collings.  Moreover the ETS test result in  this  case  was
    questionable  and  not  invalid.   The  claimant  had  been  given   no
    opportunity, as she should have been, to retake the test in  line  with
    the witness statements produced by the Secretary of  State.   Moreover,
    the claimant had given her evidence in perfect  English.   In  February
    2016 she took grade 5 grade examination in spoken English and scored at
    level B1.1 at Trinity College and sat and passed the  Life  in  the  UK
    test.

 5. The judge concluded that, on the evidence before her, the Secretary  of
    State had not discharged both the evidential and legal burden  and  the
    appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

 6. The Secretary of State  sought permission to appeal on the grounds that
    there had been administrative failure on the part of  the  Tribunal  in
    failing to link the evidence which the Home Office had provided to  the
    file.  It was said that there was a coversheet dated 7th February  2018
    and an accompanying statement dated 7th February 2018 attached  to  the
    ETS bundle which had been sent to the Tribunal prior to the hearing  at
    Harmondsworth on 22nd February  2018.   Unfortunately  those  documents
    were not appended to the grounds and are not in the Tribunal's  file.

 7. Mr Tarlow said that he did not have the documents either and there  was
    nothing which he could put before the court  which  might  assist.   He
    therefore made no submissions.

 8. I conclude therefore that the Secretary of  State's  challenge  is  not
    made out.  He has been unable to substantiate the  claim  made  in  the
    grounds that the Secretary of State provided further evidence which the
    judge did not take into account.  Accordingly the decision of the judge
    will stand.



Notice of Decision

 9. The original judge did not err in law and  his  decision  stands.   The
    Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.





[pic]
Signed                              Date 2 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor



