
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23222/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 June 2019                       |On 18 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                               MRS Khadija [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan, Counsel, instructed by Kenneth Jones
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   In a decision posted on 12  February  2019  Judge  Hawdon-Beal  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the  appeal  of  the  appellant,  a
    national of Pakistan, against the decision made by the respondent on 30
    October 2018 refusing leave to remain.  The appeal turns  on  a  single
    point, the judge' s refusal to adjourn in the face of a  request  which
    had indicated that no notice  of  hearing  had  been  received  by  the
    appellant.

2.   Since Ms Cunha said she could not defend the judge's  decision,  I  can
    be relatively brief.  The judge's reasons for refusing to  adjourn  and
    for proceeding with the appeal in the absence of one of the parties are
    set out at paragraphs 6-8:

         "6.  When the case was called on at 12.15pm, neither the  appellant
             or any member of her family had attended.  I checked the  file
             and saw that the notice  of  hearing  had  been  sent  to  the
             appellant at  the  address  given  on  the  appeal  notice  on
             December 3rd, 2018 by  second  class  post.   Although  I  was
             satisfied that the correct spelling of the road was  'Duchess'
             and not 'Douches' as noted in the  notice  of  appeal,  I  was
             satisfied that the number and the postcode were the  same  and
             therefore concluded that, despite the wrong  spelling  of  the
             street name, the letter, with the correct number and  postcode
             would have reached the appellant in plenty of  time  for  this
             hearing.  I checked the notice of appeal and section 5,  which
             gives the details of a representative, had  been  left  blank.
             Section 6  of  the  appeal  notice,  which  would  have  given
             information as to a sponsor, if there was one, was missing.  I
             therefore caused a telephone call to be  made  to  the  mobile
             telephone number found in the application form.


         7.   There was no reply and so a voicemail was left,  advising  the
             owner of the  telephone  to  call  the  Tribunal  because  the
             hearing was today, and the Tribunal  was  considering  hearing
             the matter in absence.  No response was received by 12.45  and
             therefore I indicated that I  would  consider  the  matter  in
             absence on the papers.   At  1300  I  was  informed  that  the
             sponsor son had rung and said that no notice  of  hearing  had
             been received.  At 1310, a Mr Hussain, who  said  the  he  was
             from G Lewis and Co rang and asked when the notice of  hearing
             had been sent.  He was advised that his firm were not noted as
             representatives and so were not on record as  acting  for  Mrs
             [B]. He was informed therefore that regrettably  he  could  be
             given no information.  The sponsor son did not ring  back  and
             therefore I confirmed with Mr Corden  and  my  clerk  that  my
             earlier decision would stand.


         8.   I  have  had  regard  to  the  respondent's  bundle  which  is
             comprised of the refusal letter, the application  form  and  a
             copy of her passport.  I also had regard  to  the  letters  of
             support from her children  and  the  affidavit  regarding  the
             property dispute as well as the  detailed  grounds  of  appeal
             which were submitted with the notice of  appeal.   No  further
             documentation was forthcoming from the appellant."

3.   The grounds take issue with this decision  on  the  basis  that  having
    decided to arrange for the Tribunal administrator to call the appellant
    and then to leave a voicemail advising the owner of  the  telephone  to
    call the Tribunal, the judge  should  have  reviewed  her  decision  to
    proceed with the hearing in the absence  of  one  of  the  parties,  as
    within fifteen minutes of her deciding to go ahead with the hearing (at
    12.45) the Tribunal had been contacted by solicitors  asking  when  the
    notice of hearing had been sent.  I  consider  that  the  grounds  have
    merit.  There are two principal difficulties with  the  judge's  reason
    for refusing to adjourn.   First,  whilst  it  was  in  order  for  the
    Tribunal administrator to advise the solicitor that  he  could  not  be
    given information as he was not on the record, the judge does  not  say
    that the solicitor was told to ask the son or mother to  ring  instead.
    Given that the judge was  made  aware  that  the  appellant's  son  had
    contacted the solicitor, it was unfair of her to  treat  as  fatal  the
    son's failure to call back unless he was asked to do so and there is no
    record that he was asked.  The judge would have  been  aware  from  the
    file papers that the appellant herself was aged 72 and that she claimed
    to suffer from ill health and to have  mobility  problems.   Putatively
    therefore she was a vulnerable appellant and the claim  to  non-receipt
    of the notice conveyed by a solicitor should have  been  considered  in
    that context.


4.   A second difficulty with the  judge's  decision  is  that  she  nowhere
    considered the extent to which failure of the appellant to  attend  may
    have  made  a  difference  to  the  assessment   of   her   Article   8
    circumstances.  The issue of ill health is a prime example, in that  at
    paragraph 21 the judge effectively  decided  not  to  accept  that  the
    appellant had medical problems.  She stated in this paragraph:

         "21. The  appellant  claims  that  because  of  her  fall  and  her
             resultant ill-health she cannot go back because  there  is  no
             one to care for her and she has nowhere to live.  The  grounds
             of appeal make mention of a Doctor's report  upon  her  health
             which  was  submitted  with  the  application  form  but  then
             apparently  returned  with  the  other  documents.    I   have
             carefully checked but that letter is not in  the  respondent's
             bundle and nor has it been  reproduced  with  the  grounds  of
             appeal.  I therefore have no idea as to the appellant's  state
             of health."

5.   Unsurprisingly, therefore the  judge's  subsequent  assessment  of  the
    appellant's health and care needs was premised on her not being in  ill
    health or having care needs:

         "25. That leaves the question as to whether in  light  of  all  the
             evidence  it  is  a  proportionate  decision.   I  have  given
             consideration to SS ([2017] UKSC 10) and AGYARKO ([2017]  UKSC
             11) and am satisfied that there is nothing compelling  in  the
             appellant's circumstances.  I am satisfied that she does enjoy
             family life under article 8 with her  family  because  she  is
             dependent upon  them  financially  and  emotionally  and  that
             dependency does go beyond the norm  as  per  KUGATHAS  ([2003]
             EWCA Civ 31), but there is  no  evidence  of  her  ill  health
             before me and nor, in light of the  fact  that  the  appellant
             maintains that she has been thrown out of her family home,  in
             which she has been living far longer than her  daughter-in-law
             and grandson, is there any evidence that the family have given
             consideration to fighting the claim by the daughter-in-law and
             grandson.  I also not that there is no evidence to  show  that
             there is no care available  for  the  appellant  in  Pakistan,
             either paid care or from any other family members nor evidence
             that such care is beyond the means of the family here  in  the
             UK."

6.   Given the importance the judge attached in her Article 8 assessment  to
    the absence of evidence, it was incumbent on  her  to  have  considered
    whether it was just to refuse to adjourn (so as  to  establish  whether
    there was in fact evidence) despite being informed that  the  appellant
    had not received the notice.  At the very least the judge  should  have
    considered requesting the Tribunal to call the appellant's number again
    to  offer  a  hearing  mid-afternoon.    The   judge's   decision   was
    procedurally unfair.


7.   I set aside the judge's decision for material error of law.  I  see  no
    alternative to the case being remitted to the  FtT  (not  before  Judge
    Hawden-Beal).


8.   I direct that the next hearing takes place at Taylor House.


9.   I also direct that the next judge takes account of the  further  letter
    now produced from the appellant's GP dated 30 May 2019, which states:

         "Re: [particulars the appellant]


         This  letter  is  to  confirm  that  the  above-named  patient   is
         registered with our practice as a private  patient  from  September
         2018.


         She  suffers  from  essential  hypertension,  bilateral  knee  pain
         secondary  to  moderate  to  severe   osteoarthritis   and   memory
         impairment.  She takes Amiodipine, Naproxen, Adcal and Omeprazole.


         She has complained of memory issues to the family for a long period
         of time though over the last few months this has become much worse.
          Her mini mental state score is 22/30  which  shows  that  she  has
         significant memory impairment. She is  in  the  process  of  having
         other investigations carried out with a view to  referring  her  to
         the memory clinic on a private basis.


         This letter is issued at the patient's request.  If  you  need  any
         further information please do not hesitate to contact me.






         Dr A Siddique"



No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date: 14 June 2019

             [pic]
