
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23819/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th February 2020                         |On 4th March 2020             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                              Jai Kumari thapa
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Moriaty of Counsel instructed by Everest Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Lucas promulgated on 2  July  2019,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse her  Entry  Clearance
    to the United Kingdom dated 17 September 2018 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Nepal, born in  1981,  who  applied  for
    Entry clearance to the United Kingdom  alongside  her  mother,  on  the
    basis of her late father's service as a Gurkha.

 3. The Respondent refused the application the basis that the Appellant did
    not  meet  the  requirements  as  an  adult  dependent  relative  under
    paragraph EC-DR.1.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules,  nor  did
    she meet the requirements in the Annex K of IDI Chapter 15  section  2A
    13.2, as amended.  The reasons for the refusal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules given were that the Appellant was a fit and capable adult who was
    able to look after herself; there was a lack of  details  of  financial
    commitments in Nepal; financial support  from  the  Appellant's  mother
    could continue  and  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances.   The
    Appellant did not fall within the provisions of the IDI  because  these
    did not extend to any provision for  adult  children  of  an  ex-Gurkha
    widow.  The Respondent  did  not  find  any  exceptional  compassionate
    circumstances, noting that the Appellant had other  adult  siblings  in
    Nepal who could provide support if needed following her mother's choice
    to apply for settlement in the United Kingdom.  The Respondent was  not
    satisfied that the Appellant  had  established  family  life  with  her
    mother over and above that between an adult child and their parent, nor
    that there was "real" or "committed" or "effective"  support  from  the
    Appellant's mother; such that Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights was not engaged.

 4. Judge Lucas dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated  on  2  July
    2019 on human rights grounds.  The Tribunal set  out  the  unchallenged
    evidence of the Appellant, her mother and  cousin  and  the  burden  of
    proof.  The totality of the findings on the appeal are contained in the
    following three paragraphs:

         "19. The mother of the Appellant came to  the  UK  as  recently  as
         October 2008 [sic 2018].  The Rules permit her to settle in the  UK
         as the wife of a former British Soldier and rightly so.  The  Rules
         do not, however, extend to the adult child of a widow.  The  mother
         of the Appellant was aware of  that  when  she  chose  to  separate
         herself from the Appellant by coming to  settle  in  the  UK.   She
         could remain in Nepal with the Appellant but chose not to do so.

         20.  The Appellant is now 38 years of age.  She has adult  siblings
         living in Nepal.  It is said that the mother of  the  Appellant  is
         dependent upon her because of her hearing  difficulties.   However,
         she lives and chose to live UK  with  her  niece.   The  latter  is
         clearly therefore coping with the day-to-day  particular  needs  of
         the mother of the Appellant.

         21.  The fact is that the Appellant is close to the age of 40.  She
         has a close family to turn to in Nepal.  There is nothing  in  this
         case that is exceptional or shows  that  the  understandable  bonds
         between the Appellant and her mother are over and above those which
         are expected.  The fact is that the mother of the  Appellant  chose
         to settle in the UK irrespective of the ability of  this  Appellant
         to do so as the adult child of the widow of  the  British  soldier.
         She would have remained with the Appellant in Nepal and  her  other
         children.  It is relevant that they are married as  this  does  not
         cut the family bond between them."

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on five grounds, although in  essence,  the  main
    three grounds all challenge the First-tier Tribunal's findings  on  the
    basis that there has not been a proper fact specific assessment  as  to
    whether family life is engaged for the purposes of  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on  Human  Rights  and  irrelevant  considerations,
    primarily that the Appellant's siblings are married,  have  been  taken
    into account.

 6. At the oral hearing, Mr Moriarty adopted the written grounds of  appeal
    and  noted  that  the  fourth  and  fifth  grounds   in   relation   to
    typographical errors in the decision and the short hearing and decision
    were not necessarily distinct errors of law but were indicative of  the
    lack of detailed assessment and care given to the determination of this
    appeal.  In relation to the main grounds of appeal,  it  was  submitted
    that the decision simply fails to grapple with the steps  required  for
    assessment under Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights
    and on the facts of this case, if there was a finding that family  life
    is engaged, the proportionality exercise would  ultimately  be  in  the
    Appellant's favour because of the historic injustice caused to  Gurkhas
    and their family members from  previous  immigration  policy.   It  has
    never been suggested that there are any other  contrary  factors  which
    would tip the balance the other way.

 7. In relation to family life,  following  the  decisions  in  Kugathas  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and Rai v
    Entry Clearance Officer [2017] EWCA Civ 320, Mr Moriarty submitted that
    there only needs to be real or effective or committed support  to  show
    that family life exists and therefore  Article  8(1)  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights is engaged.  On  the  unchallenged  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal, that threshold has been  met.   It  was
    not accurate for the First-tier Tribunal to refer  to  the  Appellant's
    mother choosing to settle in the United Kingdom away from the Appellant
    in circumstances where they both made a  joint  application  for  entry
    clearance with the Appellant's mother's application being granted  with
    a very limited period of time for  her  to  use  her  entry  clearance.
    Further, there is a relevant difference between the  situation  of  the
    Appellant and her siblings, who are married and  have  formed  separate
    independent  family  units.   Finally,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
    required to factor in the likelihood of the family unit having come  to
    the United Kingdom together previously if the policy had been in  place
    sooner, of which there was evidence in this case.

 8. On behalf of the Respondent, Ms Cunha submitted that the proper test as
    to whether family life is engaged in this case was in  practical  terms
    reflected in the findings  in  paragraph  21  of  the  decision,  which
    provided implicit, albeit not express reliance  on  Kugathas.   It  was
    submitted that  in  any  event,  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was limited to records  of  very  recent  phone  conversations
    after the Appellant's mother's arrival in the United Kingdom and a lack
    of evidence of the financial circumstances of  the  Appellant  and  her
    mother, a matter which was directly challenged by the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer.  It was further suggested that the community in Nepal who told
    the Appellant and her mother about the opportunity  to  settle  in  the
    United  Kingdom  would  have  also  advised  them  that  more  detailed
    evidence, in particular of  their  financial  circumstances,  would  be
    required.

 9. Overall it was submitted that the evidence of the relationship  between
    the Appellant and her mother did not go beyond  normal  emotional  ties
    and there was a lack of evidence that the Appellant  was  dependent  on
    her,  rather  than  the  Appellant's  mother  being  dependent  on  the
    Appellant due to her hearing  difficulty,  as  shown  by  the  mother's
    current dependency on the Appellant's cousin in the United Kingdom.  It
    was however accepted that for the purposes of establishing family life,
    dependency does not have to be only one way and can be on either parent
    or adult child and it was further accepted that there was  no  need  to
    establish incapacity or any other reason as to why an adult  child  was
    unable to support themselves, such that dependency could be  by  choice
    rather than need for the purposes of Article 8.

10. If, contrary to the Respondent's submissions on the existence of family
    life, Article 8(1) was engaged on  the  facts  of  this  case,  it  was
    accepted  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  that  when  undertaking  the
    proportionality balancing exercise  under  Article  8(2)  the  historic
    injustice would outweigh the public interest in the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance.

Findings and reasons

 1. I find that the First-tier Tribunal materially  erred  in  law  in  its
    approach to the assessment of the facts  in  the  context  of  a  human
    rights  appeal  concerning  Gurkha  family   members.    Although,   as
    apparently accepted by the Appellant, there  is  recognition  that  she
    does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules, the First-tier
    Tribunal thereafter makes no structured  assessment  under  Article  8,
    first of whether  family  life  is  engaged  at  all,  and  if  it  is,
    ultimately ending with the proportionality balancing exercise.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal does not set out anywhere in the  decision  the
    relevant questions to be addressed nor the applicable law and there  is
    no express reference to the decisions in Kugathas, Rai,  or  Ghising  &
    others (Gurkhas/BOC's: Historic Wrong; weight) [2013]  UKUT  567  (IAC)
    which together set out the correct approach and relevant considerations
    for an appeal such as the present one.  It cannot be said on a rational
    reading  of  the  decision  that  paragraph  21  contains  an  implicit
    reference to the test in Kugathas for whether family life  is  engaged,
    given the reference to the Appellant's mother choosing to settle in the
    United Kingdom and the irrelevance of  the  Appellants  siblings  being
    married.

 3. As above and highlighted in submissions by Mr Moriarty,  the  Appellant
    and her mother both applied for entry clearance together and  there  is
    nothing to suggest in any event that the  question  of  whether  family
    life existed in Nepal and continues to exist between the Appellant  and
    her mother could be answered by whether the Appellant's mother chose to
    settle elsewhere or not.  Further, the Appellant's position is  clearly
    different to that of her siblings in Nepal, who have  all  married  and
    live in separate family units, contrary to the Appellant who has always
    lived at home, is unmarried, has never been  employed  and  has  always
    been  financially  and  emotionally  supported  by  her  parents.   The
    unchallenged evidence before the First-tier Tribunal shows evidence  of
    dependency between the Appellant and her  mother  in  both  directions,
    with emotional support provided both ways,  financial  support  to  the
    Appellant and practical support to the Appellant's  mother.   Only  the
    latter has been interrupted by the Appellant's  mother's  move  to  the
    United Kingdom following  her  grant  of  entry  clearance.   There  is
    evidence  of  continuing  frequent  contact  and  support  between  the
    Appellant and her mother.

 4. In these circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal has materially erred in
    law in failing to make proper findings in a structured way  of  whether
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights is engaged at all,
    and thereafter failing to follow  the  usual  five  stage  approach  in
    ending with the assessment of proportionality.  These errors are  self-
    evidently material to the outcome of the  appeal  and  as  such  it  is
    necessary to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. As indicated to the parties at the oral hearing, if I found an error of
    law, I would proceed to remake the appeal on the  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I make  the  following  findings  of  fact.   The
    Appellant is a single adult whose late father  was  a  Gurkha  and  who
    would have, together with her mother, settled in the United Kingdom  as
    a family unit if they had had the opportunity to do  so  following  her
    father's service (as set out in the written statements before the First-
    tier Tribunal).

 6. Although an adult, the Appellant has always  lived  with  her  parents,
    latterly with her mother in Nepal following her father's death and  has
    always been financially and emotionally supported  by  them.   She  has
    never been employed, nor lead an independent life outside of the family
    home.  On this basis I find, in accordance with the tests  in  Kugathas
    and Rai, that there is dependency  over  and  above  the  normal  bonds
    between and adults child and the parent, involving real, committed  and
    effective support, from the Appellant's mother to the Appellant (and to
    an extent, vice versa) such that  family  life  existed  in  Nepal  for
    purposes of engaging Article 8(1) of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

 7. That family life has not been broken or terminated by  the  Appellant's
    mother's move  to  the  United  Kingdom  following  the  grant  of  her
    application for Entry Clearance and continues to subsist to the date of
    hearing before me.  It was always the intention of  the  Appellant  and
    her mother to settle in the United Kingdom together,  with  one  moving
    before  the  other  by  reason  of  circumstances  of  the  immigration
    decisions rather than any specific choice to move separately.  There is
    evidence of ongoing frequent contact and continuing  emotional  support
    between the Appellant and her mother.  In terms of  financial  support,
    the Entry Clearance Officer did not challenge the lack of  evidence  of
    the Appellant's mother leaving  her  with  70,000  NRP,  together  with
    paying for the accommodation  in  Nepal  and  food  supplies,  nor  the
    intention of the Appellant's  mother  to  continue  financial  support,
    using in particular the Appellant's father's army  pension.   The  only
    point noted by the Entry Clearance Officer was a lack  of  evidence  of
    financial outgoings of the Appellant in the context of  the  assessment
    of the adult  dependent  relative  rules  in  Appendix  FM.   In  these
    circumstances the evidence establishes ongoing financial and  emotional
    support despite  the  Appellant's  mother's  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Article 8(1) therefore continues to  be  engaged  and  family
    life continues to exist.

 8. In the circumstances, the Respondent accepts that the appeal should  be
    allowed on human  rights  grounds  as  ultimately  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise is in  the  Appellant's  favour  with  the  historic
    injustice outweighing  the  public  interest  in  immigration  control.
    There are no contrary factors to suggest otherwise  in  this  case.   I
    therefore re-make the decision under appeal to allow it on human rights
    grounds.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  re-make  it  as
follows.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]             Date 14th February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

