

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/23560/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Edinburgh                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23 January 2020                    |On 30 January 2020                  |
|                                      |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 SURREYA LIM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr A J Bradley, of A J Bradley & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant applied on 17 October 2018 for  clearance  to  visit  her
    husband in the UK, saying that she intended to stay for 4 months and  5
    days.

 2. The ECO refused her application by a decision dated  23  October  2018,
    maintained by an Entry Clearance Manager on 5 February 2019.

 3. An appeal was filed with the FtT on 19 November 2018.  FtT Judge  Green
    dismissed it by a decision promulgated on 1 August 2019.

 4. The UT granted the appellant permission to appeal on 2 grounds, set out
    in her application dated 11 November 2019.

 5. Ground 1 is on these lines.  Unlike the ECO, the judge found  that  the
    appellant intended to return to Turkey when her visa  expired,  and  so
    she met the requirements of  the  rules.   The  Judge  referred  to  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and to MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC  10,  where
    the rules were not met.  The rules were  intended  to  produce  results
    compatible with article 8, other than in  exceptional  cases.  In  this
    case, the ECO's decision was not in accordance with the rules  or  with
    the law and hence disproportionate, applying Razgar, [2004] UKHL 27.

 6. Ground 2 is based  on  the  best  interests  of  the  children  of  the
    marriage, but it emerged in submissions that no such  case  was  before
    the FtT.  Mr Bradley accordingly withdrew this ground.

 7. Mr Bradley submitted further to ground 1:

      i) There was evidence before the FtT that  the  sponsor  was  on  home
         curfew from around September 2018 until 4 March 2019.

     ii) Family life could not be carried on other  than  by  the  appellant
         visiting the UK during that period.

    iii) It was implicit in the decision that the terms of  the  immigration
         rules were met.

     iv) The judge should have stated that conclusion explicitly.

      v) The judge applied the wrong tests to article 8.

     vi) The judge should have found that as the rules were  satisfied,  the
         case was made out on human rights grounds.

    vii) The decision should be set aside.

   viii) The case was to be considered as at the date of the ECO's decision.



     ix) The decision should be reversed.

 8. Mr Clark replied:

      i) The  ECO's  decision  was  based  not  only  on  doubts  about  the
         relationship, but also on concerns about the  appellant's  personal
         circumstances, source of funds, and absence of evidence of funds to
         cover costs, along similar lines to two prior refusals in July  and
         August 2016.

     ii) Although the judge accepted  there  was  a  relationship,  he  said
         nothing about the other reasons given by the ECO and relied upon by
         the presenting officer in the FtT.

    iii) The judge should have decided, explicitly, whether the terms of the
         rules were met.

     iv) The judge had not decided, even implicitly,  that  the  rules  were
         met, as he had not dealt with several elements of the case.

      v) Although the rules were a starting point for article 8, in a  visit
         visa case it did not follow  that  to  meet  the  rules  showed  an
         article 8 right to enter the UK.

     vi) The appellant and sponsor had chosen over many years  to  carry  on
         their married life by spending most of their time apart.

    vii) The decision did not interfere significantly with  family  life  as
         the appellant and sponsor have chosen to spend it.

   viii) That was the effective decision of the judge.  It involved no error
         on a point of law.  Any error was incidental.

     ix) The sponsor had the option of applying again, if she  had  evidence
         to satisfy the rules.

      x) The sponsor  has  been  free  since  4  March  2019  to  visit  the
         appellant.

     xi) It was accepted for present purposes that the relevant date was the
         date of decision.  However, if the  decision  were  to  be  remade,
         either at date of decision or on  up  to  date  circumstances,  the
         outcome would be the same.

 9. Mr Bradley, finally, submitted:

      i) The ECO's concerns about the relationship were bound  up  with  his
         concerns over finances and absence of evidence of support from  the
         sponsor to the appellant.

     ii) In resolving the question of relationship,  the  judge  effectively
         answered the other points in the appellant's favour.

    iii) The case succeeded on Razgar question 2.

10. I reserved my decision.

11. Although the appeal was on human rights grounds  only,  it  would  have
    been preferable to consider explicitly whether the terms of  the  rules
    were met.

12. The decision is in favour of the  appellant  on  relationship,  but  it
    leaves the ECO's concerns about the financial evidence unresolved.

13. Those concerns were valid, and were clearly  before  the  appellant  in
    terms of two recent refusals.  It has not been shown that she  had  any
    substantial answer.

14. Where the rules deal with family life and are designed with a  view  to
    complying with the state's article 8 obligations, proof that the  rules
    were satisfied at the time of application goes a  very  long  way,  and
    will often be conclusive, in demonstrating  an  article  8  right.   In
    other areas of the rules - e.g. those concerned with entry to the UK of
    students, workers, or entrepreneurs - satisfaction  of  the  rules  has
    very little to do with article 8 rights.

15. Visit visa cases relate to family and private life rights according  to
    their circumstances.  Some go to fundamental aspects of family  life  -
    e.g. attendance at a family wedding, or a visit to a close relative  in
    the end stages of life and unable to leave the country.   Some  do  not
    relate to family life at all.

16. I do not uphold the submission that satisfaction  of  the  rules  in  a
    visit visa case generally establishes an article 8 right.

17. The date at which the circumstances  are  to  be  assessed  is  not  an
    entirely straightforward question; however, in light of the approach of
    both representatives, I take it  firstly  as  the  date  of  the  ECO's
    decision.

18. At that date, the extent of interference was  that  the  appellant  and
    sponsor could not meet for several months, within a relationship  where
    they have opted to spend most of their time  apart.   That  was  not  a
    disproportionate outcome.

19. At any later date, there is nothing to show that the  appellant  has  a
    general right on family life grounds to enter the UK.   She  may  enter
    only by bringing herself within the terms of the rules.

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any error on a point of law, such that it ought to  be  set  aside,  so
    that decision shall stand.

21. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      27 January 2020
      UT Judge Macleman




