
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/23209/2018
                                                               HU/23215/2018
                                                               HU/23212/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 June 2019                      |On 03 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                Muhammad [S]
                                 Ayesha [A]
                                    [MA]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S Latimer, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The first and second appellants are a married couple born  respectively
    on 31 January 1984 and 5 November 1983. The third  appellant  is  their
    son who was born in the United Kingdom on 1 January  2011.   All  three
    appellants are citizens of Pakistan.

 2. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom on 1 December 2009  with
    leave to enter as a student valid until 31 March 2011.  On 29  February
    2011, he applied for further leave as  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  worker)
    which was granted until 13 September 2014.  On 12  September  2014,  he
    applied for further leave as a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  but  this  was
    refused on 6 November 2014.  On 4 April 2018, he  applied  for  further
    leave to remain on the basis of his private and family life in the UK.

 3. The second appellant entered the United Kingdom on  20  May  2010  with
    leave as a dependant of the first appellant.  Her leave was valid until
    31 March 2011. On 22 March 2011, she applied for further  leave,  again
    as a dependant of the first appellant, now as a Tier 1  Migrant.   That
    application was refused on 21 May 2012 but, as a result of a successful
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, the  second  appellant  was  granted
    leave on 13 September 2012 until 13 September 2014.   On  12  September
    2014, she applied for further leave to remain as a Tier 1 dependant  of
    the first appellant and this was refused on  6  November  2014.   On  4
    April 2018, the second appellant applied for leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of her private and family life in the UK.

 4. The third appellant was born in the United Kingdom on 1  January  2011.
    On 22 March 2011, an application was made for leave to remain as Tier 4
    dependant child which was granted on 16  May  2011  until  30  December
    2011.

 5. On 4 October 2012, the third  appellant  left  the  UK,  travelling  to
    Pakistan with his parents.  On 18 February 2013, he was  granted  entry
    clearance as a dependent child and entered the  United  Kingdom  on  14
    November 2013  with  leave  valid  until  13  September  2014.   On  12
    September 2014, he applied for further leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    dependant child but this was refused on 6 November 2014.   On  4  April
    2018, the third appellant applied for leave to remain on the  basis  of
    his private and family life in the UK.

 6. On 31 October  2018,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  each  of  the
    appellant's applications made on 4 April 2018 for leave to remain based
    upon their private and family life in the UK under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal

 7. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
    sent on 16 January 2019,  Judge  Lloyd-Lawrie  dismissed  each  of  the
    appellants' appeals.  The judge found that none of the appellants could
    succeed under para 276ADE(1)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (HC  395  as
    amended) or outside the Rules under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellants sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission was initially refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Saffer) on 12 February 2019.  However,  on  23  March  2019  the  Upper
    Tribunal (DHCJ Gullick sitting  as  a  Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal)
    granted the appellants' permission to appeal.

The Grounds of Appeal

 9. The appellants were  granted  permission  on  their  three  grounds  of
    appeal.




10. Ground  1  contends  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  third
    appellant's relationships with his family in  the  UK  (minor  cousins,
    uncles and aunties) with whom the judge accepted he had "strong  ties".
    The judge failed to take into account the social and  emotional  impact
    on the third appellant of the loss of these relationships.




11. Ground 2 contends that the judge failed properly to apply  s.117(B)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA Act  2002"),
    in particular that both the first and second appellants were fluent  in
    English and were self-sufficient without being a burden on the state.




12. Ground 3 contends that the judge was  wrong  to  find  that  the  third
    appellant could not rely upon para 276ADE(1)(iv) because he  had  lived
    continuously in the UK for at least seven years and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect him to leave the UK because the judge had  wrongly
    concluded that the period between 4 October 2012 and 14  November  2013
    when he was in Pakistan broke the continuity of his  residence  in  the
    UK.




13. In her oral submissions, Ms Latimer relied upon grounds  1  and  3  but
    placed no reliance on ground 2.

Discussion

    Ground 1

14. Ms Latimer submitted that the judge had failed in paras 43  and  44  of
    her determination  to  have  regard  to  the  evidence  concerning  the
    strength of relationships between the third appellant and his family in
    the UK and the documentary evidence concerning his progress in  school.
    As regards to the former, she relied upon the evidence set out at paras
    16-20 of the determination and, in relation to  the  latter,  a  school
    report on the first appellant dated  July  2016  at  page  183  of  the
    bundle.

15. The judge's consideration of the third appellant's best interests  (she
    refers to him as "A3") is at paras 43-44 as follows:

         "43.  I turn first to A3, there is a huge body of case law combined
             with section 55 which states that I  must  consider  the  best
             interest of the child as a primary consideration.  I find that
             the best interests of the child,  as  a  child  who  has  just
             turned 8 and is in year  3  at  school,  to  remain  with  his
             parents.  As stated above, I find that A3 is not a "qualifying
             child".  I accept that the appellant has strong  ties  to  his
             extended family here and is doing well at school but note that
             he had stated that he had been very worried at leaving nursery
             that he would have no friends as he went to a  completely  new
             school but that he has made lots of new friends at the school.
             The Appellant has shown  himself  to  be  able  to  adapt  and
             socialise well.  He has also learnt some Welsh  and  can  read
             and write this despite this not being a language used at home.
              He spent over a year previously living with  his  grandfather
             in the house that he will return to and therefore I find  that
             whilst A3 would in the short term benefit from  being  allowed
             to remain in the UK, it would not be unduly difficult for  him
             at this young age  with  his  comparatively  short  period  of
             residence in the UK, to adapt to living in Pakistan once more.
              There is an established education system in Pakistan.

         44.  I find that both A and A2 will be able to work in Pakistan and
             will be able to still see at least  some  of  their  UK  based
             extended family as one of A2's brothers confirmed that he  had
             been in Pakistan for 4 weeks visiting family 2 years  ago.   I
             find that A and A2 always had  precarious  immigration  status
             and therefore I give little  weight  to  their  private  life.
             That applies also to A3 although it is accepted that  he  will
             not have had a choice at his age as to what country he resides
             in.  I find whilst it would be pleasing for the Appellants  to
             be able to remain in the UK, that there are  no  reasons  that
             would tip the balance in their favour.  Looking  at  the  test
             approved by Sedley LJ "what must be shown is  more  than  mere
             hardship or mere difficulty  or  mere  obstacle.  There  is  a
             seriousness test which requires the obstacles or  difficulties
             to go beyond matters of choice or inconvenience".  I find that
             there has not been shown to be anything more than  a  wish  to
             remain in the in UK in this case".

16. That was said in the context of Art 8.  But, as Mr  Howells  submitted,
    the judge also dealt with A3's best interests  in  para  37  under  the
    rubric "Immigration Rules" as follows:

         "37. I find  that  it  would  not  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
             consequences for the Appellants to return  to  Pakistan  as  a
             family unit. I find that it is in the best interests of A3  to
             remain with his parents.  However, I find that A3 has lived in
             Pakistan for a year growing up from 1 year 9 months to 2 years
             10 months of age. They could return to live in the same  house
             with A's father where they have lived previously as  confirmed
             by A and A2.   He  would  therefore  have  the  benefit  of  a
             supportive  grandparent.   I  find  that  the  Appellant   can
             understand Urdu well and can speak some Urdu although  is  not
             fluent.  I  find  that  the  evidence  of  the  witnesses  was
             contradictory and that there was an intention to portray  that
             A3 had far less ability in Urdu than he actually does. I  find
             that the A2's mother talks to A3 in Urdu and that  he  replies
             in a mixture of English and Urdu. I find that at least one  of
             his Uncles also talks to him in Urdu on occasions and that  he
             understands him but  answers  in  English.  I  find  that  the
             Appellant has managed to adapt  and  learn  some  Welsh  since
             starting school and can now read and  speak  some  Welsh.   It
             follows that with some assistance he should be able to swiftly
             improve his Urdu as he already has good understanding  of  the
             language.  His parents are in a position to help him  as  they
             are both  fluent  in  the  language.  I  find  also  that  the
             Appellant's have many members of extended family in a City  in
             Pakistan who could support them  and  provide  social  support
             should the family wish to relocate to the City.  I  find  that
             the family are well supported by family financially in the  UK
             and that there is no reason to suggest  that  this  could  not
             continue for as  long  as  was  needed  if  they  returned  to
             Pakistan. I therefore find exceptional  circumstances  do  not
             apply".

17. Leaving aside the slight curiosity that the judge placed para 37 in the
    context of her  consideration  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  I  am  not
    persuaded by Ms Latimer that the judge failed to take into account  all
    of the circumstances relevant to  the  third  appellant  including  his
    relationships with his other family members in the UK and his  progress
    in school.

18. The judge set out the documentary evidence, albeit in summary, at paras
    12-13 and the evidence of the witnesses at paras 16-20 in some  detail.
    The judge accepted that the third appellant had "strong ties" with  his
    "extended family" in the UK (see para 43).  As Mr Howells submitted, it
    has not been suggested that there was  any  "family  life"  with  these
    other relatives and his relationship with them fell to be considered as
    part of his private life.  In reality, that may well be  a  distinction
    without a difference in any event (see Singh and Singh  v  SSHD  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 630 at [25]).  The judge clearly considered  the  impact  upon
    the third appellant of leaving the UK and travelling with  his  parents
    to Pakistan.  At the date of the hearing, the third appellant was  just
    8 years old and in year 3 at school.  There was nothing in the evidence
    to displace the common sense position that the third  appellant's  best
    interests were to be with his parents if they remained in the UK but in
    Pakistan if they were removed (see  KO  (Nigeria)  and  Others  v  SSHD
    [2018] UKSC 53 at [18] and [19]).  The judge found that the  first  and
    second appellants could, in effect, reasonably be expected to  live  in
    Pakistan.  The judge noted that the third appellant had  been  able  to
    adapt and socialise well in the UK (para 43) and also  found  that  the
    third  appellant  had  some  facility  in  Urdu  and  would,  with  the
    assistance of his parents, "be able to swiftly improve his Urdu  as  he
    already has good understanding of the language".  The  third  appellant
    would, therefore, have  access  to  education  in  Pakistan  and  would
    acquire the necessary improvement in his Urdu -  the  language  he  was
    likely to have to speak in Pakistan.  I am  satisfied  that  the  judge
    fully  took  into  account  all  the  evidence  concerning  the   third
    appellant's best interests and reached a rational conclusion  that  his
    best interests were to be with his parents and that the family's return
    to Pakistan would not result in "unjustifiably harsh consequences" such
    that their removal would breach Art 8 of the ECHR.

19. For these reasons, I reject ground 1.





Ground 2

20. Ms Latimer did not place any reliance upon  ground  2.   She  no  doubt
    chose not to do so on the basis that it is wholly unarguable  that  the
    fact that the  first  and  second  appellants  speak  English  and  are
    financially independent from the state could  positively  assist  their
    claim  under  s.117B,  and  weigh  in   their   favour   in   assessing
    proportionality under Art 8 (see Rhuppiah v  SSHD  [2018]  UKSC  58  at
    [57]).

    Ground 3

21. This ground relates to the judge's conclusion that the third  appellant
    could not rely upon para 276ADE(1)(iv).  That provides as follows:

         "(1) The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain
             on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the  date
             of application, the applicant:

             ...

              (iv)      is  under  the  age  of  18  years  and  has  lived
                  continuously in the UK for at least 7  years  (discounting
                  any period of imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable
                  to expect the applicant to leave the UK; ...".

22. That provision applies  directly  to  the  third  appellant.    Section
    117B(6) of the NIA Act 2002 contains a mirroring provision which  would
    apply to the assessment of the proportionality of  removing  the  first
    and second appellants where:

         "in the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
         with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom".

23. There is no doubt that both the first  and  second  appellants  have  a
    "genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship"   with   the   third
    appellant.  Further, the third appellant is a "qualifying child" if he:
    "has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years
    or more; ..." (see s.117(D)(1) of the NIA Act 2002).

24. In this case, the appellant was born in  the  UK  on  1  January  2011.
    However, he left the UK on 4 October 2012 and returned on  14  November
    2013 having been in Pakistan with his parents.  The argument before the
    judge was that that period of absence from the UK broke the period when
    he "lived continuously in the UK" such that he could not establish that
    he had lived here continuously for at least seven years.

25.  The  judge  dealt  with  this  exclusively   in   relation   to   para
    276ADE(1)(iv).  For the purposes of that provision, para 276A  provided
    a definition of "lived continuously".  Paragraph 276A  states  that  it
    applied, inter alia, for the purposes of para 276ADE(1).  It provides a
    definition of "continuous residence" in para 276A(a). That, of  course,
    is not the same phrase as "lived continuously" in  para  276ADE(1)(iv).
    However,  by  virtue  of  para  276A(c)  it  is  stated  that:   "lived
    continuously" and 'living continuously' means  'continuous  residence',
    except that para 276A(a)(iv) shall not apply".

26. Paragraph 276A(a) says this about "continuous residence":

         "(a) continuous residence" means residence in  the  United  Kingdom
             for an unbroken period, and for these purposes a period  shall
             not be considered to have been broken where  an  applicant  is
             absent from the United Kingdom for a period  of  6  months  or
             less at any one time, provided that the applicant in  question
             has existing limited leave  to  enter  or  remain  upon  their
             departure and return, but shall be  considered  to  have  been
             broken if the applicant:

             (i)  has been removed  under  Schedule  2  of  the  1971  Act,
                  section 10 of the 1999 Act, has been deported or has  left
                  the United Kingdom having been refused leave to  enter  or
                  remain here; or

             (ii)     has  left  the  United  Kingdom  and,  on  doing  so,
                  evidenced a clear intention not to return; or

             (iii)    left the United Kingdom in circumstances in which  he
                  could have had no reasonable expectation at  the  time  of
                  leaving that he would lawfully be able to return; or

             (iv)     has been convicted of an offence and was sentenced to
                  a period of imprisonment or was directed to be detained in
                  an  institution  other  than  a  prison   (including,   in
                  particular,  a  hospital  or  an  institution  for   young
                  offenders), provided that the sentence in question was not
                  a suspended sentence; or

             (v)   has spent a total of more than 18 months absent from the
                  United Kingdom during the period in question."

27. The relevant provision is contained within the initial wording of  para
    276A(a).

28.  First,  "continuous  residence"  or,   for   these   purposes   "lived
    continuously", means residence in the United Kingdom for  "an  unbroken
    period".

29. Secondly, the provision provides that an individual who is absent  from
    the United Kingdom for a period of "6 months or  less",  provided  they
    had existing leave to enter or remain upon their departure  or  return,
    shall not be considered to have "broken" their period of residence.

30. On the face of it, therefore, the third appellant's absence from the UK
    for thirteen months "broke" his period of "continuous residence" and it
    was not saved from that consequence by being a period of six months  or
    less when he had (as the judge found he did  not  in  any  event  have)
    limited leave to enter or remain when he left for Pakistan or  returned
    to the UK.

31. Both before the judge, and before me, the  appellant  relied  upon  the
    respondent's guidance (19 December 2018) which under  the  heading  "Is
    the child a British citizen  or  have  they  lived  in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of at least seven years?" states:

         "Short periods outside the UK - for example for holidays or  family
         visits - would not count as a break in the continuous period of  at
         least seven years required.  However, where a child has spent  more
         than six months out of the UK at any one time, this  will  normally
         count as a break in continuous  residence  unless  any  exceptional
         factors apply."

32. Ms Latimer submitted that the judge had enquired as  to  whether  there
    were "exceptional circumstances" but  had  wrongly  limited  qualifying
    circumstances where an  individual  was  "stranded"  and  "cannot  come
    back".   She submitted  that  was  an  unduly  narrow  construction  of
    "exceptional circumstances".  The judge dealt with this at para  36  of
    her determination as follows:

         "36. I have been asked by Miss Francina to find that the  Appellant
             meets the rules for private live on the basis of 7  continuous
             years residence.  I find that A3 does not satisfy  this  test.
             He left the UK in October 2012 at age 1  year  9  months.   He
             returned to the UK in November 2013 at age 2 years 10  months.
             I accept that the Home Office guidance dated 19 December  2018
             states that when establishing whether a non-British child  has
             lived in the UK continuously for at least 7 years  immediately
             prior to application, the decision maker should  include  time
             spent in the UK with and without valid leave.  It goes  on  to
             state that were a child spends more than 6 months out  of  the
             UK at any one time this will normally  count  as  a  break  in
             continuous residence unless any exceptional factors apply.   I
             also accept that 276A provides  5  instances  were  continuous
             residence will definitely be broken but does not state that  a
             period of over 6 months but less than 18  months  would  break
             it.  It does state however that continuous residence will  not
             be considered to be broken where a applicant  is  absent  from
             the UK for a period of 6 months  or  less  at  any  one  time,
             "provided that the applicant in question had existing  limited
             leave to enter or remain upon their departure and return".  A3
             did not have limited leave to remain on his departure.  It  is
             accepted that he applied for and was granted this  during  his
             period away and on his return, however he did not have this on
             both entry and return.  Further,  "exceptional  circumstances"
             in my mind are not made out here and envisage situations where
             applicants are stranded and cannot come back.  It is  accepted
             that A's  father  had  health  problems,  however,  it  is  of
             importance and relevance that A felt that he could  leave  his
             father with A2 and A3 and was able to return himself to the UK
             after a few months.  I find  that  the  need  to  care  for  a
             grieving   relative   does   not   amount    to    exceptional
             circumstances.  However, I find that the  Appellant  does  not
             get over the hurdle of continuous residence in any event as he
             did not have limited leave to remain on his exist  of  the  UK
             and was out of the UK for 13 months,  A3 therefore only has  4
             years  4  months   continuous   residence   before   date   of
             application".

33. There are, in my judgment two answers to Ms Latimer's submissions.

34. First, the respondent's guidance is, no more than that:  it  is  not  a
    proper aid to construing the unambiguous wording of para 276A(a)  which
    distinguishes between periods of residence which are  "continuous"  and
    which, by direct contrast, are "broken" by an individual's absence from
    the UK.  That is the unambiguous and natural  meaning  of  "continuous"
    contrasted with  "broken"  residence.   The  only  exception  to  that,
    relevant to this appeal, is that periods of six months or less  do  not
    break an individual's continuous residence when they  have  leave  both
    when exiting the UK and when returning.  It cannot be the case  that  a
    period of thirteen months' absence from the UK  has  any  other  effect
    other than to break the first appellant's continuous residence.

35.  The  respondent's  guidance  is,  in  my  judgment,  no  more  than  a
    concessionary approach directed to case workers as to  how  they  might
    exercise discretion in an individual's favour but outside the terms  of
    para  276A  and,  for  these  purposes,   its   application   to   para
    276ADE(1)(iv).  The guidance is not a valid means of  interpreting  the
    unambiguous words of para 276A so as to read in additional  words,  and
    thereby change the meaning of para 276A, that periods in excess of  six
    months' absence from the UK will not break the continuity of  residence
    if "exceptional factors" apply.

36. The proper approach to construing the Immigration Rules  is  that  they
    should be construed sensibly according to the natural  meaning  of  the
    words used in order to discern what the  Secretary  of  State  must  be
    taken to have intended, and Parliament approved (see Mahad v ECO [2009]
    UKSC 16).  In  construing  the  Rules,  their  meaning  is  not  to  be
    "discovered" from guidance documents issued by the Secretary  of  State
    to officials (see Mahad at [10] and R (Behary and Ullah) v SSHD  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 702 at [8]).   The limited exception to that is where there is
    a "genuine ambiguity" (see Adedoyian v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773 at [70]
    and Pokhriyal v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1568 at [42] and [43]).  There  is
    no ambiguity in para 276A.  The guidance  would,  if  it  purported  to
    "interpret" para 276A, amount to a substantial rewriting of the meaning
    of the rule.

37. Secondly, even if the judge was required to look at whether there  were
    "exceptional factors", I do not accept Ms Latimer's submission that the
    judge solely based her conclusion  upon  a  narrow  and  "illegitimate"
    understanding of "exceptional factors" by limiting it to  circumstances
    where "applicants are stranded and cannot  come  back".   Although  the
    judge does refer to this in para 36, she went on  to  consider  whether
    the reason why the first appellant was absent from the UK, namely  that
    his parents had taken him to Pakistan where A1's mother  had  died  and
    his father was grieving, amounted to "exceptional circumstances".  That
    is clearly an assessment made by the judge at the end of para 26  which
    I set out above.   In concluding  that  these  circumstances  were  not
    "exceptional", bearing in mind that the first appellant had returned to
    the UK after a few months, I am satisfied that was  not  an  irrational
    conclusion or one which no reasonable judge properly directing  herself
    could reach.

38. For all these reasons, but principally that on a proper  interpretation
    of para 276ADE(1)(iv) the third appellant's absence  from  the  UK  for
    thirteen months broke the continuity of his residence, I reject  ground
    3 also.

Decision

39. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    each of the appellants' appeals did not involve the making of an  error
    of law.  The decision stands.

40.  Accordingly,  the  appellants'  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  are
    dismissed.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                 2 July 2019



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In dismissing the appeals, the First-tier Tribunal made no fee award.   That
decision also stands.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                           Dated 2 July 2019
