

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
HU/23094/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 22 November 2017                   |         On 24 November 2017         |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                         MRS SHARANJEET KAUR KOCHAR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Drabble QC, Counsel instructed by Fast Track
                 Immigration Services
For the Respondent: Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge  Monson  promulgated  on  20  March  2017   ("the   Decision")
       dismissing her appeal against the decision  of  an  Entry  Clearance
       Officer ("ECO") dated 16 September 2016 refusing her entry clearance
       as an adult dependent relative of her son, Charandeep  Singh,  ("the
       Sponsor") who is settled in the UK.


    2. The Appellant appealed a previous refusal in 2015.  That  culminated
       in a decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges  Church  and  Kamara
       promulgated on 4 September 2015 allowing her appeal.  Their decision
       was upheld by Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek on 15 April 2016.


    3. However, when the matter came back to  the  ECO  for  decision,  the
       application  was  again  refused  because  of  a  deemed  change  of
       circumstances. That change of circumstances arose from  the  Sponsor
       divorcing his first wife who is a British citizen and  remarrying  a
       second wife who, until recently, lived in India with her child  (and
       then also with the Sponsor's child from his first marriage). I  note
       however the Sponsor's evidence  that  the  breakdown  of  his  first
       marriage  in  fact  occurred  quite  shortly  after  the  First-tier
       Tribunal hearing and that UTJ Kopieczek was made aware  of  this  at
       the hearing before him.


    4. The ECO's decision was upheld by the Entry Clearance Manager ("ECM")
       by letter dated 6 October 2016 following a  complaint  made  by  the
       Appellant's advisers on 5 October 2016.   There is also  a  decision
       by the ECM made on 11 January 2017 following a review of  the  ECO's
       decision.  I will need to say a little more about that when  dealing
       with the Appellant's grounds.


    5. By the Decision, Judge  Monson  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal,
       concluding that the Respondent's decision was not  disproportionate.
       Although the appeal to this Tribunal  turns  mainly  on  matters  of
       procedure rather than the substance of the Decision, I will refer to
       the Decision in  a  little  more  detail  in  the  discussion  which
       follows.


    6. The Appellant raises three grounds. Ground one concerns a breach  of
       procedural fairness in taking  points  against  the  Appellant  when
       these had not properly been put either  by  the  Respondent  or  the
       Judge. Ground two concerns the  Judge's  refusal  of  a  request  to
       adjourn the hearing before him and  failing  to  record  the  second
       basis on which the adjournment was sought. The third is said  to  be
       an error in the consideration of Article 8 and proportionality.


    7. Permission was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam  on  14
       September 2017 in the following terms so far as relevant:-


           "It is  arguable  that  there  is  unfairness  for  the  reasons
           articulated at grounds 1 and  2.   I  grant  permission  on  all
           grounds."




    8. The matter came before me to decide whether the Decision contains  a
       material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision  or  remit
       the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.


    9. I indicated at the conclusion of the hearing that I found  an  error
       of law in the Decision, based on grounds one and  two.  I  therefore
       indicated that I would  set  aside  the  Decision.   I  re-made  the
       decision allowing the Appellant's appeal.  I indicated that I  would
       provide my reasons in writing which I now turn to do.


    Error of law: reasons


   10. As I indicated at the hearing, I was unpersuaded  by  ground  three.
       That appeared to me to focus on the position of the Sponsor's second
       wife and the two children and not on  the  Appellant.   I  had  some
       difficulty in following the logic of this ground.  I do not find any
       error of law on this account.


   11. It is though appropriate to deal at this point with an issue which I
       raised at the start of the hearing as to whether this is  an  appeal
       which falls under the section 82 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
       Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") prior to amendment by the Immigration  Act
       2014 or after those amendments.


   12. The original application for entry clearance was made as long ago as
       1 August 2013.  Following the allowed appeal, the case was  referred
       back to the ECO for a new decision.  That decision was  made  on  13
       September  2016  but,  since  there  was   no   intervening   second
       application  for  entry  clearance  that  was  a  decision   on   an
       application pending as at 6 April 2015.


   13. The Appellant's advisers initially appeared  disposed  to  the  view
       that this is  an  appeal  which  proceeds  under  the  pre-amendment
       provisions.  Mr Wilding  submitted  however  that  the  transitional
       provisions do not apply since the application includes also a  human
       rights claim.  Having considered  this  issue  further,  Mr  Drabble
       agreed with that submission.


   14. The impact of this is first as to the basis on which an  appeal  can
       be allowed or dismissed and second  as  to  whether  I  am  able  to
       consider the position as at date of hearing (as Judge Monson himself
       did) or whether I am constrained by the pre-amendment  provision  in
       section 85A of the 2002 Act to consider only  the  circumstances  as
       they existed at the date of the Respondent's decision.  That  is  of
       particular importance in this case because, since  the  Respondent's
       decision, the Sponsor's second wife has been granted entry clearance
       and has arrived in the UK.  That has relevance to the  substance  of
       the appeal, particularly in light of the findings  of  the  original
       First-tier Tribunal which I will come to when dealing with  the  re-
       making of the decision.


   15. The main focus of the submissions related to ground one.  Both  that
       and ground two focus on procedural issues.  However,  the  substance
       of the Respondent's  decision  has  relevance  to  those  procedural
       issues and I therefore set that out as follows (so far as relevant):-


           "The applicant must provide evidence that they can be adequately
           maintained, accommodated and cared for in the UK by the  sponsor
           without recourse to public funds.  If the applicant's sponsor is
           a British Citizen or settled  in  the  UK,  the  applicant  must
           provide an undertaking signed by the sponsor confirming that the
           applicant will have no recourse to public  funds  and  that  the
           sponsor will be responsible for their maintenance, accommodation
           and care, for a period of 5 years from the  date  the  applicant
           enters the UK if they are granted  indefinite  leave  to  enter.
           Information  held  at  this  office   demonstrates   that   this
           requirement is not met.  I am satisfied that had the judge  been
           made aware of this at your appeal he would not have allowed  the
           appeal. I therefore refuse your application under  paragraph  E-
           ECDR.3.1 and E.ECDR.3.2 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.
           I have taken account of  the  Judge's  findings  regarding  your
           rights under Article 8.  However,  as  the  circumstances  under
           which he made this ruling have significantly changed then  I  am
           satisfied that this no longer applies.
           I have therefore refused  your  application  because  I  am  not
           satisfied on the balance of probabilities that you meet all  the
           requirements of the relevant paragraph  of  the  United  Kingdom
           Immigration Rules."


   16. The Appellant's position is that the reasons for that  decision  are
       lacking and the decision  is  therefore  not  understood.  As  Judge
       Monson himself recorded at [28] of  the  Decision,  the  undertaking
       given by the Sponsor dated 11 July 2013 remained in place. The Judge
       accepted at [30] that the Sponsor had given an  undertaking  in  the
       terms required by E-ECDR.3.2.


   17. Mr Drabble also directed my attention to the statement of  Mr  Wells
       (the Appellant's legal adviser) relating to the  ECM's  response  to
       the complaint made about the ECO's decision.  That reply is recorded
       at [12] of Mr Wells' statement as follows (so far as relevant):-
           "Additional  information  has  been  presented  following   your
           clients appeal, which is subject to non-disclosure.  In light of
           this information a decision has been  taken  to  re-refuse  your
           clients application....There is nothing further we  can  add  at
           this stage and any further correspondence points will need to be
           addressed by an Immigration Judge at appeal, where  all  factors
           pertaining to this case will be assessed in the round."


   18. Unfortunately, that did not and could not happen as envisaged as the
       Respondent was unrepresented  at  the  hearing.  The  Appellant  was
       therefore left completely in the dark as to  the  information  which
       could not be disclosed.  Mr Wells surmises  in  his  statement  that
       this information may  have  come  from  the  Sponsor's  first  wife.
       However, no such information was disclosed at the hearing before me.
        The ECO/ECM's position therefore remains unclear (as it was at  the
       time of the hearing before Judge Monson).


   19. With that introduction, I turn to the procedural unfairness which is
       relied upon.  In order  to  explain  grounds  one  and  two,  it  is
       appropriate to set out what is said by Counsel who  appeared  before
       Judge  Monson  (Mr  O'Callaghan)  and  Mr  Wells.   Mr   Callaghan's
       "evidence" comes in the form of an e-mail written immediately  after
       the hearing as follows:-
            "FTT (IAC) - Taylor House
            6 March 2017
            Coram: JFFT Monson
                 HOPO: -----
                 No Presenting Officer attended.
           The JFFT informed me that the ECO had served a bundle  including
           a ECM decision, but no copy was provided to the Appellant.
           There appear to have been two different decisions, dated some  3
           months apart, though we have only received 1.
           The ECO has provided no detail  as  to  the  'information'  that
           concerned  him/her.   I  informed  the  JFFT  that  it  is   not
           appropriate that the Appellant  seek  to  address  20  different
           issues  that  may  or  may  not  be  in  the  ECO's  mind.   The
           Appellant's position is clear - he does not know the case he  is
           to answer beyond generalities.
           If the information concerned separation of husband and wife, the
           decision refers to evidence now available  that  if  before  the
           Judge would have had an impact on the decision.  The  separation
           was an issue  known  to  the  UT,  which  did  not  consider  it
           sufficient to overturn the FTT decision.
                 ?
           There was a discussion as to whether the issue of personal  care
           was at the heart of the refusal, with the Sponsor being employed
           and not able to provide 24 hours care.  I observed that  he  was
           capable and willing to provide intimate care - evidence could be
           called on the issue.
           I requested an adjournment so as  to  i)  identify  whether  two
           decisions have been issued and ii)  secure  instructions  as  to
           issue of care.
           The Judge refused the application for an  adjournment  as  there
           were two issues before him as there was no evidence from ECO  i)
           allow the appeal outright or ii) remit the matter  back  to  the
           ECO.  They were the two options addressed in the submissions."


   20. Mr O'Callaghan's  record  of  what  occurred  is  supported  by  the
       statement of Mr Wells who also attended the hearing.  His  statement
       is  supported  by  a  statement  of  truth.  It   is   not   however
       contemporaneous with the hearing.  The statement reads  (so  far  as
       relevant) as follows:-
            "[18]      At the appeal hearing  the  ECO  was  unrepresented.
           First Tier Tribunal Judge Monson raised an issue concerning  the
           appearance of  a  second  decision  by  the  ECO  predating  the
           decision which was the subject of the appeal by 3 months.   This
           decision had not been provided to us and we  were  not  shown  a
           copy.  The Judge confirmed that he had received  a  bundle  from
           the ECO.  Again, we were not shown a copy although no  complaint
           is made about this point since we were confident that we had the
           relevant documents, with the exception of this second decision.
            [19] Mr O'Callaghan argued that the ECO had provided no  detail
           as to the information  that  concerned  them  and  that  it  was
           inappropriate for  the  Appellant  to  seek  to  address  twenty
           different issues which may or may not be in the ECO's mind.   He
           maintained that the Appellant's case was that they did not  know
           the case to be answered beyond the  generalities  postulated  in
           the decision to refuse.
            [20] He further pointed out that if the decision concerned  the
           separation of the sponsor and his wife, the decision  refers  to
           evidence now available that if it  had  been  before  the  Judge
           would have made an impact on the decision.  He pointed out  that
           the separation of the sponsor and his wife had been  made  known
           to the Upper Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal had not  considered
           it sufficient to overturn the First Tier Tribunal Decision.
             [21]  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Monson  then  referred  Mr
           O'Callaghan to the second to last  paragraph  of  the  sponsor's
           witness statement where he speculates that the  new  information
           could be a letter from his ex-wife  and  asked  if  that  was  a
           'guess' to which Mr O'Callaghan agreed saying that we simply did
           not know for certain what the issue was  that  had  led  to  the
           second refusal.
            [22] First Tier Tribunal Judge Monson then raised the issue  of
           personal care of the appellant saying that he could not see  how
           such care could be provided now that the sponsor's wife  was  no
           longer available and how the 24 hour care could be provided.
            [23] Mr O'Callaghan responded that evidence could be called  on
           the issue and then requested  an  adjournment  on  two  grounds.
           Firstly he argued that we needed to identify why the decision we
           had appealed was different in content  and  dated  three  months
           after the decision the Judge possessed on his file.  The  second
           issue was that the Judge was now raising the issue  of  personal
           care and instructions needed to be taken so that evidence  could
           be adduced on this point.
            [24] The Judge refused an adjournment.  He said that there were
           two issues before him as there was no evidence from the ECO.  He
           could either allow the appeal outright or remit  the  matter  to
           the ECO and invited submissions on either course of action.
            [25] In light of that indication the sponsor was not called  to
           give evidence.  Notwithstanding the  Judge's  indication,  First
           Tier Tribunal Judge Monson dismissed  the  appeal  on  the  20th
           March 2017."


   21. Although the contemporaneous note of what occurred at the hearing is
       unsupported by a statement of truth and the version  included  in  a
       formal signed statement is not contemporaneous, the two versions are
       entirely consistent with each other.  Indeed, both versions are  not
       inconsistent with what is said at [23] of the Decision save that the
       Judge has not noted that the submission that the  appeal  should  be
       allowed outright arose because of what  he  had  said  and  that  he
       overlooked that Counsel for the Appellant  also  indicated  that  he
       wanted an adjournment to take  instructions  on  the  personal  care
       issue and that evidence could be called on that issue if necessary.


   22. Mr Wilding obviously could not assist as to what occurred  as  there
       was no Presenting Officer at the hearing.  I have not been  able  to
       find Judge Monson's record of the proceedings on file and he was not
       asked to comment on what it is said occurred.  As I posited  at  the
       hearing, it may be that the Judge thought  that  this  was  an  "old
       style" appeal which might have permitted him to find that  that  the
       ECO's decision was not in accordance with the law or the Immigration
       Rules and to remit for further reasons to be  given.   He  may  have
       subsequently realised that this was not an option under the  amended
       appeal provisions.  However, as Mr Drabble submitted and  I  accept,
       if that were the position, the Judge  should  have  invited  further
       written or oral submissions on what course he  should  take  in  the
       alternative.  It may be that there was some misunderstanding of what
       the Judge said about allowing the appeal; it might be that the Judge
       intended that he should be able to dispose of the appeal  by  either
       allowing it or  dismissing  it  outright  or  to  remit  it  in  the
       alternative.  However, if that intention  were  made  clear,  it  is
       unlikely that both of  those  present  at  the  hearing  would  have
       misunderstood that intention in the same way. I am for  that  reason
       prepared to accept that the e mail written by Mr O'Callaghan and the
       statement of Mr Wells are a true reflection of what occurred.


   23. Turning then to the impact of what occurred, I note first  that  the
       second decision spoken of in the e-mail/statement is  one  dated  11
       January 2017.  It is in the form of a review by the ECM of the ECO's
       decision.  It says no more  than  that  the  ECO's  decision  is  in
       accordance with the law and rules and that the ECM was not  prepared
       to exercise discretion.  In relation to Article  8,  it  notes  only
       that given the change in circumstances there is no breach.  For that
       reason, I can well see why the Judge refused the adjournment on that
       basis.  That decision says no more than already said by the ECO.  It
       provides no additional reasons.


   24. The second basis for the adjournment request  is  however  the  more
       important and needs to be considered alongside the lack of  evidence
       from the Sponsor and what it is claimed that the  Judge  said  about
       the possible outcomes (which I have accepted he did in fact  say  or
       was understood to have said).  Mr Wilding submitted that there is no
       procedural unfairness in relation to the Sponsor not being called to
       give evidence.  The Appellant was legally represented and it  was  a
       matter for the legal representatives how the case was presented.  As
       an abstract proposition, I have no  difficulty  in  accepting  that.
       However, in this case, that occurred in the  context  of  the  Judge
       having indicated that he  would  either  allow  the  appeal  (as  Mr
       O'Callaghan submitted he should do)  or  remit  to  the  ECO  for  a
       further decision.


   25. That lack of evidence then led to what Mr Drabble  submitted  is  at
       the heart of the error of  law  namely  the  Judge's  reasoning  for
       dismissing the appeal at [32] and [33] of the  Decision.  The  Judge
       there said this:-
            "[32]      There has been a significant change of circumstances
           since the previous hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal.   At
           the time of the previous hearing, the plan was for the sponsor's
           first wife (who had status here) to look after the appellant  in
           the family home while the sponsor was  out  at  work.   But  now
           there is nobody to look after the appellant while the sponsor is
           out at work.  Tiranjit Kaur is willing to perform this role, but
           her ability to do so is contingent upon her  applying  for,  and
           being granted, entry clearance - together  with  her  son  by  a
           previous relationship.
            [33] Mr O'Callaghan submitted that  the  appellant  could  look
           after his mother on his own until his  second  wife  joined  him
           here,  with  the  two  children.   This  is  not   a   realistic
           proposition, and it is not shown to be affordable.   It  is  not
           realistic because it involves the  sponsor  leaving  his  mother
           alone while he is out at work.  Moreover, the appellant requires
           help with "intimiate tasks": see paragraph [29] of the  decision
           of the Upper Tribunal.  As Sikh faith and culture places a great
           deal of importance on personal dignity, it is not credible  that
           the appellant would tolerate  having  assistance  with  intimate
           tasks being given by her son, rather than by a daughter-in-law."


   26. I was initially unpersuaded that the Judge was not entitled to reach
       the conclusions he did for the reasons  given,  in  particular,  the
       focus of the earlier appeal on the need for the Sponsor's first wife
       to be present to care for the Appellant whilst  the  Sponsor  is  at
       work and the point made that he could not afford care in India  (and
       it might be expected that care in the UK would be more costly).


   27. I was  however  persuaded  by  Mr  Drabble's  submissions  that  the
       reasoning does indeed involve errors.  Firstly, as Mr Drabble points
       out, in the previous appeal it was accepted by the Tribunal that the
       Sponsor and his first wife took it in turns to travel  to  India  to
       care for the Appellant.  There was no suggestion that the  Appellant
       was not willing to allow her son to deal  with  her  personal  care.
       Second, Mr Drabble drew my attention to the Sponsor's recent witness
       statement where he explained that, if the Appellant had come to  the
       UK before his second wife was permitted to do so,  then  his  cousin
       and his cousin's wife would have helped with his mother's care.   Of
       course, that statement was not before Judge  Monson.   Neither  does
       any submission appear to have been made to him that  by  saving  the
       �300 that the Sponsor currently sends to India for  the  Appellant's
       care, he could afford to pay for care in the UK.


   28. That though brings me on to the rather more important point which is
       that the reason that some of this evidence was not before the  Judge
       is that the points were not put to the Sponsor or those representing
       the Appellant.  Again, I accept Mr Wilding's submission that  it  is
       not necessarily procedurally unfair for points not to be  put  to  a
       witness where a decision is taken not to  call  evidence  from  that
       witness.  That though ignores the reason why  the  Sponsor  was  not
       called  to  give  evidence  which   is   because   the   Appellant's
       representatives had understood  that  they  did  not  need  to  call
       evidence because the Judge  intended  either  to  allow  the  appeal
       outright or to remit to the ECO (had the Judge had the power  to  do
       so).


   29. The way in which procedural unfairness is argued in the  Appellant's
       skeleton argument is as follows:-
          a) It was manifestly unfair  for  the  ECO  to  give  the  limited
             reasons he did; Judge Monson himself accepted at  [35]  of  the
             Decision that inadequate reasons were given.
          b) As a result of the inadequate reasons, the  Appellant  was  not
             aware of the case against her and her advisers' preparation  of
             her case was thereby prejudiced. It is said that  the  Tribunal
             should have adjourned with a direction for  the  Respondent  to
             provide more details of the nature of the evidence relied  upon
             or to disclose the evidence.
          c) That unfairness was compounded by the Judge's  indication  that
             in light of the lack of  evidence,  his  two  options  were  to
             either allow the appeal outright or remit to the  ECO.    As  a
             result, this  deprived  the  advisers  of  the  opportunity  of
             considering whether  the  Sponsor  should  be  called  to  give
             evidence once the adjournment was refused.


   30. I am persuaded that the Appellant has made out a case of  procedural
       unfairness particularly based on  (c)  above.   If  the  Appellant's
       advisers had understood the Judge to indicate that he might  dismiss
       the appeal outright once the adjournment had  been  refused,  it  is
       undoubtedly the case that they would have called the Sponsor to give
       evidence about how he intended to provide care for the Appellant  in
       the absence of his wife and what alternative arrangements  could  be
       put in place in the interim if his  second  wife  had  not  by  then
       arrived.  The Appellant was therefore deprived of the opportunity to
       present her case as she would have wished if the Judge had not given
       the indication which he did (or at least the indication  which  both
       advisers understood him to give).


   31. I therefore find an error of law to be made out on grounds  one  and
       two.  The error is clearly material as it has deprived the Appellant
       of the opportunity fairly to present her case.  For that  reason,  I
       set aside the Decision of Judge Monson.


    Re-making of decision on appeal: reasons


   32. As I indicated at [13] above, both representatives agree  that  this
       is an appeal which proceeds under the amended section 82 of the 2002
       Act.  Accordingly, the issue for  me  is  whether  the  Respondent's
       decision breaches the Appellant's human rights.


   33. I do not need to go into any  detailed  analysis  in  light  of  the
       decision made in the  previous  appeal.   In  that  decision,  FTTJs
       Church and Kamara  accepted  that  the  Appellant  meets  the  adult
       dependent relative requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Their
       reasoning is based on the following findings.   They  accepted  that
       the medical, shopping, housework and cooking requirements  could  be
       met in India.  However, they went on to say that there "is no person
       in India who could reasonably provide the personal care  element  of
       the Appellant's requirements at any price.  This is because  of  the
       'humiliation' the Appellant would feel at having intimate tasks such
       as washing, bathing and dressing carried out  by  a  stranger  when,
       according to her Sikh culture, she should be cared for by  her  only
       son's family."  Having found that the Appellant met the requirements
       of Appendix FM, they also allowed the human  rights  appeal  because
       the Respondent's decision "would cause very  significant  disruption
       to the life of the Sponsor, his wife and their  son"  and  that  the
       circumstances were compelling and the interference unjustified.


   34. Whilst it is right to point out that at  the  date  of  the  hearing
       before Judge Monson and his Decision, there had indeed been a change
       of circumstances in the sense that not only was the Sponsor divorced
       from his first wife but his second wife remained living in India and
       was therefore able to care for the Appellant there (at  least  until
       she was granted entry clearance).  As I have noted, however,  I  now
       need to consider the issues as at date of the hearing before me.


   35. The Sponsor's second wife was issued with a spouse visa on  27  June
       2017.  Although she has travelled back to India and returned to  the
       UK on two occasions since, and the Appellant has at other times been
       supported by the Sponsor's mother-in-law, the situation  in  the  UK
       has now reverted to the situation as it was at the date of the first
       appeal, save that the care which was to be provided by the Sponsor's
       first wife at that time will now be provided by the Sponsor's second
       wife (at least whilst the Sponsor is working and  unable  to  do  so
       himself).
   36. There is nothing before me to suggest that the  Appellant's  medical
       condition has changed or improved.  There is nothing to suggest that
       the necessary care arrangements are any different to  those  present
       at the time of the previous appeal decision.  There is therefore  no
       person in India who can reasonably provide the care.  The  financial
       requirements  are  met.   Although  the  ECO  put   in   issue   the
       undertaking, Judge Monson accepted on the  evidence  (and  I  accept
       also on the evidence now  before  me  from  the  Sponsor)  that  the
       necessary undertaking  for  the  purposes  of  E-ECDR.3.2  has  been
       provided.  It follows that the Appellant meets the Rules  for  entry
       as an adult dependent relative.


   37. As this is an appeal under the amended provisions of the 2002 Act, I
       cannot however allow the appeal on the basis that  the  Respondent's
       decision is not in accordance with the Rules. I  can  only  (in  the
       circumstances here) allow the appeal on human rights grounds.  It is
       clearly relevant  that  the  Appellant  meets  the  Rules.   As  the
       original Tribunal found, to refuse the Appellant  entry  will  cause
       very significant disruption to the family life of the  Sponsor,  his
       wife and child. It is for the Respondent to justify the interference
       and to show that refusal  of  entry  is  proportionate.  The  public
       interest does not require the Appellant to be refused entry  because
       she is able to satisfy the requirements under the Rules.   For  that
       reason, I allow the appeal.


DECISION
    I am satisfied that the Decision contains material errors of  law.  The
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson promulgated  on  20  March
    2017 is set aside.
    I re-make the decision and I allow the appeal on human  rights  grounds
    on the basis that the  Respondent's  decision  refusing  the  Appellant
    entry clearance breaches her Article 8 ECHR rights.
      Signed           [pic]      Dated:  23 November 2017
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
