
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23107/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 July 2020                      |On 4 August 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                            SUGANYA CHANDRAKUMAR
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER -SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge O'Keeffe promulgated on 3 December 2019 in  which  the
       Judge dismissed  the  appellant's  earlier  appeal  on  human  rights
       grounds.
    2. Permission to appeal was granted  by  another  judge  the  First-Tier
       Tribunal the operative part of  the  grant  being  in  the  following
       terms:
           "2.    The grounds argue that the  Judge  failed  to  adequately
                consider the living conditions  for  the  Appellant  in  Sri
                Lanka and thereby failed to properly assess  the  Article  8
                claim.
           3.     In the decision the Judge made findings on  many  of  the
                issues in the appeal but it is just about arguable that  the
                decision failed to recognise the high level of risk  that  a
                single Christian girl  likes  the  Appellant  faces  in  Sri
                Lanka."
    3. As a result of the Covid-19  pandemic  and  the  practice  directions
       issued  in  light  of  the  need  to  take  appropriate   precautions
       directions were sent to the parties advising them  of  a  provisional
       view of the Upper Tribunal that the question of whether the Judge had
       erred in law in a manner material to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
       appeal could be determined without a hearing and inviting the parties
       observations upon this proposal and  providing  the  opportunity  for
       further submissions to be made in support of  their  claim  that  the
       Judge had erred in law or otherwise.
    4. The Overriding Objective is contained in the Upper Tribunal Procedure
       Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing   with   a   case   fairly
       and   justly   includes:   dealing  with   it   in   ways  that   are
       proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the   case,   the  complexity
       of   the   issues,   etc;   avoiding   unnecessary   formality    and
       seeking flexibility  in  the  proceedings;  ensuring,   so   far   as
       practicable,  that the parties are able to participate fully  in  the
       proceedings; using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
       effectively; and avoiding delay, so far  as  compatible  with  proper
       consideration of the issues.
    5. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the  Upper  Tribunal  to
       further the overriding objective; and to  cooperate  with  the  Upper
       Tribunal generally.
    6. Rule 34  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
       provides:
           '34.-
           (1)    Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may
                make any decision without a hearing.
           (2)    The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed
                by a party when  deciding  whether  to  hold  a  hearing  to
                consider any matter, and the form of any such hearing.
           (3)    In immigration judicial  review  proceedings,  the  Upper
                Tribunal must hold a hearing before making a decision  which
                disposes of proceedings.
           (4)    Paragraph (3) does not affect  the  power  of  the  Upper
                Tribunal to-
                (a)    strike out a party's case, pursuant to  rule  8(1)(b)
                    or 8(2);
                (b)    consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;
                (c)    determine an  application  for  permission  to  bring
                    judicial review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or
                (d)     make  a  consent  order  disposing  of  proceedings,
                    pursuant to rule 39, without a hearing.'
    7. The appellant's  submissions  dated  29  March  2020  rely  upon  the
       original Grounds dated 21 December 2019 and request that the  Judge's
       determination be set aside, and the appeal allowed or, alternatively,
       that there be an oral hearing for  further  oral  submissions  to  be
       made. The respondent submissions dated 8 June 2020 comment  upon  the
       question of whether the Judge has erred in law but fails to make  any
       comment concerning the method by  which  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  to
       determine this question.
    8. The parties have been given the opportunity to comment  upon  whether
       the error of law issue can be determined on the papers  and  although
       the appellant seems to suggest that she is happy for  this  to  occur
       provided the appeal is allowed but that if not  an  oral  hearing  is
       required, there is  nothing  on  the  facts  or  in  law  that  makes
       consideration of the issues on the  papers  not  in  accordance  with
       overriding objectives at this stage. The appellant fails to establish
       what will be said orally that  has  not  been  written  down  in  the
       further submissions that have been provided. The appellant  fails  to
       deal adequately with the  current  state  of  the  proceedings  which
       relate to the question of whether a material error of  law  has  been
       made. It is only if the same is found that the Upper Tribunal has any
       power to substitute a decision to either allow or dismiss the appeal.
        The directions sent by the Upper Tribunal  clearly  provide  at  [4]
       that "If this Tribunal decides to set aside the decision of the First-
       Tier Tribunal for error of law, further directions will accompany the
       notice of that decision".
    9. I find it  is  appropriate  in  all  the  circumstances  to  exercise
       discretion provided by the Rules to determine the question of whether
       the Judge has made an error of  law  in  a  manner  material  to  the
       decision to dismiss the appeal on the papers. Such a course of action
       has not been shown to be either unfair or contrary to the  overriding
       objectives.

Background

   10. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on the 26 December  1993
       who on 9 July 2018 made an application for entry clearance to the  UK
       under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.
   11. The Judge, having considered the documentary evidence and having  had
       the benefit  of  seeing  and  hearing  oral  evidence  given  by  the
       appellant's mother her sponsor in the UK, sets out findings  of  fact
       from [20] of the decision under challenge.
   12. The Judge noted a previous decision promulgated on 18  November  2014
       which was taken as the starting point for determining the  issues  in
       this appeal and in which it was noted  to  previous  Judge  found  no
       compelling circumstances let  alone  exceptional  circumstances  that
       applied to the appellant or the existence of insurmountable obstacles
       to her remaining in Sri Lanka.
   13. The Judge considered the more recent decision of the  Upper  Tribunal
       of PP [2017] UKUT 00117.
   14. The Judge notes it was not disputed the  appellant  is  an  unmarried
       female  living  in  Trincomalee  and  noted  the  evidence   of   the
       appellant's mother that since 2010 she had  been  maintained  in  the
       Church of the Foursquare Gospel, the sponsor having made arrangements
       for the appellant's accommodation through the Church.
   15. The Judge notes, however, that when the sponsor gave oral evidence it
       became apparent the appellant has accommodation available to  her  at
       the home of her paternal grandmother [24].
   16. The Judge noted the claim the Reverend of the church  had  asked  the
       appellant's  mother  to  make  arrangements   for   the   appellant's
       accommodation as he could not deal with her needs. The  Judge  refers
       to reference to something similar in 2014 and finds  the  appellant's
       sponsor's claim of  the  absence  of  family  support  in  Sri  Lanka
       inconsistent with the letter provided by the Emmanuel  United  Church
       dated 1 February 2017 in which the writer claimed that the appellants
       family members had been known for a considerable period and that  her
       relatives informed the author of the letter that  the  appellant  was
       suffering without her mother. The Judge noted the appellant  has  two
       brothers living in Sri Lanka. At [28] the Judge writes:
           "28.   For me as a whole, I find that I have not been  presented
                with an accurate picture of the appellant's  current  living
                circumstances. There is an inconsistency as  to  whether  or
                not Rev Jeyachandran is still responsible for the  appellant
                or whether she lives alone. Although I  was  told  that  the
                appellant has no close relatives to whom she can turn, it is
                now apparent that her paternal grandmother continues to live
                in accommodation in Sri Lanka and the appellant is  able  to
                stay at  that  property.  Documentary  evidence  shows  that
                relatives of the appellant were known to the pastor  of  the
                Emanuel United Church at the time of her application."
   17. At [30 - 31] the Judge writes:
           "30.   There is no up-to-date  evidence  to  suggest  that  this
                appellant has any particular health needs. I accept that she
                suffered from Dengue fever at the end of  2018/beginning  of
                2019. The evidence demonstrates however  that  she  received
                appropriate medical treatment in hospital. A letter from  Dr
                Peieris dated  1  February  2017  said  that  the  appellant
                suffered from headaches and was affected by  depression.  He
                said that she had been mentally affected by separation  from
                her mother and this had caused her headaches and depression.
           31.    I was not provided with any up to date  medical  evidence
                to show the current position. The appellant  said  that  she
                was undergoing a terrible physical and  physiological  (sic)
                ordeal in her daily life. She gave no details of how she was
                affected. The assertion that  she  felt  she  did  not  have
                anyone to protect her and her mother  was  the  only  person
                taking care of her is undermined by the discrepancies in the
                evidence to which I have referred.  Ms  Chandrakumar's  oral
                evidence was that the appellant was not currently  receiving
                any treatment either for depression or to treat  her  Dengue
                fever."
   18. The Judge considered the position  for  females,  particularly  Tamil
       females in the former conflict zone in Sri  Lanka  and  the  positive
       risk and countervailing factors, before concluding at [33]:
           "33.   In this case I find that it  has  not  been  demonstrated
                that the appellant is living in isolation or  that  she  has
                low socio economic status. There is no evidence that she  is
                dependent on Government aid; she  has  access  to  financial
                support from her mother. There is  no  suggestion  that  she
                would be perceived  as  having  LTTE  membership,  links  or
                sympathies. For the reasons set out above,  I  find  that  I
                have not been presented with  an  accurate  picture  of  her
                current circumstances in Sri Lanka. I find therefore that it
                has not been demonstrated  she  has  no  support  from  male
                relatives or neighbours. She has  managed  to  live  in  Sri
                Lanka for a number of years without apparently coming to any
                harm."
   19. The Judge's conclusion is set out at  [34  -  36]  in  the  following
       terms:
           "34.   In considering the proportionality  question  I  have  to
                take into account the public interest considerations set out
                in Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
                Act 2002. I  take  into  account  that  the  maintenance  of
                immigration control is in the public interest. The appellant
                does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  for
                leave to enter the UK. I was told that the  appellant  could
                be maintained and accommodated by her mother and I  have  no
                reason to doubt that. I was not provided with  any  evidence
                to show that the appellant can speak English. In  any  event
                these two factors are neutral in the balancing exercise.
           35.    Balanced against that is the clearly loving  relationship
                between the appellant and her mother.  I  accept  that  they
                would both prefer to live together rather than apart.  There
                is nothing to stop them though continuing to maintain  their
                family life as before by daily contact and by  the  sponsors
                visits back to Sri Lanka. The evidence before me  considered
                as a whole, does not show that the appellant meets the  risk
                factors set out in PP.
           36.    Considering the appellant's case as a whole, I find  that
                it has not been demonstrated that the  appellant's  case  is
                exceptional or that the  decision  would  result  in  unduly
                harsh consequences for the appellant or her mother.  I  find
                that  the  refusal  of  the   appellant's   application   is
                proportionate and  a  fair  balance  between  the  competing
                interests.  In  balancing  the  private  interests  of   the
                appellant as against the public interest, I  find  that  the
                balance is in favour of refusal. The strength of the  public
                policy in maintaining immigration control is not  outweighed
                by the strength of the appellant's Article 8 case."
   20. The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal on two main
       grounds. Ground 1 asserts the Judge's proportionality  assessment  is
       infected by legal error as there was no assessment by  the  Judge  of
       the oral submissions that it was the respondent's delay which led  to
       the appellant being over 18 when the sponsor was  granted  ILR  on  1
       January 2011, notwithstanding that the Sponsor had  been  in  the  UK
       since 1999 and had claimed asylum due to persecution  in  Sri  Lanka.
       The grounds assert that  is  a  material  error  which  affected  the
       Judge's assessment of the proportionality as  the  delay  denied  the
       appellant entry clearance as a minor under paragraph 297(i)(e) of  HC
       395. It is stated at that time the Sponsor had sole responsibility as
       the appellant's father had been missing since  the  appellant  was  2
       years of age in 1995 and would therefore have been entitled  to  join
       her mother.
   21. Ground 2 asserts it was not disputed by the Presenting Officer before
       the Judge at the appeal hearing that the appellant had been living in
       Four Squares Church since 2010 after her maternal  grandmother  died.
       It is  alleged  the  Judge  failed  to  take  the  sponsors  evidence
       regarding this aspect into account  when  assessing  proportionality,
       making findings that are unreasonable and flawed.
   22. The Secretary of State asserts there is no legal error in the Judge's
       decision.  The  author  of  the  respondent's  grounds  asserts   the
       appellant's challenge appears to be solely on the basis  the  Judge's
       findings are Wednesbury unreasonable requiring it to be  demonstrated
       that the decision under challenge is irrational or perverse.
   23. In relation to Ground 1 the respondent asserts that  no  evidence  of
       the alleged delay, or evidence capable of proving that paragraph  297
       would have been met is identified in the appellant's grounds and that
       the pleadings did not suggest the Judge had erred by failing to  take
       such evidence into  account.  The  respondent  asserts  there  is  no
       admissible evidence that the appellant relied upon any alleged  delay
       as part of her case before the Judge. It is stated  that  whilst  the
       grounds and further submissions make reference to the Judge's  Record
       of Proceedings no application appears to have been made for  that  to
       be adduced and that it had not been  seen  by  the  respondent  which
       would make it inappropriate for the Upper Tribunal  to  consider  the
       same.  The  respondent  asserts  it  has  not  been  shown  that  the
       respondent delayed in granting ILR to the appellant's mother  and  it
       has not been shown that the alleged delay was argued before the Judge
       or that the Judge erred by failing to take the issue into account.
   24. In relation to Ground 2 the author of the respondent's  reply  argues
       there is no positive duty under Article 8 requiring the respondent to
       facilitate entry clearance of the appellant on the ground she  claims
       to in fear for her safety in Sri Lanka. PP was an  in-country  asylum
       appeal where the potential risk faced by the appellant in  that  case
       do not form material considerations in the current case. It is argued
       the Judge was bound not have  regard  to  the  appellant's  right  to
       respect for private  life  in  the  context  of  an  entry  clearance
       application and that any alleged difficulties the appellant may  face
       due to her particular personal characteristics have no  bearing  upon
       the family life with her sponsor.
   25. The respondent also notes the Judge found that  as  the  sponsor  had
       made repeated visits to Sri  Lanka  to  see  the  appellant  she  can
       reasonably continue to do so and that an assertion  at  [12]  of  the
       appellants  grounds  that  the  Judge's  analysis  is  'unreasonable'
       amounts  to  mere  disagreement  in  a  case  where   there   is   no
       disproportionate interference with family life.
   26. Further submissions made in the grounds at [14 - 18] are said not  to
       be admissible so far as they seek to give evidence and  that  it  was
       open to the Judge to find that it and the tribunal below had not been
       given the full facts.

Error of law

   27. The Judge's Record of Proceedings is within the file, is  typed,  and
       therefore clearly legible. Although the author  of  the  respondent's
       grounds assert that it would be unfair for the Upper Tribunal to take
       notice of the same  no  unfairness  is  made  out  as  no  doubt  the
       Presenting Officer would have made a note of the evidence given.
   28. The Record of Proceedings shows that the appellant's  representative,
       at the outset of the appeal, confirmed it was  appeal  on  article  8
       grounds outside the Rules. There is  also  reference  to  a  skeleton
       argument having been handed in on the previous  occasion  the  appeal
       was listed, dated 30 July 2019, which refers to the  decision  in  PP
       and claims the appellant is in a highly vulnerable situation  as  she
       is in a church care home and is therefore in  a  single  lone  female
       headed household notwithstanding being in a  church  care  home.  The
       skeleton argument refers to the recent bombing  of  churches  in  Sri
       Lanka highlighting  the  vulnerability  of  Christian  minorities  in
       addition to the vulnerability of the appellant as  a  single  female.
       The  skeleton  argument  states  there  are  highly  exceptional  and
       compelling circumstances such that the appellant's appeal  should  be
       allowed. It is maintained the appellant  has  family  life  with  her
       mother and her emotional ties are above and beyond normal ties. There
       is reference to the  appellant's  mother  giving  oral  evidence,  to
       country  information  and  a  statement  at  [7]  that  the  security
       situation has deteriorated in  Tamil  areas  with  increase  searches
       since the 21 April 2019 bombings and that the  appellant's  situation
       is even more vulnerable due to the increased militarisation. What  is
       not mentioned in the skeleton argument is any reference to the impact
       of any alleged delay  in  the  respondent's  decision  regarding  the
       appellant's mother's ILR.
   29. In the Record of Proceedings, following the giving of  evidence,  the
       Judge sets out the submissions made by both advocates. So far as  the
       appellant's representative is concerned the Judge  records  is  being
       submitted: "The delay is because the SSHD did not  grant  status  and
       sponsor was not naturalised until 2012. Consider under  legacy.  That
       delay is unacceptable because the children reached an age and  turned
       over 18 when she received status. We are in a situation that  if  the
       sponsors application had been determined  sooner  than  the  children
       would have been minors and they would have come quite  clearly  under
       297 in circumstances where the father had disappeared. Left  with  an
       application outside the rules. Has to be looked at  compassionately."
       This was  clearly  a  matter  that  was  raised  in  the  appellant's
       submissions but not on  the  basis  of  an  assertion  the  delay  in
       granting status to the appellant's mother was unlawful. There was and
       is  no  evidence  to  support   such   a   claim.   The   appellant's
       representative  stated  to  the  Judge  that  the  sponsor  was   not
       naturalised until 2012 and refers to the 'legacy scheme'  but  at  no
       point is it made out that the appellant was entitled to the  exercise
       of discretion on that basis sufficient to warrant a grant  of  leave.
       It also does not automatically follow that had  an  application  been
       made by the appellant before she attained the age  of  18  she  would
       have succeeded. As noted at [5] of the  respondent's  submissions  no
       evidence capable of proving that paragraph 297 would have been met is
       identified nor it suggested the Judge erred by failing  to  take  any
       such  evidence  into  account.  Even  though  there  is  no  specific
       reference by the Judge to this aspect it is not  made  out  that  the
       Judge has erred in a manner material to the decision to  dismiss  the
       appeal.  The  appellant's  speculation  that  had  something   happen
       something else may have resulted is not sufficient. It  is  not  made
       out this is an aspect that is capable of tipping the balance  in  the
       appellant's favour as part of the proportionality assessment.
   30. So far as Ground 2 is concerned the Judge clearly considered all  the
       evidence with the required degree of anxious scrutiny and  was  fully
       aware that the appellant is a young single female  of  the  Christian
       faith  and  also  the  case  law  relied  upon  by  the   appellant's
       representative. The Judge's findings in relation to that are set  out
       above.  The Judge had seen the earlier decision in 2014 in  which  it
       was noted the appellant in that appeal live together at accommodation
       arranged through the Church of the Four Square Gospel  in  Sri  Lanka
       and where it was recorded by the judge on that occasion that the same
       Reverend referred to before the Judge in this appeal was said to have
       called upon the sponsor to take the necessary  arrangements  for  the
       appellant's accommodation and care assistance as he could not provide
       the same any further due to work and other  church  commitments.  The
       judge in the earlier proceedings, having considered all the evidence,
       found there were no compelling circumstances, let  alone  exceptional
       circumstances  that  applied  or  insurmountable  obstacles  to  this
       appellant remaining in Sri Lanka.  The  evidence  considered  by  the
       Judge was not found to change that position in this appeal which is a
       finding clearly within the range of those available to the  Judge  in
       light of the concerns recorded in the decision under challenge.
   31. Repeating the basis of submissions made to the  Judge  regarding  the
       appellant's alleged circumstances in Sri  Lanka  does  not  establish
       arguable legal error. The grounds assert the Home  Office  Presenting
       Officer did not dispute that the appellant had  been  living  in  the
       church after her maternal grandmother died. The Presenting  Officer's
       submissions to the Judge as recorded in the Record of Proceedings are
       as follows:
           "Agree that Article 8 is engaged. Current living circumstances -
           unclear from sponsors evidence. Appellants evidence that she  is
           living in a childcare home. She explains that to be a  home  for
           orphans however she returns home to the house of her  mother  in
           law. Sponsor unable to explain when the appellant  began  living
           in  that   accommodation.   Paragraph   24   of   the   previous
           determination. Say sponsor has provided an unclear background to
           the  appellant's  living  situation.  When  asked  what  current
           difficulties appellant faces, the sponsor  explained  they  were
           perhaps emotional in terms of being left in  Sri  Lanka.  Submit
           the appellant hasn't demonstrated exceptional  circumstances  in
           her case to warrant a grant outside the rules."
   32. There is no evidence of the Judge going behind a concession  made  by
       the respondent or  making  a  finding  outside  the  range  of  those
       reasonably available to the Judge on the evidence when considered  as
       a whole. There is nothing arguably irrational in the Judge concluding
       on the evidence to which weight could be placed that  the  respondent
       had established the decision is a proportionate interference  in  any
       protected right.
   33. Whilst the appellant and UK based sponsor may wish she could move  to
       the United Kingdom the grounds fail to establish arguable legal error
       material to the decision to dismiss the appeal sufficient to  warrant
       the Upper Tribunal interfering any further in this decision on any of
       the pleaded grounds.

Decision

   34. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.


   35. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 23 July 2020
