
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23946/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 February 2019                           |On 05 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                          ms pauline vernetta brown
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Ferguson, Counsel instructed by Ansah
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 4 March 1951 who  applied
    to the respondent for leave to remain on  human  rights  grounds.   The
    respondent refused  that  application  on  27  September  2016.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 19  November  2018,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal D Barker dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

Grounds for Permission to Appeal

 2. The appellant appeals, with permission, in summary on the grounds  that
    it was argued the judge erred in her approach to the  consideration  of
    family life and the appellant's grandson's best interests  and  whether
    these could or did amount to exceptional circumstances.

Error of Law Discussion

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 7  August  2000  on  a  six
    month visit visa.  She  applied  for  further  leave  to  remain  on  8
    February 2001, refused on 17 August 2001 and made a further application
    on 7 July 2015, refused on 26 August 2015.  The application  which  was
    the subject of the present appeal was made on 27 April 2016 and it  was
    not disputed that the appellant has been resident in the UK  in  excess
    of eighteen years at the date of the First-tier Tribunal  hearing,  nor
    was it disputed that she only had leave to remain  for  the  first  six
    months of that period.

 4.  The  judge,  in  a  careful  and  comprehensive  decision,  took  into
    consideration the appellant's  relationships  with  her  children,  her
    grandchildren as well as her great-grandchildren and  found,  at  [24],
    that she had a "very close relationship"  with  her  family  which  the
    judge found to be "a deep family relationship and mutual  support"  and
    the judge noted that the appellant had close involvement  in  care  for
    each family member.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal went on to  consider  the  appellant's  medical
    conditions which included severe pain, diabetes and eye problems.   The
    judge took into consideration that it was notable  that  the  appellant
    was not good at attending appointments in relation to her poor diabetes
    control.  The judge took into  consideration  that  the  appellant  was
    severely obese as noted in the reports and although it  was  stated  at
    one point that the appellant had poor mobility the judge found that the
    extent of the appellant's mobility had not been  established  and  that
    whilst it was noted that she had a  weight  problem  and  was  severely
    obese, it did not automatically follow that  she  had  severe  mobility
    problems.  These findings were unchallenged.

 6. The judge considered the appellant's immigration history and the  claim
    that it was as a result of her illness that she had remained in the UK.
     However, the judge did not accept this explanation and did not find it
    credible that it would take the appellant  and  her  daughter  fourteen
    years to realise that the solicitor was not acting  and  then  to  find
    someone else (paragraph [26]).  The  judge  quite  properly  considered
    that the fact the appellant had remained unlawfully in the  UK  for  in
    excess of seventeen years at the time of  the  decision  needed  to  be
    taken into account.  Again these findings were unchallenged.

 7. The judge then went on, at [27], to  consider  the  arguments  made  in
    relation to paragraph 276ADE and for the reasons given (which have also
    not been challenged) found that there would  not  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration  into  Jamaica;  although  the
    judge accepted that there would be some obstacles and disruption,  this
    did not meet the test of very significant  obstacles  and  in  reaching
    this finding the judge took into consideration that  it  was  not  just
    disruption  and  sadness,  this  did  not  meet  the  amount  to   very
    significant obstacles and the judge concluded that  the  appellant  did
    not meet the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE.   There  has  been  no
    direct challenge to that finding.

 8. The judge, at [28], considered that Article 3 medical grounds had  been
    raised in the grounds of appeal but that it was accepted that treatment
    would be available in Jamaica and that the evidence did  not  meet  the
    high threshold for finding a breach of Article 3 of the  ECHR.   Again,
    this was not challenged.

 9. The judge also noted that it was not suggested that the appellant could
    meet the requirements of Appendix FM.  The judge went  on  to  consider
    the facts of the case at [30] including that the  appellant  had  lived
    with her daughter and children and that  she  had  a  large  and  close
    family and that she had lived with her daughter for the  whole  of  the
    life of her grandson with whom she  had  a  very  close  bond  and  was
    involved in his upbringing, in that she helped to take him to and  from
    school, although it was stated that the child was now being  encouraged
    to travel to and from school independently  and  the  judge  found  the
    appellant's role would in that respect diminish.   The  judge  accepted
    that appellant assisted with child care due  to  the  child's  mother's
    work pattern within the NHS.  The judge accepted that  there  would  be
    significant changes and upset in  the  family  if  the  appellant  were
    removed and found that the main factor in the evaluation was the family
    and private life with the family and the  general  private  life  which
    would be formed after eighteen years in the UK.

10. The judge then went on at [31] to consider Section 55 and  conducted  a
    best interests assessment.  The judge reminded herself  that  the  best
    interests must be a primary consideration.  Although it  was  submitted
    that the judge had erred in that assessment in stating  that  the  fact
    that the appellant's grandchild could remain in the UK with his  mother
    was sufficient to mean that his best interests did not warrant a  grant
    of leave to remain for the appellant, that is to  mischaracterise  what
    the judge said at [31]: The judge  took  into  consideration  that  the
    children involved in the appellant's life would be able to remain  with
    their respective parents.  The judge took fully into consideration that
    it is desirable for children to have contact with grandparents or great-
    grandparents but that it cannot be said that it would  be  contrary  to
    the best interests of the children in this case, for the grandparent to
    leave.  The  judge  took  into  consideration  that  contact  could  be
    maintained including by visits and communication.

11. The judge also noted that the grandchild to whom she  was  particularly
    close was getting older and that the events which were  described  when
    he could not eat or sleep without his grandmother's  presence  some  of
    these events were when he was very young and that he was now at an age,
    at the final year of junior school, where he was maturing and  becoming
    more independent.   The  judge  found  that  there  was  no  supportive
    evidence of  a  real,  necessary  dependence  of  the  child  upon  his
    grandmother and that the appellant did not have 'family life  would  be
    protected by the Rules'.

12. The judge  therefore  undertook  a  broad  evaluative  best  interests'
    assessment, albeit that this was within the  framework  of  considering
    the  Immigration  Rules.   Having  undertaken   that   assessment   and
    considered all the factors, there was no material error  in  the  judge
    finding  that  the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's  grandson  in
    particular and the other grandchildren did not require the appellant to
    be granted leave.  The  judge,  having  set  out  in  some  detail  the
    documentary and  oral  evidence  and  having  evaluated  that  evidence
    including the age and dependency of the  appellant's  grandson  on  his
    grandmother, reached a  sustainable  best  interests  conclusion  which
    cannot be said to reach the high threshold  of  irrationality  and  for
    which the judge gave adequate reasons.

13. It was not the case that the judge was not finding family life,  rather
    the judge found that the appellant did  not  have  'family  life  which
    would be protected by the Rules' including given the lack of dependency
    upon her.  In considering Article 8 more  generally,  the  judge  found
    that there would be an interference with  the  appellant's  family  and
    private life, at [33].  The judge directed herself properly,  including
    that she had to consider the private and family life of  all  of  those
    involved and acknowledged, as she had  throughout  the  decision,  that
    there would  be  'substantial  interference  and  disruption'  to  that
    private and family life.  However, the judge gave adequate reasons  for
    finding that such disruption would not be disproportionate taking  into
    consideration the appellant's immigration history and weighing  up  all
    the evidence.

14. Miss Ferguson submitted that the psychological and emotional  needs  of
    the child which could not be met by a paid carer,  was  analogous  with
    the situation considered under the adult dependent relative Immigration
    Rules as considered in Britcits [2017] EWCA Civ 368 (paragraph 20)  and
    that this together with all the factors was  capable  of  amounting  to
    exceptional circumstances, under Appendix FM GEN.3.2 with reference  to
    GEN.3.3.   I am not of  the  view  that  this  materially  assists  the
    appellant's case and including as reiterated in Britcits (paragraph 78)
    the Article 8 balance depends on the facts of any particular case

15. In  regards  to  exceptional  circumstances  Appendix  FM  provides  as
    follows:-

         "GEN.3.2.      (1)  Subject  to   sub-paragraph   (4),   where   an
                      application for entry clearance or leave to enter  or
                      remain made under this Appendix,  or  an  application
                      for  leave  to  remain  which  has   otherwise   been
                      considered under this Appendix,  does  not  otherwise
                      meet the requirements of this Appendix or Part  9  of
                      the Rules, the decision-maker must  consider  whether
                      the circumstances in sub-paragraph (2) apply.

                  (2)  Where sub-paragraph (1) above applies, the  decision-
                      maker must consider, on the basis of the  information
                      provided  by  the  applicant,   whether   there   are
                      exceptional circumstances which would render  refusal
                      of entry clearance, or leave to enter  or  remain,  a
                      breach of Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
                      Human Rights, because such refusal  would  result  in
                      unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the  applicant,
                      their partner, a relevant  child  or  another  family
                      member whose Article 8 rights it is evident from that
                      information would be affected by a decision to refuse
                      the application.

         GEN.3.3. (1)  In considering an application for entry clearance  or
                      leave to enter or remain where paragraph GEN.3.1.  or
                      GEN.3.2. applies, the decision-maker must  take  into
                      account,  as  a  primary  consideration,   the   best
                      interests of any relevant child.

                  (2)   In  paragraph  GEN.3.1.  and  GEN.3.2.,   and   this
                      paragraph, "relevant child" means a person who:

                       (a)      is under the age of 18 years at the date  of
                           the application; and

                       (b)      it is evident from the information  provided
                           by the applicant would be affected by a  decision
                           to refuse the application."

16. Whilst the judge did not explicitly dismiss the appellant's  case  with
    reference  to  GEN.3.2.  and  exceptional  circumstances  resulting  in
    unjustifiably  harsh  consequences,  the  judge  was   aware   of   the
    appellant's case in this regard, as  recorded  at  [17],  that  it  was
    argued by  Ms  Ferguson  that  there  were  exceptional  circumstances,
    including because of the relationship with  her  grandson  and  others.
    The judge fully considered all the factors  including  the  appellant's
    role in her grandson's life (which although close, she ultimately found
    to be diminishing given the child's increasing independence as he  gets
    older).  It is patently clear from the judge's findings  that  she  did
    not find there to be exceptional circumstances which  would  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the  appellant  or  any  of  her
    family, including that she did not find that the child's best interests
    required his grandmother to remain for the reasons given, including his
    maturity, increasing independence and the lack of adequate evidence  of
    dependency on the appellant,  together  with  the  fact  that  all  the
    children in question could continue to remain  in  the  UK  with  their
    parents.  On the basis of all the factors considered in the  round,  as
    reflected in the judge's findings therefore, it  is  difficult  to  see
    what other conclusion could have been reached.

17. Although Miss Ferguson tried, belatedly, to suggest that the judge  had
    failed to take into consideration all of the relevant  factors  in  her
    proportionality assessment, including that the  appellant  had  been  a
    British subject at birth in Jamaica, I agree with Mr Jarvis  that  that
    was not properly before me.  In any event, I cannot see  what  material
    difference it could have made to the judge's decision even  if  it  had
    been.  Equally Miss Ferguson submitted that there was no  consideration
    of  the  fact,  when  considered  cumulatively,  that  the  appellant's
    relationship including with her grandchildren was  mutually  supportive
    and that she would increasingly rely on her family as she  aged;  again
    this was not specified in the grounds of appeal.  Even if it were,  the
    judge considered all the circumstances including that  there  were  not
    very  significant  obstacles  to  reintegration  for   the   appellant,
    notwithstanding that there were some obstacles and disruption.

18.  The appellant's grounds of appeal are not made out and  amount  to  no
    more than a disagreement with the judge's reasoned findings.

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date:  1 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal was dismissed; no fee award can be made.


Signed                                  Date:  1 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
