
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: HU/23719/2018 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 April 2021                   |On 27 April 2021                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     TR

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                    Claimant



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer

For the Claimant:      Mr A Osman, instructed by Turpin & Miller LLP



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I indicated that I found an error of law but reserved my full reasons to  be
given in writing, which I now address. The order made is described at  the
end of these reasons.


1. To avoid confusion, for the purposes  of  this  decision  I  shall  refer
   below to the parties as they  were  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal
   hearing.

2. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe, with  date  of  birth  given  as
   22.3.90, who first arrived in the UK in 2007. Following a conviction  and
   sentence for serious drug-dealing offences, he was imprisoned  for  three
   and a half years on 10.3.17  and  subsequently  made  the  subject  of  a
   deportation order.

3. The Secretary of State has appealed with permission against the  decision
   of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 16.4.20, allowing on human  rights
   grounds the appellant's appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of
   State, dated 8.11.18, to make a deportation order and to refuse his human
   rights claim. At that  appeal  hearing,  the  appellant's  representative
   confirmed that the challenge was made only  on  article  8  ECHR  grounds
   outside the Immigration Rules.

4. The appeal was primarily allowed by the First-tier Tribunal on the  basis
   that pursuant to paragraph  399(b)  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  on  the
   appellant's 3-year-old daughter for him to be removed. The grounds  argue
   that the findings  were  inadequately  reasoned,  particularly  when  the
   appellant does not live with his daughter and her mother is  her  primary
   carer. Reference  is  made  to  various  case  authorities  defining  and
   clarifying the term "unduly harsh" as something going beyond  what  would
   necessarily be involved for any child faced with  the  deportation  of  a
   parent.

5. The grounds also challenge the finding of very significant  obstacles  in
   relation to private life, pointing out that because he had not  lived  in
   the UK for the majority of his life, the appellant could  not  meet  399A
   and therefore he cannot satisfy the very significant obstacles  test  but
   would need to meet the very compelling circumstances over and  above  the
   very significant obstacles and unduly harsh tests in 399 and 399A.

6. The grounds go on to complain that in relying on the expert  report,  the
   judge failed to justify strong and cogent grounds for departing from  the
   Country Guidance of CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe Country
   Guidance [2013] UKUT 59 (IAC). Finally, the grounds submit that the judge
   failed to take into account family support, which would  be  relevant  to
   article 3 considerations.

7. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal  on  13.5.20,
   the judge considering there to be arguable merit in the ground  that  the
   judge failed to explain how the obstacles to return to Zimbabwe were such
   as to amount to  very  compelling  circumstances  "over  and  above"  the
   Immigration Rules. The judge granting permission was not impressed by the
   very significant obstacles argument, considering  that  necessarily  part
   and parcel of the very compelling circumstances test.

8. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In particular, I  have  read
   and taken account of the appellant's lengthy response, dated 21.8.20.

9. For the reasons summarised below, I am satisfied that  the  Secretary  of
   State's complaint does identify at least one material error of  law,  and
   in fact more than one, sufficient to require the decision to be set aside
   and remade, with no findings of fact preserved.

10. Whilst Mr Osman did his best to piece together  from  various  parts  of
   the impugned decision findings which could have justified the  conclusion
   that the unduly harsh test was met, the fact is that this finding at [78]
   of the decision is inadequately reasoned. The only reason given  is  that
   the judge considers it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  lose  the
   direct personal contact with her father she currently enjoys if  she  had
   to remain in  the  UK  without  him,  and  given  her  age  it  would  be
   unreasonable to expect them to continue family life through modern  means
   of communication. The judge fails  to  point  to  any  other  factors  to
   justify the unduly harsh finding.

11. In relation to unduly harsh, the grounds cite the reference  to  'bleak'
   and 'severe' in MK (Sierra Leone) v Secretary of State  [2015]  UKUT  223
   (IAC), and the more recent Supreme Court decision of KO (Nigeria) & Ors v
   Secretary of State [2018] UKSC 53, where  it  is  explained  that  unduly
   harsh  is  intended  to  introduce  a  higher   hurdle   than   that   of
   reasonableness and that "one is looking for a degree of  harshness  going
   beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child  faced  with  the
   deportation of a parent." In Secretary of State  v  PG  (Jamaica)  [2019]
   EWCA Civ 1213, the Court of Appeal held that the distressing consequences
   and difficulties to be expected from separation are not unduly  harsh  as
   they do not elevate the case above the commonplace. Mr Osman referred  me
   to the Court of Appeal's decision in  HA  (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of  State
   [2020] EWCA Civ 1176, where the Court found no reason  in  principle  why
   cases of "undue" harshness may not occur  quite  commonly  under  section
   117C(5), which addresses article 8 and additional considerations in cases
   involving foreign  criminals.  The  court  clarified  the  effect  of KO
   (Nigeria) v Secretary of State. According to the Court of Appeal,  there
   is no reason why undue  harshness  should  be  a  rarity  in  deportation
   cases.

12. At [51] Lord Justice Underhill stated,

      "51.  The essential point is that the  criterion  of  undue  harshness
      sets a bar which is "elevated" and carries a "much stronger  emphasis"
      than mere undesirability: see para 27  of  Lord  Carnwath's  judgment,
      approving the UT's self-direction in MK (Sierra Leone), and  para  35.
      The UT's self-direction uses  a  battery  of  synonyms  and  antonyms:
      although these should not be allowed to become a  substitute  for  the
      statutory language, tribunals may find them of some  assistance  as  a
      reminder of the elevated nature of  the  test.  The  reason  why  some
      degree of harshness is acceptable is that there  is  a  strong  public
      interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals  (including  medium
      offenders): see para 23. The  underlying  question  for  tribunals  is
      whether the harshness which the deportation will cause for the partner
      and/or child is of a sufficiently elevated  degree  to  outweigh  that
      public interest.


      52.    However,  while  recognising  the  "elevated"  nature  of   the
      statutory test, it is important not to lose sight of the fact that the
      hurdle which it sets is not as high as that set by the test  of  "very
      compelling circumstances" in section 117C(6)."


13. Although  that  decision  post-dates  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, it highlights that an elevated degree of harshness is necessary
   to meet the test. Nothing in the impugned decision begins to justify  the
   unduly harsh conclusion and that failure  amounts  to  an  error  of  law
   vitiating the decision. Neither the reference to 'unduly harsh'  at  [78]
   nor the reference to s117C(5) at [98]  help  the  reader  understand  the
   reasoning for reaching that conclusion.

14.  In passing, I note that at [81] and [98] the judge makes  the  confused
   findings that there is little or no public interest  in  the  appellant's
   deportation. Elsewhere, the judge correctly refers to  the  test  of  the
   public interest being outweighed but it is not  clear  overall  that  the
   judge has correctly  understood  what  the  public  interest  means.  For
   example, at [99] the judge refers to the "respondent's  important  public
   duties" being outweighed.

15.  At  [91]  the  judge  concludes  that  the  cumulative  effect  of  the
   difficulties to be encountered on  return  to  Zimbabwe  amount  to  very
   significant  obstacles,  even  though  at  [90]  the  judge   noted   the
   respondent's argument that the appellant could not meet 399A  because  of
   the limited length of residence in the UK and that his offending  history
   meant that he was not socially and culturally integrated in the  UK.  The
   judge appears to deliberately overlook that very compelling circumstances
   are required if the appellant cannot meet the requirements of the  Rules.
   Reading the  decision  carefully,  it  is  not  clear  what  the  judge's
   conclusion on 399A is. The correct approach would have been  to  reach  a
   conclusion on the Rules before making a consideration outside the  Rules.
   This is a material error of law.

16. In relation to article 3, the judge cites extensively  from  the  expert
   report but fails entirely  to  identify  strong  and  cogent  grounds  to
   justify departing from the applicable Country Guidance case of CM,  cited
   above. That according to what is set out at [87]  that  the  respondent's
   representative did not challenge the credentials of  the  expert  or  the
   report's conclusions is insufficient. This is a clear error of law.

17. Finally, also in relation  to  article  3,  the  judge  failed  to  take
   account  of  the  financial  and  family  support  the  appellant   might
   reasonably expect on return to Zimbabwe. In response, Mr  Osman  referred
   me to [29] of his response and the reference  to  Secretary  of  State  v
   Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ  813,  where  Lord  Justice  Sales  considers  the
   concept of integration. I do not  agree  with  Mr  Osman's  reading  that
   integration at its core requires the ability to find a  job.  As  put  at
   [30] of Mr Osman's response, "First-tier Tribunal Judge Flynn finds  that
   the respondent cannot find a job  in  Zimbabwe  and  therefore  the  only
   conclusion open to her is that the  respondent  cannot  integrate  within
   Zimbabwe." That is a misconstrued interpretation of the point being  made
   by Sales LJ that integration is a broad concept and "not confined to  the
   ability to find a job or sustain life while living in the other country."
   What was required was "a broad evaluative judgement  as  to  whether  the
   individual will be enough of an insider in  terms  of  understanding  how
   life in the society in that other country is carried on and a capacity to
   participate in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to be  accepted
   there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to
   build up within a reasonable time a variety  of  human  relationships  to
   give substance to the individual's  private  or  family  life."   In  any
   event, the appellant could not meet the other requirements of Exception 1
   under s117C(4) of the 2002 Act. In the  premises,  unless  the  appellant
   could meet Exception 2,  the  unduly  harsh  test,  the  public  interest
   required his deportation. For the reasons set out above, the unduly harsh
   consideration is flawed and in error of law.  Given  those  difficulties,
   the conclusion at [99] that the interference with the article 8 rights of
   the appellant and  his  daughter  outweigh  the  "respondent's  important
   public duties" cannot be sustained.

18. Taken and read as a whole, I am satisfied that the decision  is  lacking
   in adequate reasoning for the  findings  made,  such  as  to  render  the
   decision in error of law. In consequence, none of  the  findings  can  be
   preserved. In the premises, the appropriate course is to remit the matter
   to the First-tier Tribunal to be made de novo.

19. In the circumstances and for the reasons set  out  above,  I  find  such
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so  that
   it must be set aside.



Decision

      The appeal of the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade afresh.



      I make no order for costs.




Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       16 April 2021




Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       16 April 2021





