
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/23289/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision Under Rule 34 Without a     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On 29th September 2020               |   On 05th October 2020              |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                MANDHOJ RANA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLERARNCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's decision dated 5 October 2018.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Verghis, promulgated on 28 October 2019.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal filed on 30 March 2020.

      v) The grant of permission by the UT, dated 4 May 2020.

     vi) The UT's directions, issued  on  27  July  2020,  with  a  view  to
         deciding without a hearing (a) whether the FtT erred in law and (b)
         if so, whether its decision should be set aside.

    vii) The response for the ECO, dated and received on 30 July 2020.

 2. There is no response on file from the appellant.

 3. Based on all the above, the UT may now proceed fairly  and  justly,  in
    terms of rules 2 and 34, to decide questions  (a)  and  (b)  without  a
    hearing.

 4. Ground 1 is that the FtT erred "in failing to adopt the correct  lawful
    approach in assessing whether there existed family life".

 5. The ground refers to Rai [2017] EWCA Civ 320.The  FtT  directed  itself
    extensively in respect of that case at [36].  The FtT  also  noted  Pun
    [2017] EWCA Civ 2016, at [37], and other case law.

 6. Ground 1 has no substance.  It specifies no error  of  legal  approach.
    The FtT plainly directed itself correctly.

 7. Ground 2 is unclear, but the gist appears to be that the FtT went wrong
    at [19], where it records that the sponsor said that he stays with  the
    appellant in Nepal as he has an extra room;  failed  to  refer  to  the
    sponsor's statement; and did not "correctly assess all the evidence".

 8. This ground fails to specify any inaccuracy in the FtT's record of  the
    evidence taken at [19], or anything said by the sponsor elsewhere which
    might have made any difference.

 9. It should not be left to the UT to burrow into materials to  see  if  a
    ground has  any  substance,  but  I  have  referred  to  the  sponsor's
    statement.  At [17] he says, "We always stayed with  our  son  when  we
    visited him in Nepal".

10. I note that at [27] the FtT found the evidence of the sponsor  and  his
    wife credible on spending more time with the appellant than with  their
    daughter or their other son while visiting Nepal.

11. I cannot identify any legal error on the basis of ground 2.

12. Ground 3 is that the FtT "erred in the assessment of telephone  contact
    [and] failed to consider the  evidence  properly.   It  is  correct  to
    identify the records from Nepal as a record of  the  appellant  calling
    the sponsor, but [there were also] phone  cards  which  demonstrate  in
    part the calls made by the sponsor to the applicant ...  the FtT failed
    to consider ...evidence  of  contact.   Therefore,  the  assessment  of
    emotional support is flawed."

13. The respondent accepts that the FtT did not refer to the  phone  cards,
    but submits that they add nothing material.

14. It is not shown that the evidence of calls  from  the  sponsor  to  the
    appellant added anything of such consequence  as  to  require  separate
    mention.

15. The decision of the FtT is balanced and careful.  It took a  favourable
    view of the evidence from the appellant's  parents,  but  found  family
    life for article 8 purposes between the appellant, as a  mature  adult,
    and his parents, not to be established.  That  crucial  assessment  was
    firmly grounded in the evidence as a whole.  The grounds  do  not  show
    that it involved the making of any error on a point of law.

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

17. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


      [pic]
      29 September 2020
      UT Judge Macleman



                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.




