
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23617/2018
                                                               HU/23621/2018
                                                               HU/23624/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 October 2019                    |On 10 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                NARINDER [K]
                                KAWALJIT [S]
                                    [G S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Murphy, instructed by Farani Taylor
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  appellants  are  a  husband  and  wife  and  their  three-year-old
    daughter. I shall refer to the first appellant as 'the appellant';  the
    appeal turns upon her English-language test result of February 2013 and
    the other appellants may only succeed in their appeals if she succeeds.
    By decision dated 9 November 2018, the appellant's human  rights  claim
    was refused. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  which,
    in a decision promulgated on 4 July 2019, dismissed  the  appeals.  The
    appellants now appeal, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge upheld the Secretary of State conclusion that  the  appellant
    had obtained an English-language certificate in  2013  fraudulently  by
    the use of a proxy test taker and went on to  dismiss  the  appeals  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds. The appellant asserts that the judge has  erred
    in law in her analysis of the evidence relating  to  the  test  and  in
    concluding that the Secretary of State had  discharged  the  burden  of
    proving that the appellant had acted fraudulently. First, the appellant
    complains that the judge attached insufficient weight to evidence  that
    the appellant had taken and passed an English-language  test  to  IELTS
    standards prior to the disputed language test. Secondly, the  appellant
    asserts that the judge rejected her  explanation  as  to  why  she  had
    travelled  from  her  home  in  Hounslow  to  South  Quay  College   in
    Whitechapel to take the test without having regard to the oral evidence
    of the appellant in which she had provided an  explanation  for  having
    travelled so far to take the test.

 3. As regards the first ground, I find that it has no merit. The judge was
    well aware that the disputed test had taken place six years before  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing. Accordingly, the  judge  appears  to  have
    treated with some caution the appellant's English language  ability  as
    exhibited at the tribunal hearing [48]. However, it is clear  that  the
    judge was entitled to take the view that the  appellant's  English  was
    still not 'particularly impressive' at the hearing in June 2019. It  is
    the case that the judge does not refer in terms to  the  previous  test
    undertaken by the appellant but I have no reason to  believe  that  the
    judge was unaware of that test as it is referred to in the  appellant's
    written evidence. I am satisfied that the judge has considered all  the
    evidence in reaching her determination.  I  find  that  the  judge  has
    reached findings following  an  examination  of  the  totality  of  the
    evidence  which  included  the  respondent's  evidence  regarding   the
    disputed test, the appellant's previous success in an  English-language
    test and her limited ability in English as exhibited  at  the  Tribunal
    hearing. As a result of employing that methodology,  I  find  that  the
    judge has unarguably reached findings of fact which were  available  to
    her. Given that I find that the judge was aware of  the  previous  test
    but under no obligation to make specific reference to it, it  does  not
    follow, as the appellant asserts,  that  the  outcome  of  the  judge's
    analysis should necessarily have been different solely  on  account  of
    the fact that the appellant may have satisfied examiners in an English-
    language test prior to 2013. Accordingly, I find that the first  ground
    of appeal  amounts  to  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  findings
    available to the judge on the evidence.

 4. As regards the second ground of appeal, I find this has  no  merit.  At
    [49], the judge stated that she could 'see no reason  why  any  genuine
    student living in Hounslow wishing to take these tests would have  gone
    to South Quay College in Whitechapel  when  there  was  clear  evidence
    before me that the directors were ranging from pilots to sit the  tests
    over a long period.' The wording is a little obscure but  it  is  clear
    that the judge was concerned that the appellant  would  have  travelled
    from West to East London (ignoring  other  colleges  in  between  which
    might offer the same test) to take the test  at  a  particular  college
    which  the  Secretary  of  State's  evidence  plainly  reveals  allowed
    candidates to use proxies. Further, it is not the case that  the  judge
    has ignored the appellant's explanation given in oral evidence  because
    she has recorded that explanation at [17]: '[the  appellant]  took  the
    test in Whitechapel because a college informed her there was a  college
    where she could sit the test which was in Whitechapel. At the time  she
    was living in Kingsley Avenue Hounslow. She  had  checked  it  had  not
    found  any  colleges  in  Hounslow.'  Notwithstanding  the  appellant's
    explanation, I find that the judge was entitled  to  be  concerned  and
    draw an adverse inference from the fact that the appellant travelled so
    far from her home to sit the test at this particular college. I do  not
    consider that the judge has fallen into error by failing to give a more
    explicit rejection of the appellant's explanation.

 5. In the circumstances, I find that the judge has not erred  in  law  for
    the reasons advanced in the grounds of appeal or at  all.  The  appeals
    are dismissed.



Notice of Decision

    These appeals are dismissed.


Signed                              Date 3 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

