
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23299/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 May 2019                       |On 14 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                              Miss Hualing Wang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Barnfield of Counsel, instructed by Pickup
Scott Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                        AMENDED DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This decision has been amended pursuant to rule  43  of  the  Tribunal
      Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008 (as  amended).   The  decision
      promulgated on 10 December 2019 was sent to the parties in error.   An
      oral decision was given at the end of the hearing on 15 May  2019.   I
      am satisfied, pursuant to paragraph 43(2)(d) that  there  has  been  a
      procedural irregularity, and therefore, applying  paragraph  43(1)(a),
      that it is in the interests of justice to set aside the decision of 10
      December 2019 and to remake the decision.




   2. The appellant is a citizen of China  born  on  13  August  1979.   The
      appellant appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  of  2
      November 2018 to refuse her leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a
      partner of a British citizen.

   3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett dismissed the appellant's appeal in
      a decision dated 28 January 2019 both under the Immigration Rules  and
      Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

   4. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Black
      in a decision dated 16 April 2019 stating that the First-tier Tribunal
      may have arguably erred  by  stating  that  the  burden  is  upon  the
      appellant, which is not correct in far as S-LTR.1.6 is concerned,  and
      furthermore, the judge does not appear to have directed herself as  to
      the correct test for assessing dishonesty.

   5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found the following which  I  summarise.
      The appellant  did  not  meet  the  suitability  requirements  of  the
      Immigration Rules because although she indicated  in  the  application
      form that she had no convictions, she was convicted and imprisoned for
      ten weeks in June 2007 for failing to produce an immigration document.
       On 25 September 2012, the appellant was  arrested  and  cautioned  on
      suspicion of running  a  brothel.   The  judge  did  not  believe  the
      appellant's explanation that she was  not  aware  of  the  caution  or
      having received one.

   6.  The  judge  noted  that  in  the  personal  history  section  of  the
      application form, the  appellant  was  asked  if  she  had  ever  been
      convicted of any criminal offences in the United Kingdom or any  other
      country and she stated, "no".  She was asked  if  she  had  ever  been
      subject to a caution and the appellant indicated, "no".  The judge was
      satisfied that the appellant had not been honest  in  the  application
      form that she submitted to the respondent and therefore she  does  not
      meet the suitability requirements of the immigration rules in light of
      her previous immigration history and she does not meet the eligibility
      requirements as she has had never had leave to remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom.

   7. In respect of Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights,
      the  judge  accepted  that  there  will  be  a  separation  from   the
      appellant's partner's son if the appellant leaves the  United  Kingdom
      and stated that it is for the appellant's partner to decide whether he
      wishes to accompany the appellant to China or  whether  he  wishes  to
      remain in the United Kingdom in order to maintain his regular face-to-
      face contact with his son in the United Kingdom.  At paragraph 19, the
      judge stated that there are no exceptional circumstances,  considering
      that the appellant came to the United Kingdom without  leave  and  has
      been imprisoned and cautioned in the United Kingdom.

   8. The grounds of appeal which were argued  before  me  by  Mr  Barnfield
      raise five points, the first point being that the judge did  not  have
      the evidence which it was incumbent  on  the  respondent  to  produce,
      which is a caution.  There is merit in this particular ground  because
      no  evidence  of  a  caution  was  produced  by  the  respondent.  The
      appellant's explanation was that she had never been cautioned  to  her
      knowledge.

   9. However, the appellant also did not refer to  her  conviction  in  the
      application form that she submitted to the respondent.  The respondent
      refused her application under S-LTR.1.6, which is a  mandatory  ground
      for refusal.  Therefore, the other grounds of  appeal  have  no  merit
      because  the  appellant  did  not  mention  her  conviction   in   her
      application  form  and  no  credible  explanation  was  given  by  the
      appellant, for that omission. I find that there is no  material  error
      of law made by the judge, in respect  of  dismissing  the  appellant's
      appeal under the Immigration Rules.

  10. In respect of Article 8, I find there is a material error  of  law  in
      the proportionality assessment carried out by the  judge.   The  judge
      did not give adequate reasoning for her decision or give consideration
      to the family life of all the members of the appellant's family  which
      will be impacted by her removal.   For  the  judge  to  say  that  the
      appellant's partner, who is a British  citizen,  can  either  stay  or
      leave is not a proportionate analysis.

  11. I therefore set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
      respect of the Article 8 decision  and  remit  it  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for evidence to be led on the family life  of  the  appellant
      and her partner and her partner's son.  The appeal  be  placed  before
      any other judge other than Judge Grimmett.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Dated this 7th day of January 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana
