
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/23931/2018 (T)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd August 2020                           |On 26th August 2020           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                    [A D]
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to directions sent on 2 July  2020  indicating  a  provisional
    view that in light of the need to take precautions against  the  spread
    of Covid-19 and the overriding objective, it would  be  appropriate  in
    this case to determine the issue of whether the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision involved the making of an error of law and if so  whether  the
    decision should be set aside without a hearing;  the  parties  did  not
    raise any objections and both made written submissions  on  the  issues
    raised in the appeal.

 2. In circumstances where no objections were  made  to  the  issues  being
    determined without a hearing and where the parties  have  made  written
    submissions; it is in the interests of justice to proceed to  determine
    the error of  law  issues  on  the  papers  in  light  of  the  written
    submission available and the full appeal file.

 3. The Appellant appeals with permission (on two grounds only) against the
    decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Housego  promulgated  on  31
    December 2019, in which the Appellant's appeal against the decision  to
    refuse her entry clearance to the United Kingdom  to  join  her  mother
    dated 8 November 2018 was dismissed.

 4. The Appellant is a national of Ghana, born on 2  May  2008  who  sought
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom to join her mother, residing here
    with  leave  to  remain  as  the  spouse  of  a  British  citizen,  the
    Appellant's step-father.  The Appellant's application was based on  her
    having been abandoned by her biological father  as  a  baby  and  being
    brought up by her mother (who moved in with her  own  parents  at  that
    time) who has had sole responsibility for her from birth and continuing
    after her mother's entry to the United Kingdom in 2017; following which
    she has remained financially responsible for her,  has  kept  in  touch
    with her and visited her three times.

 5. The Respondent refused the application  the  basis  that  although  the
    Appellant has provided details of her father and stated  they  have  no
    contact, there was a lack of evidence about  his  present  location  or
    consent for the Appellant to move to the United Kingdom; that there was
    no legal documentation or custody  document  to  demonstrate  that  the
    Sponsor had sole responsibility and there  was  no  evidence  beyond  a
    statement as to who the Appellant was living with in Ghana  as  to  her
    arrangements there.  The Respondent did not consider  that  there  were
    any matters making the Appellant's exclusion undesirable, that suitable
    arrangements were in  place  for  her  care  and  that  there  were  no
    exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of entry clearance.

 6. Judge Housego dismissed the appeal in  a  decision  promulgated  on  31
    December 2019 on all grounds.   In  essence,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    accepted that the Appellant had been abandoned by her father as a  baby
    but found that since then she had  been  brought  up  by  her  maternal
    grandparents or at the very least, they shared parental  responsibility
    for  her  with  the  Sponsor.   The   Sponsor   did   not   have   sole
    responsibility.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  adverse  credibility
    findings about the Sponsor and her husband on the  basis  that  neither
    knew very much about the Appellant's education and  documents  relating
    to that were unreliable (in relation to the names on the documents  and
    inconsistent evidence about whether written reports were sent) and that
    the Sponsor was unclear as to when the Appellant started at the  school
    or at what age.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  there  was  no
    evidence showing that the Appellant and Sponsor lived together in Ghana
    for 9 years from 2008 when the Appellant was born to when  the  Sponsor
    came to the United Kingdom in 2017.  Finally, it  was  found  that  the
    Appellant's current living conditions were satisfactory and there  were
    no reasons making  her  exclusion  undesirable,  nor  where  there  any
    compelling circumstances that could leave to a grant of leave to  enter
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

The appeal

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on nine grounds  as  follows.
    First, that the First-tier Tribunal materially  erred  in  law  in  its
    assessment of the  proportionality  balancing  exercise,  applying  the
    wrong test of 'unduly harsh' which is only relevant to  deportation  of
    foreign criminals  and  requiring  a  threshold  test  of  'exceptional
    circumstances' which does not exist.

 8. Secondly, that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  was  procedurally
    unfair because it did not notify the parties of the intention  to  rely
    on the case of Tuquabo-Tekle & Others v The Netherlands 60665/00 [2005]
    ECHUR 803, not relied upon by either party and with no  opportunity  to
    make submissions on it.

 9. The third, fourth and fifth grounds of appeal relate to the use  of  an
    internet search  for  information  about  the  Appellant's  school  and
    teachers in Ghana and claim that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  materially
    erred in law in failing to record the  submission  about  the  internet
    search, failing to consider the lack of evidence that the  website  was
    up to date, was procedurally  unfair  without  giving  the  Sponsor  an
    opportunity  to  furnish  evidence   in   response,   particularly   in
    circumstances where the matter was considered to be  material  and  the
    Respondent had not previously raised this.  The Appellant  claims  that
    there was an error of law in this regard  in  failing  to  adjourn  the
    appeal and for failing to address all of these points  in  the  written
    decision.

10. Sixthly, that the First-Tribunal materially erred  in  law  in  finding
    that the Appellant was raised from birth by her  maternal  grandparents
    when there is no evidential basis for such a  finding  and  no  reasons
    given in support of it; the finding also being  inconsistent  with  the
    First-tier Tribunal's  finding  that  there  was  no  evidence  of  the
    Appellant  living  with  the  Sponsor.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  has
    therefore made findings which were perverse and/or irrational.

11. Seventhly, that the First-tier Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  in
    finding an inconsistency in paragraph 46 of the decision  about  school
    reports when there was none - it is not inconsistent for school reports
    to have been sent but not received.

12. Eighthly, that the First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  in
    finding that the Sponsor's evidence was not "candid" because he claimed
    he was fully involved in decisions about the Appellant, without  giving
    adequate reasons and which in any event was irrational on his evidence.



13. Finally, that the  First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  in
    finding at paragraph 49 that there was no evidence that  the  Appellant
    and Sponsor lived  together  in  Ghana  for  nine  years,  contrary  to
    substantial evidence in the bundle of the same and the written and oral
    evidence of the Sponsor and her husband.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Page  on  7  April  2020  on
    grounds six and nine only; permission to appeal was  expressly  refused
    on the remaining grounds.  Judge Page identified the central  issue  in
    the appeal being whether the Sponsor had sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant and that only grounds six and nine sufficiently engaged  with
    findings on that  matter  to  warrant  permission  being  granted.   In
    relation to the other grounds, Judge Page stated:

         "The remaining rounds of appeal amount  to  disagreement  with  the
         judge's conclusions on the other evidence before the judge and  the
         procedures the judge followed during the  hearing  and  after  when
         writing up.  The judge  was  under  no  obligation  to  notify  the
         parties of the caselaw  that  the  judge  would  refer  to  in  the
         decision [ground 2].  The judge has not relied on any "unusual case
         law" - and it is not explained what  was  unusual.   There  was  no
         obligation on the judge to engage  in  on-line  research  into  the
         appellant's school in Ghana  to  verify  the  appellant's  evidence
         about who taught there as suggested by ground 5.   With  regard  to
         the other grounds, the correct legal tests and Rules appear to have
         been  properly  applied.   None  of  the  remaining  grounds   have
         identified arguable errors of law. ...".

15. In response to the directions issued on 2 July 2020, the Appellant made
    written submissions on 18 August 2020 (with sufficient  explanation  as
    to the delay directly attributable to personal and general difficulties
    caused by Covid-19) in which all grounds  of  appeal  continued  to  be
    relied upon on the basis that Judge Page unfairly restricted the  scope
    of the grounds  of  appeal  which  were  all  material  and  on  point.
    However, the Appellant did not seek permission to  appeal  directly  to
    the Upper Tribunal on the grounds which were initially  refused  (which
    is the correct procedure) and any such  application  even  if  properly
    made would be significantly out of time,  the  deadline  for  doing  so
    having passed some  three  and  a  half  months  before  these  written
    submissions.  The invitation to the  Upper  Tribunal  to  consider  the
    remaining grounds at this stage does not constitute an application  for
    permission to appeal, nor is there a good reason to extend time  to  do
    so and in any event I  would  have  refused  permission  for  the  same
    reasons given  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  these  grounds.   The
    decision therefore only concerns the sixth and ninth grounds of  appeal
    which  are  the  only  ones  properly  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    determine.

16. As to the grounds before the Upper Tribunal,  the  Appellant's  written
    submissions are substantively the same as the grounds of appeal on  the
    sixth and ninth grounds.

17. In response to the directions issued on 2  July  2020,  the  Respondent
    made written submissions on  9  July  2020  opposing  the  appeal.   In
    relation to the sixth ground of appeal, the Respondent  submitted  that
    the Sponsor  displayed  a  lack  of  knowledge  and  awareness  of  the
    Appellant's education and  circumstances  which  was  relevant  to  her
    credibility.  In this  regard  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  adverse
    findings based on the oral evidence,  with  clear  and  cogent  reasons
    given for the findings.  The Respondent reiterates that it  is  for  an
    Appellant to establish their claim with evidence and  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is  entitled  to  accept  or  reject  it,  with  reasons,
    particularly where credibility is an issue.

18. In relation to the ninth ground of appeal, the Respondent submits  that
    it is immaterial to the central issue of whether the Sponsor  had  sole
    responsibility for the Appellant.  The cohabitation between the Sponsor
    and her husband was not  relevant  and  could  not  have  affected  the
    outcome of the appeal, and in any event, as referred to in paragraph 29
    of the First-tier Tribunal, it is  a  matter  of  which  it  was  aware
    anyway.

Findings and reasons

 1. The two live grounds of appeal in this case are linked, concerning  the
    finding that the Sponsor did not have sole responsibility  and  to  the
    contrary, the Appellant had been brought up  by  maternal  grandparents
    who at the very least, had  shared  responsibility  with  the  Sponsor.
    These findings in part relied upon the finding that there was a lack of
    evidence of the Appellant residing together with the Sponsor in Ghana.

 2. Contrary to  the  claim  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  that  there  was
    substantial evidence of the Appellant's cohabitation with  the  Sponsor
    in Ghana, there was in fact very little at all  about  the  Appellant's
    circumstances there.  The  Sponsor's  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was that she and the  Appellant  had,  after  the  Appellant's
    birth, lived with the Sponsor's parents in Ghana until she came to  the
    United Kingdom in 2017.  There was no documentary or other evidence  of
    the  Sponsor's  residence  and  no  evidence   from   the   Appellant's
    grandparents.

 3. Also before the First-tier Tribunal was evidence in  the  form  of  the
    application form, which confirmed that the Appellant had lived  at  her
    current address for seven years (the same address  as  listed  for  her
    grandparents) and  listed  both  of  her  grandparents  as  her  'legal
    guardians', whom it was confirmed she was  still  living  with  in  the
    grounds of appeal.  The Appellant's own  written  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal was that the people  who  took  care  of  her  from
    infancy were her grandfather and mother.

 4. This evidence consistently supported the finding that the Appellant had
    lived with her maternal grandparents for the majority, if not the whole
    of her life in Ghana, with limited evidence that the Sponsor also lived
    with them before coming to the United Kingdom.  When this  evidence  is
    considered together with what the  Appellant  herself  said  about  her
    relationship with her grandparents (her grandfather in particular)  and
    the adverse credibility findings which were made against  the  Sponsor,
    it was rationally open to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  conclude  that
    there was insufficient evidence of the Appellant and  Sponsor  residing
    together in Ghana as claimed and that overall, at best, the Sponsor had
    shared responsibility with her parents for the Appellant, which was not
    sufficient for the purposes of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  adverse
    credibility findings were clearly reasoned in relation to the  lack  of
    knowledge about the Appellant's education (not limited to the  evidence
    about head-teacher, teacher and details on the website but also  as  to
    when the Appellant started school) and open to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to make on the evidence.  There  was  nothing  perverse  or  irrational
    about these findings or the overall conclusion.

 5. I find no error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  or  its
    reasoning.  This is a case in which the Appellant had simply failed  to
    establish, on the balance of probabilities, that the Sponsor  had  sole
    responsibility for her and where there was a lack of any other evidence
    upon which there was an alternative basis upon which the  appeal  could
    have been allowed by satisfaction of the Immigration Rules  or  outside
    of them on Article 8 grounds.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant,  who
is a child, is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her or  any  member  of  her  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed   G Jackson                           Date     23rd August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

