
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: HU/23979/2018
                                                               HU/23946/2018
                                                               HU/23951/2018
                                                               HU/23971/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th November 2019                |On 12th December 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                       Gurumwal [L] (First Appellant)
                       Tangyen [L] (Second Appellant)
                           [C L] (Third Appellant)
                          [P L] (fourth appellant)
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S Iqbal, Counsel instructed by W H Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appealed against the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dated 12th November 2018 dismissing their appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's refusal  of  their  human  rights  claim  on  12th
    November 2018.

 2. The appellants, Nigerian nationals born in 1984 and 1985,  are  husband
    and wife and their two children born  in  2015  and  2018.   The  first
    appellant entered the United Kingdom as a student in 2011 and his  wife
    entered as his dependent in 2014.  Their leave expired on 18th  October
    2017 but on 22nd September 2017, they  made  an  application  on  human
    rights grounds for leave to remain which  was  refused  and  ultimately
    generated this appeal.

 3. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal were as follows:-

      i) that the judge had gone beyond the limitation  of  the  grounds  of
         appeal to the First-tier Tribunal and failed to  properly  consider
         the human rights claim.  It was accepted that no  protection  claim
         was made and that the claim was limited  to  human  rights  grounds
         only and that was a matter which was confirmed by  Counsel  at  the
         hearing.  That, however, did not mean  that  the  events  on  which
         proper and credible protection claim  could  have  been  made  were
         irrelevant and the claim was  based  on  those  same  events  which
         should have been considered against a different  test,  that  being
         paragraph 276ADE.  The events referred to and relied on  were  such
         that there would be very significant difficulties to  their  return
         and integration in Nigeria.  The  judge  failed  to  determine  all
         matters raised by the appeal and it was arguable that  the  outcome
         of the appeal may have been different had the judge considered  the
         appeal within the context of the Rules.

     ii) the judge failed to have regard to relevant policies which rendered
         the decision potentially unlawful.  The judge failed to have regard
         to the Secretary of State's policies and give anxious  scrutiny  to
         the human rights claim as there was no reference to  the  Secretary
         of State's policy document.

    iii) there was a material misdirection on material matters.   The  judge
         was required  to  apply  the  correct  threshold  when  considering
         whether Article 8 of the ECHR was engaged.  Failure to refer to the
         Secretary  of  State's  relevant  policy  documents   and   country
         information provided a significant barrier to the  judge's  ability
         to conduct the required best interests test.  In giving substantial
         weight to the public interest question and maintaining  immigration
         control the judge failed to give any consideration to  the  absence
         of any public interest removal from the UK  of  those  genuine  and
         subsisting parental  relationships  with  a  qualifying  child  and
         failed to have regard to the importance of freedom of expression.

     iv) The judge  gave  inadequate  reasons.   The  first  appellant  made
         specific reference to the EASO report of Country Guidance:  Nigeria
         (AB261 to 322) as supporting his assertions and the judge  provided
         no reasons for  failing  to  give  any  weight  to  this  document.
         Insofar as the  judge's  comments  regarding  "bare  assertions  of
         difficulties" may relate to employment, the  Secretary  of  State's
         own policy documents on internal relocation the Country  of  Origin
         Information Report: Nigeria March 2019 (see paragraph 4.1.1  AB345)
         CPIN (AB339 to 353) referred to  another  EASO  report,  and  would
         therefore fall for disclosure in its own right and added weight  to
         the EASO report.  The socio-economic report corroborated the  first
         appellant's  supposedly  bare  assertion  with   regards   to   the
         difficulties   obtaining   employment,   the   rising   trend    in
         unemployment.  Another  EASO  report  regarded  the  targeting  and
         individuals in Nigeria and provided further background  information
         regarding the indigene settlers issue relevant to the human  rights
         claim.

    Analysis

 4. I take the grounds together as they are intertwined.

 5. At paragraph 2 the judge recorded at the outset of the appeal that  the
    appellant's representative, Mr Mupara, made  clear  that  he  was  only
    seeking to argue the appeal on the basis of Article 8 ECHR  outside  of
    the Immigration Rules.  He made plain that he was not seeking  to  rely
    on private life provisions of the ECHR within the Rules.

 6. Although the grounds and the submissions of Ms Iqbal submitted that the
    judge should have considered paragraph 276ADE with  reference  to  very
    significant obstacles it was made clear that the protection  issue  was
    not pursued.  Indeed, as the  judge  records  at  paragraph  4  of  his
    determination the appeal was not being argued  within  the  Immigration
    Rules either but outside those Rules:-

         "On  behalf  of  the  First  Appellant  it  was  argued  that   his
         circumstances and those of his family were exceptional and that  it
         was appropriate to look at Article 8 outside of the Rules" [4].

 7. The Record of Proceedings of the hearing on 21st June 2019 record  that
    exactly and state, "No protection claim" "only outside the  Immigration
    Rules".

 8. In passing I observe, that that submission itself indicates that  there
    were  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  return   to   Nigeria,   as
    encapsulated by the Immigration Rules at Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  This
    particular rule sets out as follows:-

         '276ADE  (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for  leave
                  to remain on the grounds of private life  in  the  UK  are
                  that at the date of application, the applicant:

                      (i)   does not fall for  refusal  under  any  of  the
                      grounds in Section S-LTR 1.1 to  S-LTR  2.2.  and  S-
                      LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5. in Appendix FM; and

                      (ii)  has made  a  valid  application  for  leave  to
                      remain on the grounds of private life in the UK; and

                      ...

                      (vi)  subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18  years
                      or above, has lived continuously in the UK  for  less
                      than   20   years   (discounting   any   period    of
                      imprisonment) but there  would  be  very  significant
                      obstacles to the  applicant's  integration  into  the
                      country to which he would have to go if  required  to
                      leave the UK'.

 9.  It  is  not  open  to  the  appellant  once  the  representative   has
    specifically declined to rely on Paragraph  276ADE  (vi)  to  raise  it
    again in the grounds of appeal.

10. The judge, nevertheless, appropriately directed himself in relation  to
    the relevant case law, in particular R (Agyarko) [2017] UKSC 11 and  KO
    (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 453.  R (Agyarko) [2017] UKSC 11  emphasises  the
    test  of  'unjustifiably  harsh  consequences'  to  be   applied   when
    considering a challenge under Article 8 on  human  rights  grounds  the
    refusal of leave to remain or removal.  That  is  the  test  the  judge
    clearly applied.

11. It is not made out, from a careful reading of the decision as a  whole,
    that the judge failed to consider all the relevant factors.  The  judge
    at paragraph 7, found the first appellant had visited various countries
    since his birth in 1984 because his  father  was  a  diplomat  and  had
    returned to Nigeria from time to time between the  ages  of  17  to  27
    years.  (He is now in his thirties).  He  had  various  family  members
    such as his mother father and sibling who lived partly in  Nigeria  and
    partly in Senegal.  His wife also had relations in Nigeria.  The  first
    appellant was a mechanical engineer, with a PhD from Brunel  University
    and with work experience and his wife an architect who  also  had  work
    experience.

12. The judge noted that he had regard to all of the evidence and there  is
    no indication that the judge failed  to  consider  the  Country  Policy
    Information Note on Nigeria March 2019 and the  references  within  the
    reports to poor socio-economic factors could hardly be said to apply to
    the appellants bearing in mind their high degree of education and  work
    experience.   Indeed,  the  CPIN  referenced  that  Nigeria  had   made
    significant progress in socio economic terms since 2005.

13. There is no doubt that the judge did address the points made  regarding
    difficulties in securing employment and considered the evidence in  the
    round and gave adequate  reasoning  for  his  findings.   This  can  be
    gleaned from the consideration at paragraph 7 that:-

         "The First Appellant has been outspoken on issues, of which  it  is
         said at least there  would  be  a  dim  view  taken  by  the  state
         authorities and that it would make finding employment, both in  the
         state sector but also in private industry,  because  of  its  close
         relationship to the state's involvement in many contracts of works,
         that he has given his expertise, in waste management would find  it
         difficult to work".

14. At paragraph 8 the judge recorded:-

         "but also it was not being argued with reference to Article 8 as an
         additional consideration as to why he could not return, so much  as
         it illustrated why he might find difficulties on return in  finding
         employment and making a life for himself and the family there".

15. The judge evidently did not accept that the appellant would  be  unable
    to access work owing to his sympathies for the  Fulani  nomadic  people
    from  the  North  of  Nigeria,  commenting  as  he  did  on  the  first
    appellant's returns to Nigeria and specifically  records  at  paragraph
    14:-

         "I concluded, having considered all the evidence in the round, that
         the difficulties envisaged on a return to Nigeria did not  do  more
         than reflect to a degree unenquired into matters and concerns which
         remain unsupported.  Therefore, the significance of the views  that
         the First Appellant had expressed in relation  to  Fulani  did  not
         seem to me, on the face of it, to have given any cause for  him  to
         leave nor any difficulties  as  a  fact  returning  as  a  visitor,
         bearing in mind he remained a Nigerian national".

16. The judge also recorded, however,  that  the  second  appellant  was  a
    qualified architect but worked at Tesco on the customer  services  side
    in the UK and that, implicitly, even if the first appellant  could  not
    work, that it would be "uncertain as to whether or not there  would  be
    any impact on her from  the  First  Appellant's  return".   Indeed,  as
    stated by the judge there was  no  statement  produced  by  the  second
    appellant.  As the judge observed:-

         "Neither the First  nor  the  Second  Appellant  have  investigated
         alternative education  and  it  seemed  they  have  not  wished  to
         contemplate a return to Nigeria: No steps have been  taken  to  try
         and discern what, if any difficulties might arise in Plateau  State
         or elsewhere in Nigeria".

17. Following Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014]  UKUT  00341  (IAC)
    judges need to resolve the key conflicts in  evidence  and  explain  in
    clear and brief terms their reasons for  preferring  one  case  to  the
    other so that parties can understand why they have lost.  That is  what
    the judge did.  It is not incumbent upon the  judge  to  address  every
    piece of evidence.

18. In relation to ground (ii) there was significant material on the  first
    appellant's blogging and a series of reports in the documentary  bundle
    served by the appellants.  None of the background material was specific
    to the first appellant and there was no indication of previous harm  to
    the first appellant nor to his family who remain in Nigeria.  That said
    the judge recorded in his Record of Proceedings "No protection  claim".
    Had the first appellant wished to rely on a  protection  claim  fearing
    harm to himself or his family it was open to him to raise the matter as
    a "new issue" further to Section 85 of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002.  He did not do so.  The first appellant also stated in
    his witness statement that he did not wish to claim asylum  because  he
    wished to return to Nigeria at some point.  Indeed, as recorded by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge the appellants' extended family  remained  in
    Nigeria and there appeared no evidence of difficulty for them in  doing
    so.

19. The appellants were legally represented through the proceedings and  it
    is a basic tenet of asylum and humanitarian  protection  law  that  the
    standard of proof for proving a well-founded fear of serious harm is to
    the lower standard (R v The Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    ex parte Sivakumaran  [1988]  AC  958).    Under  Article  8  (and  the
    immigration rules) it is for the first appellant to prove the facts  of
    the difficulties on the balance of  probabilities.   Having  failed  to
    press his claim on the lower standard of proof, any weight to be  given
    to his assertion that there would  be  very  significant  obstacles  or
    rather  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  owing  to   his   political
    activity, would be limited, but even so,  as  I  have  pointed  out  at
    paragraph 7 of his determination, the judge did address this point.

20. At paragraph 9 the judge detailed  the  extensive  education  that  the
    first appellant and his interest in  generating  renewable  energy  for
    rural Nigerian communities using waste and in particular:-

         "Much of the First Appellant's statement related to  the  fears  he
         has arising from his past political activities in ng but those  are
         not issues, as I was informed, that were being pursued in front  of
         me for the purposes of the appeal."  (Emphasis added.)

21. Even without the above reasoning it should be emphasised that the  test
    for demonstrating very significant obstacles  is  an  exacting  one  as
    explained by Underhill LJ in Parveen v The Secretary  of  State  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 932

22. Underhill LJ in SA  (Afghanistan)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  53  gave  further
    guidance on integration at paragraph 36 and also the  approach  of  the
    Tribunal when assessing errors of law:-

         "As Sales LJ made clear in Kamara v. Secretary  of  State  for  the
         Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 813; [2016] 4 WLR 152 at [14]:

             "The idea  of  'integration'  calls  for  a  broad  evaluative
             judgment to be as to whether the individual will be enough  of
             an insider in terms of understanding how life in  the  society
             in that  other  country  is  carried  on  and  a  capacity  to
             participate in it, so as to have a reasonable  opportunity  to
             be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis
             in that society and to build up within  a  reasonable  time  a
             variety of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to  the
             individuals private of family life."

         Later in the judgment, at [18], he added this:

             "[The tribunal's] decision  is  to  be  read  looking  at  the
             substance of the reasoning and not with a fine-tooth  comb  or
             like a statute in an effort to identify errors. In giving  its
             reasons, a tribunal is entitled  to  focus  on  the  principle
             issues in dispute between the parties, whilst also  making  it
             clear that it has considered other  matters  set  out  in  the
             legislative regime being applied." "

23. In essence it was argued that the  judge  had  failed  to  address  the
    reports but the  judge  clearly  found  that  if  the  first  appellant
    concluded that there was insufficient risk such that he did not make  a
    protection claim, that claim would not feature as the principal element
    in  assessing  very  significant  obstacles  or   unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences.  Despite Ms Iqbal's valiant attempts to argue  otherwise,
    I cannot agree that the judge erred in  law  by  failing  to  cite  the
    Country Policy and Information Note: Nigeria Internal relocation  March
    2019, specifically and specifically follow  the  Secretary  of  State's
    guidance on Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b: Family Life (as
    a Partner or Parent) and Private  Life:  10-Year  Routes:  Version  4.0
    particularly at page 58, into his analysis.

24. At page 58 the Family Migration guidance states:-

         "A very significant obstacle may arise where the applicant would be
         at  a  real  risk  of  prosecution  or  significant  harassment  or
         discrimination as a result of their sexual or political orientation
         or faith or  gender  or  where  their  rights  and  freedoms  would
         otherwise be so severely restricted as to affect their  fundamental
         rights and therefore their ability to establish a private  life  in
         that country.

         The decision maker should consider whether the  applicant  has  the
         ability to form an adequate private life by the  standards  of  the
         country of return - not by UK standards.  The decision  maker  will
         need to consider whether the applicant will be able to establish  a
         private life in respect of all its essential elements, even if, for
         example their job, or their ability to find work, or their  network
         of friends and relationships may be differently constituted in  the
         country of return.

         The fact the applicant may find life difficult  or  challenging  in
         the country of return does not  mean  they  have  established  that
         there would be very significant obstacles to integration there."

25. As indicated the answer to this assertion is  the  judge's  finding  at
    paragraph 8:-

         "Whilst it seems the First Appellant at one state sought to make  a
         protection claim, it was explicitly said to me that  there  was  no
         such reliance on any claim of that nature, which has  not  in  fact
         been considered by the Secretary of State,  but  also  it  was  not
         being  argued  with  reference  to  Article  8  as  an   additional
         consideration as to  why  he  could  not  return,  so  much  as  it
         illustrated why he might find difficulties  on  return  in  finding
         employment and making a life for himself and the family there."

26. In my view the arguments that were  available  to  the  appellants  now
    attempted to  be  raised  under  paragraph  276ADE  were  properly  and
    sufficiently addressed by the First-tier Tribunal but the fatal blow to
    the appeal is that Paragraph 276ADE was not argued  by  the  appellants
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

27. In relation to the third ground it is simply not arguable that the best
    interests of the children were not properly considered or that the just
    misdirected himself when finding the following:-

         "4.      On behalf of the First Appellant it was  argued  that  his
             circumstances and those of his  family  were  exceptional  and
             that it was appropriate to look at Article 8  outside  of  the
             Rules.  I therefore set the claim in the immediate context  of
             the best interests of the children, non-British nationals,  in
             the context of Zoumbas v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2013] UKSC 74.  It seemed to me  the  unchallenged
             position was whatever, (sic) the benefits may be of access  to
             education and health services in the UK that in terms  of  the
             legislation and in fact, the best interests  of  the  children
             lay in being with their parents, be it in the UK or Nigeria.

         5. They are young children and the  eldest  of  the  two  has  just
             started  in  nursery  school  whilst  the  second   child   is
             effectively a baby."

28. The grounds are misguided in the criticism of the judge's assessment of
    the public interest in removal seemingly overlooking Section 117A which
    states as follows:-

         "117A Application of this Part

         (1)      This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts -



             (a) breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

             (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
                  Rights Act 1998.

         (2)      In considering the public interest question, the court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

             (a) in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
                  117B, and

             (b) in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,
                  to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)      In subsection (2), 'the public  interest  question'  means
             the question of whether an interference with a person's  right
             to respect for private and  family  life  is  justified  under
             Article 8(2)."

29. As conceded in the grounds, these children are not qualifying  children
    and, even so, the judge did refer himself to KO (Nigeria),  finding  at
    [4] that their best interests were to remain with their parents and who
    were well-educated and had  extended  family  in  Nigeria.   The  judge
    pointed out there was no statement produced  by  the  second  appellant
    concerning the children or the implications on them for  their  return,
    or any such difficulties she felt about such an option.  The judge  was
    entitled to rely on that absence.  Both  children  were  identified  as
    young, the eldest just starting nursery school  whilst  the  second  is
    'effectively a baby' [5].  Those findings were unarguably open  to  the
    judge.

30. In relation to ground (iv) there is an assertion that the judge  failed
    to direct himself properly and give adequate reasoning.

31. I refer to reasoning above with regards the reports and repeat that the
    judge confirmed that he had taken all the evidence  in  the  round  and
    specifically addressed himself to the significance of  the  views  that
    the first appellant had expressed in relation to the Fulani  which  the
    judge found "did not seem to me, on the face of it, to have  given  any
    cause for him to leave nor any difficulties as a fact  returning  as  a
    visitor, bearing in mind he remained a Nigerian national".  That was  a
    succinct  but  apposite  finding.  In  the  light  of  the   particular
    circumstances relating to the appellants, the judge clearly found their
    assertions as to their plight on return to be just that - assertions  -
    and the reports did not assist in furthering their claims.

32. As he was obliged to do the judge took into account Section 117B of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 but concluded, "There was,
    on the face of it, no obvious reason why two intelligent  adults,  well
    qualified and educated, would be a burden on the United  Kingdom",  but
    weighing  in  the  balance  and  that  the  public  interest   question
    maintaining immigration control was  a  significant  one  and  although
    empathy should be afforded to the  appellants'  circumstances,  "theirs
    was not  a  case  which  has  any  particular  merits".   That  was  an
    adequately reasoned finding.

33. Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief  explanation  of  the
    conclusions on the central issue on  which  an  appeal  is  determined,
    those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole  makes
    sense, which in this case  it  does,  having  regard  to  the  material
    accepted by the judge,  Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:  set  aside)
    [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC).

34. This is a specialist Tribunal and  as  reiterated  in  UT  (Sri  Lanka)
    [2019] EWCA Civ 1095 at paragraph 26:-

         "In  R  (Jones)  v  First  Tier  Tribunal  and  Criminal   Injuries
         Compensation Authority [2013] UKSC 19, Lord Hope said (at paragraph
         25):

             'It is well established, as an  aspect  of  tribunal  law  and
             practice, that judicial restraint should be exercised when the
             reasons that a tribunal  gives  for  its  decision  are  being
             examined. The appellate court should not  assume  too  readily
             that the tribunal misdirected itself just  because  not  every
             step in its reasoning is fully set out in it.'"

35. I find no error of law in the decision and it will stand.   The  appeal
    remains dismissed.

Notice of Decision

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Helen Rimington  Date 9th December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
