
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24627/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 14 August 2019                    |on 29 August 2019                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    FBSS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person.
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Arullendran promulgated on  the  21  March  2019  in
        which the Judge dismissed the appellants  appeal  on  human  rights
        grounds.





Background


     2. The appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain on  the  basis
        of long residence in the UK.  There  was  no  dispute  between  the
        parties in relation to the dates the appellant has been in  out  of
        the UK. At [14] the Judge records the following:

             "14.      The  Appellant  claims  that   she   submitted   her
                  application for ILR on 1 September 2018 and that  she  had
                  581 days absence from the UK between 1 September 2008 to 1
                  September 2018, which exceeded the limit  imposed  by  the
                  respondent's Rules of 540 days in  the  sum  of  41  days.
                  However, the Appellant claims  that  the  reason  for  the
                  extended absence from the UK was out  of  her  control  in
                  2012/13 because she was compelled to stay in Saudi  Arabia
                  until  her  scholarship  application  and  visa  had  been
                  concluded and this resulted in an absence of 175  days  on
                  that occasion.  The Appellant relies on pages 54 to 57  of
                  her bundle which sets out in detail the dates  of  leaving
                  and entering the UK and the reasons for the absence."

     3. The Judge finds on the evidence that the appellant failed  to  show
        she met the requirements of paragraph 267B of the Immigration Rules
        and that the requisite period of continuous  lawful  residence  had
        been broken [29]. At [30] the Judge recognises that the requirement
        for the 10-year period can be waived  where  there  are  sufficient
        compelling or compassionate reasons for the excessive absences from
        the UK.
     4. The respondent in the reason for refusal stated:

             "When assessing your application the  Home  Office  have  been
             unable to identify a 10-year period in which the least  number
             of absences have been taken which total less than 540 days. It
             is noted that over the period of  your  residence  between  12
             July 2004 and 22 June 2018 you have declared a total  of  1050
             days absence from  the  UK.   Between  26  June  2009  and  16
             September 2009 you have declared a total of 581  days  absence
             from the UK.


             The amount of days  you  have  been  absent  from  the  United
             Kingdom exceeds the maximum amount of 540 days allowed in  any
             10  year  qualifying  period,  with  this  in  mind  you   are
             considered  to  have  broken  your  continuous  residence  and
             therefore you cannot satisfy the requirement to have completed
             at least 10 years continuous lawful residence under  paragraph
             276B(i)(a) of the immigration rules.


             For  the  reasons  outlined  above,   your   application   for
             indefinite leave to remain on the grounds of long residence is
             refused as you have failed to meet  the  requirements  of  the
             Immigration Rules  under  paragraph  276D  with  reference  to
             Paragraph 276B(i)(a) of HC 395 (as amended).


             The Secretary of  State  has  in  her  power  a  discretionary
             element where if she feels fit,  can  wave  a  breach  of  the
             Immigration rules. With this in mind, the Secretary  of  State
             has given consideration to the break in your lawful  residence
             mentioned above.


             It is noted that you have stated  that  the  reason  for  your
             excessive absences is because you had to acquire a scholarship
             from KSA's government, because you  had  to  obtain  admission
             with a Tier 4 sponsor and because you had to apply  for  Entry
             Clearance.


             However, it is decided that it would  not  be  appropriate  to
             exercise discretion with regard to the absences accrued as  it
             is considered that the permitted maximum of 540  days  or  180
             days in any one period of absence under the Immigration  Rules
             is generous and designed to meet a  number  of  eventualities,
             including   having   to    obtain    scholarship/sponsor/entry
             clearance.


             You have provided no sufficiently compelling or  compassionate
             reasons for your excessive absences from the  UK  or  why  you
             should be treated differently to any  other  student  in  this
             country. Therefore, it is not considered that yours is a  case
             where exercise of discretion is appropriate.

     5. The appellant was therefore fully aware of the issues at  large  in
        this appeal from the outset.



Error of law


     6. The Judge sets out conclusions and findings  from  [28]  which,  in
        relation to the exercise of discretion, are set out at [30] in  the
        following terms:

             "30.     The breach of the Immigration Rules, with  regard  to
                  the provisions of 10 years continuous  residence,  can  be
                  waived  where  there  are   sufficiently   compelling   or
                  compassionate reasons for the excessive absence  from  the
                  UK. In this case the Appellant has claimed the absence was
                  due to missing paperwork for the  scholarship  application
                  and delay in obtaining the ATAS certificate for  the  Visa
                  application.  The  Appellant  has  not   stated   in   her
                  application or anywhere in her evidence what  the  missing
                  paperwork was. I have considered the document at  page  14
                  of the Appellants bundle which appears to  show  that  the
                  Appellant submitted her application for a  scholarship  on
                  30 July 2012 and it was returned to her on 1  August  2012
                  with a request for further information/documents,  but  as
                  there had been no action by the Appellant it was  rejected
                  on 1 September 2012  and  the  Appellant  resubmitted  the
                  application on 6 September 2012.  The  Appellant  has  not
                  provided any evidence regarding the reasons for the  delay
                  between the return of her original application on 1 August
                  and the resubmission of the  application  on  6  September
                  2012. In the circumstances, I am  not  satisfied,  on  the
                  balance of probabilities, that the delay in processing the
                  scholarship application was outside  the  control  of  the
                  Appellant. Therefore, I find that there  are  insufficient
                  compelling reasons  to  waive  the  requirement  that  the
                  Appellant have no more than 540 days of absence in  a  10-
                  year period and, thus, her  continuity  of  residence  has
                  been broken and she does  not  meet  the  requirements  of
                  paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules."

     7. The application for permission to appeal is supported by  documents
        which the appellant confirmed during the course of the hearing were
        not before the decision-maker and not before  the  Judge.  It  also
        transpired that the documents submitted in April 2019 had not  even
        been served upon the respondent although copies were provided to Mr
        McVeety at the hearing enabling him to consider the same during the
        course of the hearing. The  documents  are  copy  emails  sent  and
        received regarding what occurred in relation to the application and
        in support of her claim that any delay was beyond her control.
     8. The appellant was handed a copy of a summary  of  Ladd  v  Marshall
        [1954] EWCA Civ 1, which set out the test  to  be  applied  when  a
        party relies on fresh evidence not before a court or  tribunal.  In
        order to justify the reception of fresh evidence or  a  new  trial,
        three conditions must be fulfilled:

             First, it must be shown that the evidence could not have  been
             obtained with reasonable diligence for use at the trial:


             Second, the evidence must be such that,  if  given,  it  would
             probably have an important influence  on  the  result  of  the
             case, though it need not be decisive:


             Thirdly, the evidence must be such  as  is  presumably  to  be
             believed, or in other words, it must be  apparently  credible,
             though it need not be incontrovertible.


             - Lord Denning.

     9. It is not made out the extra material the appellant seeks  to  rely
        upon in establishing an error of  law  was  not  available  to  her
        and/or could not have been obtained with due diligence for  use  in
        the hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal. The dates clearly  show
        this material was in  existence  some  time  ago  and  was  in  the
        personal control of the appellant as there are emails both received
        and sent by her. It is therefore arguable that what  the  appellant
        is attempting to do is to claim the Judge erred in law on the basis
        of material which had not been disclosed. The appellant also stated
        in her application for permission to appeal that she has email  she
        can provide to show reasons for delay in  the  second  application.
        Whilst the same may exist they have not been disclosed  either  and
        do not, arguably, assist.
    10. The reality of this case is that the Judge made the decision on the
        basis of the evidence  that  had  been  made  available.  Both  the
        decision-maker  and  the  Judge  acknowledged  the   existence   of
        discretion in a case where an applicant had  exceeded  the  maximum
        permitted threshold of absences and is not made out  the  decision-
        maker's  conclusion  that  it  was  not  appropriate  to   exercise
        discretion  in  the  applicant's  favour,  on  the  basis  of   the
        information made available  with  the  application  for  leave,  is
        irrational. It has not been made out that  the  Judge's  conclusion
        there was insufficient evidence provided to explain the reason  for
        the delay following the return of the  original  application  on  1
        August and resubmission on 6 September 2012 is outside the range of
        findings reasonably open to the Judge.  It  is  not  made  out  the
        Judge's  conclusion  there  are  insufficient  compelling   reasons
        established  to  waive  the  requirement  is  a  decision  that  is
        irrational. It is not made out the exercise of  discretion  by  the
        decision-maker or consideration of the same by the Judge was not  a
        lawful exercise of the discretionary power.
    11. Even if there was some explanation for the delay between  1  August
        and 6 September 2012, it appears that on 30 July 2012 the applicant
        submitted an incomplete or invalid application resulting  it  being
        returned to her on  1  August  2012  with  a  request  for  further
        information/documents. No  explanation  was  before  the  Judge  to
        explain why the  applicant  failed  to  file  a  valid  application
        containing all the requisite information on the first occasion.
    12. Although the appellant pleads a fairness point it is not  made  out
        the Judge committed a procedurally regularity sufficient to  amount
        to an error of  law  in  proceedings  which  are  by  their  nature
        adversarial and in which the Judge considered all the evidence made
        available. Directions given following the  lodging  of  the  appeal
        made it clear to the appellant that she was required  to  file  all
        the evidence upon which she was seeking  to  rely  by  a  specified
        date.  It  also  appears  from  the  respondent's  decision   under
        challenge and application that the appellant has had the benefit of
        legal representation.  It is not made out there  is  an  acceptable
        explanation for why the appellant did not file the  evidence  later
        disclosed in accordance with those directions, which are binding on
        the appellant even though she may be a  litigant  in  person.   The
        appellant  is  an  intelligent  woman  of   considerable   academic
        achievement  holding  both  a  BSC  with  first  class  honours  in
        Nanotechnology and a PhD as a Doctor of Philosophy.
    13. Permission was also granted on the  basis  the  decision  disclosed
        inadequate reasoning in relation to the  proportionality  balancing
        exercise. The Judge finds at [34] it was not disputed the appellant
        has a private life in the United Kingdom with no finding that those
        elements the appellant sought to rely upon we disputed.  The  Judge
        notes the appellant has lived in the United Kingdom since  the  age
        of 11 and identifies at [34] that the  issue  in  relation  to  the
        human rights aspect is  the  proportionality  of  the  respondent's
        decision.  The  Judge  finds  the  decision  proportionate   having
        considered the matters listed in section 117B the 2002 Act and  the
        fact  that  little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private  life
        established by a person at  a  time  their  immigration  status  is
        precarious. The Judge considers Rhuppiah  [2018]  UKSC  58  finding
        that there are a number of matters that weigh in the balance in the
        respondent's favour. Whilst the section dealing with this aspect is
        relatively brief it is not made out the Judge  failed  to  consider
        appropriate facts or legal provisions. As the appellant was  unable
        to succeed under the Immigration Rules it was necessary for her  to
        establish something in her case that warranted  a  grant  of  leave
        outside the Rules which  outweighed  the  public  interest  in  her
        removal. The Judge's finding that the appellant failed to establish
        any element to which sufficient weight could be given  to  outweigh
        the public interest has not been shown to be a finding outside  the
        range of those available to the Judge on the facts  of  this  case.
        The appellant's disagreement with the outcome and desire to  remain
        in the United Kingdom, whilst understandable,  does  not  establish
        that the conclusion on proportionality  is  outside  the  range  of
        findings open to the judge on the law and evidence.
    14. As the appellant fails to establish arguable legal  error  material
        to the decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  the  determination  shall
        stand.


Decision

    15. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    16. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure     (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 22 August 2019












