
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24735/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 February 2020                  |On 23 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                            mrs Habiba Juma KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mohzam, Solicitor, Twinwood Law Practice
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan whose application for entry
    clearance to join her son ("the sponsor") in the UK as an adult
    dependent relative was refused by the respondent.

 2. The respondent gave four reasons for refusing the application.

          i) First, the appellant had not complied with the requirement to
             present a valid medical certificate confirming that she had
             undergone screening for active pulmonary tuberculosis and that
             she is free from the disease.

         ii) Second, it was not accepted that the appellant satisfied the
             conditions of paragraph E-ECDR.2.4 of Appendix FM which
             requires that she must "as a result of age, illness or
             disability require long-term personal care to perform everyday
             tasks".

        iii) Third, it was not accepted that the appellant, as required by
             E-ECDR.2.5, was unable, even with the practical and financial
             help of the sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in
             Afghanistan.

         iv) Fourth, it was not accepted that there were exceptional
             circumstances which would render refusal a breach of Article 8
             ECHR because of unjustifiably harsh consequences for her and
             her family.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where her appeal was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chapman ("the judge").  In a
    decision promulgated on 8 July 2019 the judge dismissed the appeal.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. As well as the oral and written evidence of the sponsor, the judge had
    regard to the following evidence.

          i) A letter from a neighbour of the appellant stating that he and
             his wife have been assisting her but are planning to move
             house and therefore will not be able to continue doing so.

         ii) A letter from a hospital in Afghanistan dated 9 April 2019
             stating that the appellant travels to India for medication for
             asthma and arthritis.

        iii) Notes dated 18 and 19 September 2017 from an Indian hospital
             concerning the appellant's osteoarthritis and chronic
             bronchitis.

         iv) Records showing travel of the appellant and the sponsor to
             Tehran in 2018 as well as money transfers from the sponsor to
             the appellant.

 5. At paragraph 41 of the decision, when considering the evidence of the
    sponsor, the judge stated:

         "The sponsor's strong feeling that the Appellant should be allowed
         to join him in the United Kingdom is, I find, a 'two-edged sword'
         when assessing his evidence because what he says is most likely to
         come from a very subjective and emotional desire to achieve the
         outcome he wants, rather than being independent and objective.  For
         this reason, I find that I must treat with caution the sponsor's
         evidence, or any evidence produced by or through him, when it comes
         to assessing the Appellant's care needs, or what care is available
         to her in Afghanistan. "

 6. At paragraph 50 the judge went on to say:

         "Due to the fact that I cannot rely on the sponsor's evidence or
         the letter from [the appellant's neighbour], I cannot accept that
         the neighbour is moving away from the Appellant.  I cannot accept
         that there is no treatment for her medical conditions in Kabul."

 7. The judge found that the evidence did not establish that the appellant
    requires long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks and
    therefore that the conditions of E-ECDR 2.4 were not satisfied. The
    judge stated that the medical letter dated June 2019 was unclear and
    poorly translated.  The judge also observed that the sponsor's evidence
    had been that there was no treatment available to the appellant in
    Kabul but this letter came from a medical practitioner in Kabul.

 8. In respect of the medical evidence from India dated September 2017, the
    judge found that this was several years old and did not demonstrate
    that the appellant now requires help with daily care needs.  The judge
    found that the appellant had been able to travel to India on several
    occasions.

 9. At paragraph 47 the judge stated:

         "Having spent 3 weeks together [in Tehran in 2018] I would have
         expected the sponsor to be able to describe in some detail the
         appellant's disabilities and her personal care needs including the
         everyday tasks she had to be helped with. Yet he has not done so,
         either in his statement or in his oral evidence. I asked him to
         describe his mother to me. All he could say was: "she's ill.  She
         needs a stick to walk".  This was not, in my view, the descriptions
         of a person with a significant disability or significant care
         needs."

10. Having concluded that the burden had not been discharged to show that
    the appellant requires long-term personal care to perform everyday
    tasks as required by E-ECDR 2.4, the judge found that it was not
    necessary to consider E-ECDR.2.5 (although she made several
    observations indicating that she did not consider the conditions of E-
    ECDR.2.5 were met).

11. With respect to whether refusing entry clearance would be contrary to
    Article 8 ECHR, the judge found that the public interest in health and
    wellbeing of the population of the UK was engaged because the appellant
    had not shown that she does not suffer from TB.  The judge also
    concluded that she was not satisfied that refusal of entry would cause
    a significant interference with the family life enjoyed between the
    appellant and sponsor as they would be able to continue communicating
    as they have done in the past.

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

12. The first ground of appeal takes issue with the approach taken to the
    evidence of the sponsor, as set out in paragraphs 41 and 50 of the
    decision (quoted above at paragraphs 5 and 6).  The contention made in
    the grounds is that the judge erred by rejecting the entirety of the
    sponsor's evidence, as well as evidence obtained by the sponsor to
    support the appeal, merely because the sponsor has a subjective and
    emotional desire to succeed in the appeal, which is inevitably true of
    any appellant or sponsor in a case.

13. Mr Mohzam, in his submissions, developed this argument, stating that
    paragraph 41 of the decision indicates that there has not been a proper
    evaluation of the sponsor's evidence.  He drew attention to paragraph 7
    of the sponsor's witness statement where he stated:

         "My mother is precious to me and lately her old age had taken a
         toil on her health.  My mother is not as mobile as she used to be.
         She suffers from asthma and arthritis, she is in chronic pain when
         her arthritis flares up.  She finds it difficult to care for
         herself and further she finds tasks like combing her hair difficult
         to do in being able to perform hygiene duties unaided.  The
         arthritis has crimpling effects on her."

14. Mr Mohzam argued that there was a necessity to address these points and
    the judge failed to do so, instead making an unwarranted criticism of
    the sponsor's evidence merely on the basis of his strong desire to
    bring his mother to the UK.

15. The second ground of appeal argues that the judge erred by failing to
    place any weight or reliance on the letter from the appellant's
    neighbour.  At paragraph 43 the judge stated:

         "The letter from [the neighbour] appears to be signed by a
         thumbprint, which suggests that [the neighbour] could not have
         written the letter personally and that the words used are those of
         someone else, most probably, in my view, those of the sponsor. I
         find that I can place very little weight or reliance on this
         document"

16. The grounds contend that there was no evidence that the neighbour did
    not write the letter personally and as a matter of fairness this ought
    to have been put to the sponsor at the hearing to enable any
    clarifications to be made.

17. The judge at paragraph 46 commented that he found it difficult to
    accept that the appellant's neighbour had brought her to India for
    medical treatment, stating that "I find it difficult to accept that her
    neighbour would spend so long with her in another country".  The
    grounds submit that the sponsor ought to have had an opportunity to
    address this concern and there was, in any event, no reasoning to
    support this conclusion.

18. The final paragraph of the grounds of appeal state:

         "Whilst it is accepted that the absence of a TB certificate was
         fatal to the appellant's application and appeal, it is submitted
         that adequate and reasoned findings on the remainder of the appeal
         were essential."

19. Mr Mohzam stated that he was resiling from this concession and
    submitted that the appellant would be able to obtain the TB certificate
    after the appeal is allowed.  He acknowledged however that it could not
    be said that the appellant satisfies the requirements of Appendix FM
    given the absence of a TB certificate.

20. Mr Lindsay argued that the appeal cannot succeed because of the absence
    of a TB certificate.  This is required under the Immigration Rules; and
    if the appellant cannot meet the Immigration Rules her appeal cannot
    succeed because there is no basis for finding, in accordance with
    GEN.3.2, that there are exceptional circumstances that would render
    refusal of entry clearance a breach of Article 8 ECHR because it would
    result in unjustifiably harsh consequences.  In respect of paragraphs E-
    ECDR.2.4 and 2.5 of Appendix FM, Mr Lindsay's view was that adequate
    reasons had been given for finding that the conditions of these
    requirements were not satisfied.

Analysis

21. Whilst paragraph 41 of the decision, read together with paragraph 50,
    might give the impression that the judge rejected the appellant's case
    because the evidence of (and obtained by) the sponsor was in some sense
    tainted due to his desire to bring the appellant to the UK, reading the
    decision as a whole (and having regard to the evidence underpinning the
    decision)  it is clear that this is not in fact why the appeal was
    dismissed, as there were other - sustainable - reasons why the judge
    did not accept that the appellant's care needs met the threshold of E-
    ECDR 2.4.

22. There was a very limited amount of medical evidence before the judge;
    and the evidence that was adduced lacked any detail and fell
    significantly short of demonstrating that the appellant could not
    perform day to day tasks.  In the absence of medical evidence, the
    appellant's case depended on the evidence of the sponsor and her
    neighbour.

23. The judge gave a clear and sustainable reason for not placing weight on
    the evidence of the neighbour, which was that his letter was "signed"
    by thumbprint, indicating illiteracy and suggesting that the letter was
    written by somebody else. Given the absence of a statement by the
    neighbour to the effect that the letter had been read to him, the judge
    was entitled to treat it with scepticism. Moreover, the neighbour's
    letter is extremely brief and provides no detail about the nature and
    extent of the personal care she requires.

24. With respect to the sponsor's evidence, the judge explained at
    paragraph 47 that his description (at the hearing) of the appellant did
    not point to there being significant care needs and lacked any detail.
    Mr Mohzam drew attention to the sponsor's witness statement but this,
    like the oral evidence, provided very little detail about the care
    needs of the appellant. Paragraph 7 of the sponsor's witness statement
    (quoted above), which Mr Mohzam referred to at the hearing, only states
    that she finds caring for herself difficult - not impossible; and the
    only concrete example given is that she finds combing her hair
    difficult.

25. It was for the appellant to show, through evidence, that she was unable
    to perform everyday tasks without personal care. The evidence did not
    show this and therefore the judge was clearly entitled to conclude that
    the requirements for entry clearance as an adult dependent relative
    were not satisfied.

26. Having found that E-ECDR 2.4 was not satisfied, it was not necessary
    for the judge to assess E-ECDR.2.5.

27. For the appellant to succeed outside the Immigration Rules, there would
    need to be compelling circumstances. Based on the evidence before the
    First-tier Tribunal, the judge was clearly entitled to conclude that
    there were no such compelling circumstances.

 Notice of Decision

28. The grounds of appeal do not identify a material error of law. The
    appeal is therefore dismissed.
|                                             |                                     |
|                                             |                                     |
|Signed                                       |                                     |
|                                             |                                     |
|[pic]                                        |                                     |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan                |                Dated: 25 March 2020 |

