
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: HU/24510/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 20th September 2017                   |On: 26th September 2017          |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              Tehzeeb Ul-Hassan
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Brown, Counsel instructed by direct access


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Pakistan born on the 28th August  1984.
    On the 20th December 2016 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pacey) allowed
    his appeal on human rights grounds. The Secretary of State for the Home
    Department now has permission to appeal against that decision.






    The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 2. The case before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  Mr  Ul-Hassan  was
    entitled to indefinite leave to remain  under  paragraph  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules. This requires applicants to  demonstrate  that  they
    have been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
    period of 10 years.


 3. The Tribunal accepted that Mr Ul-Hassan had lived in this country since
    the 26th August 2006, when he had arrived with  leave  to  enter  as  a
    student. It found however for the Secretary of State  on  an  important
    question of fact. On the 10th February 2011 the Secretary of State  had
    refused to vary Mr Ul-Hassan's leave to remain so as to grant him leave
    as a spouse.    Mr Ul-Hassan did not make a new application  until  the
    13th April 2011. In the intervening period - calculated in the  refusal
    letter to be 62 days - Mr  Ul-Hassan  did  not  have  lawful  leave  to
    remain.   The Tribunal  concluded  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    therefore correct to have refused leave under 276B.  It  accepted  that
    the 'gap' had resulted from the fact that it  had  taken  Mr  Ul-Hassan
    several weeks to assemble the necessary  evidence.  He  was  eventually
    granted leave to remain as a spouse.  The determination concludes:


         "In my judgement the appellant cannot succeed under the  rules  for
         the   reasons   provided   by   the   respondent.   The   perfectly
         understandable and entirely credible explanation he has provided in
         relation to the gap in the ten year period, however,  coupled  with
         the totality of his otherwise excellent immigration history  to  my
         mind is so exceptional as to warrant  consideration  of  Article  8
         beyond the rules.


         I accept that the decision under appeal was made in pursuit of  the
         legitimate aim and that it would have consequences of such  gravity
         as to engage the right to respect for private and  family  life.  I
         had subsumed, in the question of proportionality, the  criteria  to
         be found in s117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
         2002. It is for the Respondent to  show  that  the  decision  under
         appeal is proportionate in pursuit of the legitimate aim sought  to
         be achieved. I  also  accept  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
         immigration control is in the public interest. I also  accept  that
         the appellant can speak English  and  is  financially  independent.
         That is apparent from the documents that he has provided. There  is
         no  material  element  of  precariousness  given   that   for   the
         overwhelming majority of his time  in  the  UK  he  has  been  here
         lawfully. It is clear that in that time he  will  have  established
         strong and enduring ties to this country. In  light  of  all  this,
         then, I cannot see that  there  is  any  real  public  interest  in
         maintaining the decision under appeal and on that  basis,  I  allow
         the appeal on human rights grounds".






    The Secretary of State's Challenge


 4. The Secretary of State contends that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is flawed for want of reasons and a failure to  take  material
    matters into  account.  The  Tribunal  finds  the  decision  to  refuse
    indefinite leave to remain to be a disproportionate  interference  with
    Mr Ul-Hassan's Article 8 rights but does not identify in what  way  the
    interference is caused: it does not appear to have taken  into  account
    the fact that Mr Ul-Hassan currently has permission to  reside  in  the
    United Kingdom as the family member of an EEA national until  the  28th
    November 2018.


 5. Permission was granted on the 20th June  2017  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pedro.   The grant of permission does not expressly deal with the
    issue of time. The appeal was lodged two  days  late.  The  explanation
    given by the Secretary of State was that this was due to the disruption
    caused by the Christmas break and associated bank holidays.   I  accept
    the explanation and extend time.




    The Response


 6. I was not provided with a Rule 24 response but I accept that given  the
    legal issues involved this is perhaps unsurprising: until very  shortly
    before the hearing of this appeal Mr Ul-Hassan was unrepresented.


 7. Mr Brown resisted the Secretary  of  State's  complain  insofar  as  it
    relates to interference. The denial of indefinite leave  is  plainly  a
    matter of personal significance to Mr Ul-Hassan and as such is a matter
    capable of engaging Article 8 ECHR.  The fact that he has permission to
    reside in this country in another  capacity  does  not  defeat  such  a
    claim: JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402.


 8. Mr  Brown  did  acknowledge  that  it  might  perhaps  have  been  more
    straightforward if the Tribunal had allowed the appeal  with  reference
    to paragraph 276B (on human  rights  grounds)  and  in  line  with  the
    published policy guidance on the approach to  be  taken  to  'gaps'  in
    residence. In this case the Tribunal had accepted that some  delay  had
    been caused by the fact that the necessary documents had been  retained
    by the Home Office, and overall that  a  perfectly  understandable  and
    entirely credible explanation had been given for  the  short  break  in
    leave.  The policy provides that the Secretary of State  exercises  her
    discretion where there is a short gap, and in  this  case  the  refusal
    letter did not demonstrate that such an exercise had  been  undertaken.
    Mr Brown submitted that the decision contained no material error but in
    the alternative invited me to substitute the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal with a Greenwood declaration to  the  effect  that  no  lawful
    decision had been taken: Greenwood (No 2)  (paragraph  398  considered)
    [2015] UKUT 00629 (IAC) [at 23].  In the event of such  a  finding  the
    matter would, in effect, be back before the Secretary of State to  take
    a fresh decision.




    Discussion and Findings


 9. This was an appeal determined at first instance on the  papers.  Having
    looked at those papers it is apparent that the First-tier Tribunal  can
    be forgiven for overlooking the fact that Mr Ul-Hassan  had  permission
    to reside under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 ('the EEA Regs'). That is because it is nowhere raised as an issue
    by either party.  For the reasons given by Mr Brown I am satisfied that
    this fact has no bearing on whether the First-tier Tribunal was correct
    to have found there to be an interference. There was at one time a line
    of thought to the effect that an appellant who was not  facing  removal
    could not logically rely on human rights grounds  in  an  appeal.  That
    approach was rejected by the Court of Appeal in JM (Liberia).  Although
    that case concerned a distinct legal framework I am satisfied that  the
    same approach should apply today. Mr Ul-Hassan's current permission  to
    reside is based on the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2006. The Secretary of State  has  recognised  a  derivative  right  of
    residence  but  that  right  could  lapse  at  any  time:   the   facts
    underpinning the recognition might change, or the Regs themselves might
    even cease to apply.  The question therefore of  whether  Mr  Ul-Hassan
    qualifies for indefinite  leave  in  a  personal  capacity  is  clearly
    therefore one of some significance, which merited  consideration  under
    Article 8.


10. The second limb of the appeal, deftly concealed in the closing sentence
    of the grounds, is a  reasons  challenge.  It  is  submitted  that  the
    decision is deficient for want of explanation as to why the decision is
    disproportionate.  I cannot accept that is so. The Secretary  of  State
    cannot possibly fail to understand why the decision was as it  is.  The
    only reason that the application failed under paragraph  276B  was  the
    gap in continuous lawful  residence.    The  Tribunal  considered  that
    there was a perfectly understandable and credible explanation  for  the
    gap,  only 62 days in a ten year period; Mr Ul-Hassan  had  established
    that he  had  an  otherwise  unblemished  and  "excellent"  immigration
    history. Those matters  weighed  in  the  balance  against  the  public
    interest  (in  particular  those  matters  set  out  at  s117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002). All  things  considered,
    it would be disproportionate to refuse to  grant  Mr  Ul-Hassan  leave.
    That is not the decision that every Tribunal might have taken,  but  it
    is the one that this  Tribunal  took,  whilst  clearly  expressing  its
    reasoning. I am unable to find that this ground is made out.


11. I would note for the sake of completeness that there was, as  Mr  Brown
    notes, a striking omission in the reasoning of both  Tribunal  and  the
    Secretary of State in her refusal letter.   That is that  there  is  no
    reference to the Secretary of State's published policy on what might be
    considered a  break  in  continuous  lawful  residence.    The  policy,
    entitled 'Long  Residence'  (3  April  2017)  lists  events  that  will
    routinely be considered  to  break  continuous  lawful  residence.  For
    instance, an absence from the  UK  of  more  than  6  months  would  be
    sufficient, an absence of less would not  defeat  an  application.   In
    respect of periods of overstaying the guidance  stipulates  that  where
    there is any one period in excess of 28 days, occurring  prior  to  the
    24th November 2016, decision makers must consider whether there are any
    exceptional circumstances that caused the  break.  Examples  are  given
    that include postal delays, serious illness and an inability to provide
    documents.     Had I found there to be  an  error  as  alleged  in  the
    grounds, and I were remaking this decision, I  would  have  found  that
    there has yet to be a lawful decision by the Secretary  of  State,  who
    has failed to exercise her discretion as set out in her own policy.  It
    would then be a matter for the Secretary of State, who  would  have  to
    consider the unchallenged findings of fact  in  Mr  Ul-Hassan's  favour
    about what caused the delay.     For my part I can see  no  discernible
    difference between the present outcome and that which would follow from
    application of the policy, save to note the following injunction in the
    guidance:


         "When granting leave in these circumstances, the applicant must  be
         granted leave outside of  the  rules  for  the  same  duration  and
         conditions that would have applied  had  they  been  granted  leave
         under the Rules"




    Decision


12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
    of law and it is upheld.


13. There is no order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         24th September 2017
