


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/24303/2018
     & HU/24304/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 14 November 2019                       |On 21 November 2019              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 kedar dewan
                                 muna dewan
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K McCarthy, instructed by Everest Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants, who are twins, are  citizens  of  Nepal,  born  on  18
      January 1981. They have been given permission to  appeal  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith dismissing  their  appeals
      against the respondent's decisions to refuse  their  applications  for
      entry clearance.

   2. The appellants applied for entry clearance  on  6  September  2018  to
      settle in the UK as the adult dependant relatives of their father,  an
      ex-Gurkha soldier, who was issued with a settlement visa on  10  March
      2014 and who came to the UK on  25  April  2014  with  his  wife,  the
      appellants' mother. The respondent considered that the appellants  did
      not meet the requirements of paragraph EC-DR.1.1 of Appendix FM of the
      immigration rules and that they did not meet the requirements  of  the
      Home Office policy in Annex K, IDI Chapter 15, section  2A  13.2.  The
      respondent went on to consider Article 8 of  the  ECHR  but  concluded
      that there was no established family life between the  appellants  and
      their parents and that Article 8 was not  engaged,  but  that  in  any
      event the decision to refuse the applications  was  proportionate  and
      did  not  breach  the  appellants'  Article  8   human   rights.   The
      applications were refused on 15 November 2018.

   3. The appellants appealed against that decision and their  appeals  were
      heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith on 1  July  2019.  The  judge
      noted that the appellants had an older sister who came to  the  UK  in
      2011 and was married and that they had an older brother and a  younger
      sister who lived with them in the family home in Nepal.  The  evidence
      before the judge was that none of them  were  employed  and  the  male
      family members worked in the field owned by  the  family  where  crops
      were grown. They received cheques from the sponsor, from his  Nepalese
      bank account. The judge observed that there were no photographs of the
      appellants and the sponsor and that  there  was  no  evidence  of  any
      relationship between them.  Although  he  accepted  that  the  sponsor
      travelled to Nepal to see his children, he considered the  absence  of
      evidence of the relationship between them to undermine the strength of
      their family life. The judge  accepted  that  there  was  family  life
      between the parents and children at the time when the sponsor and  his
      wife left Nepal but concluded that the  family  life  which  currently
      existed was not anything more than the usual  emotional  ties  between
      adult siblings and their parents. He  therefore  considered  that  the
      respondent's decision was not disproportionate and  he  dismissed  the
      appeals.

   4. The appellants sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
      against the judge's decision on five grounds: that the judge had acted
      unfairly in rejecting the evidence about ongoing contact  between  the
      appellants and their parents; that the judge had erroneously  elevated
      the threshold of  establishing  family  life  under  Article  8(1)  by
      requiring there to be dependency; that the judge had taken  immaterial
      factors into account when determining that Article 8 was not  engaged;
      that the judge had failed to take  account  of  relevant  material  in
      determining whether Article 8 was engaged;  and  that  the  judge  had
      failed  to  consider  the  appellants'  father's  evidence   and   his
      explanation for the delay in making the application for them  to  join
      him in the UK.

   5. Permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal, essentially on  the
      ground that the  judge  had  arguably  applied  an  elevated  test  in
      assessing the existence of family life  in  the  context  of  historic
      injustice.

   6. At the hearing Ms McCarthy addressed,  and  expanded  upon,  all  five
      grounds in her submissions. Ms Jones responded, relying on the case of
      Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) Nepal [2012]  UKUT  160
      and submitting that the judge had been entitled to make  the  findings
      that he did on the facts and the evidence.

Consideration and findings

   7. The first ground asserts unfairness  on  the  part  of  the  judge  by
      failing to give the  appellants  an  opportunity  to  respond  to  the
      assertion that there was no contact between them and  the  appellants.
      It was Ms McCarthy's submission that there was such  evidence,  namely
      evidence of telephone contact and visits by  the  sponsors  to  Nepal.
      However the judge was entitled to draw his own  conclusions  from  the
      evidence and to accord it the limited weight that he did and  was  not
      required to put each and every concern to the  appellants.  The  judge
      accepted the relationship between the appellants and the sponsors,  he
      accepted that there was family life at the time the sponsors  departed
      for the UK, accepted that the sponsors had visited the  appellants  in
      Nepal  and  accepted  that  the  appellants'  father  supported   them
      financially. However he did not accept that  there  was  a  continuing
      relationship that amounted to family life for the purposes of  Article
      8(1) and reached that conclusion on the basis of the limited  evidence
      before him, as he was entitled to do. He clearly had  full  regard  to
      the evidence of the  appellants  and  sponsors  in  their  statements,
      referring  to  that  evidence  at  [30].  Contrary  to  Ms  McCarthy's
      reference to visits made by the sponsors to Nepal, the evidence in the
      statements was that the sponsors had visited only  once,  in  February
      2019, five years after leaving Nepal, as confirmed by  the  stamps  in
      their passports. That  was  considered  and  accepted  by  the  judge.
      Although the judge did not  specifically  refer  to  the  evidence  of
      telephone calls, the evidence described in the index to the bundle  as
      records of Viber calls and messages, was barely legible  and  provided
      no proper details or evidence of contact between the relevant parties.
      Likewise, the three photographs produced simply  showed  the  sponsors
      and appellants standing together, which is consistent with the judge's
      acceptance that the sponsors visited  the  appellants  in  Nepal.  The
      judge plainly accepted that the parties were  in  contact  but  it  is
      clear from his findings at [31] that  he  did  not  accept  there  was
      meaningful contact amounting to  a  relationship  which  would  engage
      Article 8(1).

   8. As for the assertion in the grounds and Ms McCarthy's submission  that
      the judge applied the wrong test for assessing family life and wrongly
      required there to be dependency, it  seems  to  me  that  the  judge's
      assessment was entirely consistent with the guidance in Ghising which,
      at [61], endorsed previous authorities specifically referring  to  the
      need for additional elements of dependence.  Ghising  also  emphasised
      the fact sensitive nature of each case and the judge's assessment  was
      entirely consistent with that  approach.  The  grounds  criticise  the
      judge  for  taking  into  account  immaterial  matters  and  for   not
      considering material matters, but I find no merit in such  assertions.
      The judge simply set out the facts as he was  told  them  through  the
      oral and documentary evidence, taking full account of the  appellants'
      circumstances and status in Nepal, the circumstances of their parents'
      departure from Nepal and their relationship  and  contact  with  their
      parents.  Having  considered  the  relevant  facts  and  assessed  the
      evidence, the judge then reached the conclusion that the  relationship
      between the appellants and sponsors did not  involve  anything  beyond
      the usual emotional ties between adult family members.  There  was  no
      elevation of the  threshold  for  establishing  family  life,  as  the
      grounds assert, but the proper test was applied. The  judge  was  well
      aware of the sponsor's lengthy service as a Gurkha and  the  relevance
      of historic injustice and he assessed the  family  situation  in  that
      context, reaching a conclusion which was entirely open to him  on  the
      evidence before him.

   9. For all of these reasons I find no merit in the appellants' grounds of
      challenge. The grounds are essentially a disagreement with the judge's
      decision and I fail to see why permission was  granted  in  the  first
      place. The judge's decision took account  of  all  the  evidence,  was
      fully and cogently reasoned and was entirely and properly open to  him
      on the evidence before him.

  10. Accordingly I find no errors of law in the judge's decision. I  uphold
      the decision.

DECISION

  11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeals stands.


Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  15 November
2019
