
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/24695/2018
                                                               HU/24709/2018
                                                               HU/24713/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th August 2019                           |On 11th September 2019        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                        Shilpi [B] (first appellant)
                          [AAR] (second appellant)
                           [AR] (third appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY orders not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M K Islam, Legal Representative instructed by Taj
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The first Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh and the second and third
    Appellants are her children.  Her appeal to be permitted to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pears  in
    a decision promulgated in a decision dated 5th May 2019.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged, the main ground  being  that  there
    was procedural unfairness going beyond the scope of the refusal  letter
    dated 28th November 2018.

 3. Permission to  appeal  was  initially  refused  but  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan in a decision dated 9th July 2019.

 4. Judge O'Callaghan said that it was arguable that following  an  initial
    discussion of issues to be considered at the  hearing  the  Appellants'
    representative was left with a clear and unambiguous understanding from
    the judge that the genuine nature of a NHS card was accepted and so the
    decision of the judge to subsequently reject  the  genuineness  of  the
    document  without  prior  notice  of  such   intention   was   arguably
    procedurally unfair.  It was said that the  Appellant  would  be  aware
    whether an unambiguous observation  was  made  and  whether  there  was
    procedural unfairness would be considered by the Tribunal in the  error
    of law hearing.

 5.  Judge  O'Callaghan  made  a  direction  that  the  Appellant  and  the
    Respondent were to endeavour and file and serve witness statements from
    the representatives who attended the hearing before the  judge,  namely
    Mr T Shah and Mr M Sartorius, exhibiting any contemporaneous  notes  of
    the hearing no later than seven days before the hearing.

 6. What I have is a witness statement of Mr Shah for the  Appellant  dated
    9th August 2019.  He refers to well-known case law, namely that justice
    must not only be done but must be seen to be done.  He  refers  to  his
    Record of Proceedings which is lodged.  He explained the  legal  issues
    to the judge.  The judge had stated to  the  representatives  that  the
    first good evidence of the length of time the first Appellant had  been
    here was an NHS card issued on 30 November  2000.   The  representative
    (Mr Shah) replied that he could not go beyond this  available  document
    and the judge ruled in open court, that he proceeded on the basis  that
    the Appellant had official documents  from  30th  November  2000.   The
    judge clearly indicated the issue was resolved at the outset.

 7. There was no document lodged on behalf of the Home Office  namely  from
    Mr Sartorius, with  Mr  Tarlow  explaining  that  there  had  not  been
    sufficient time to obtain a document from him.

 8. Mr Islam in his submission said that the judge had indicated he was not
    going behind the NHS document at the start of the hearing but had  then
    given reasons why he had rejected that approach.  Furthermore,  he  had
    made no findings on the length of  residence  that  the  Appellant  had
    enjoyed in the United Kingdom.  Rather oddly in paragraph 43, the judge
    had said that he made no findings  on  when  the  first  Appellant  had
    arrived in the UK and he had also  said  he  would  "observe"  and  not
    conclude that she seemed to have been in the UK from about 2011.  These
    findings were inadequate.  It was up to the judge who had the  evidence
    placed before him, to make  a  finding  of  when  the  first  Appellant
    arrived in the UK and that was important to the  outcome  of  the  case
    under Article 8.

 9. I was asked to set the decision aside and remit the appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

10. For the Home Office Mr Tarlow relied on what the judge had  said.   The
    judge had dealt with the NHS residence card  and  those  findings  were
    open to him.  However, if I was against him on that  and  the  findings
    were not adequate then the matter should be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

11. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

12. What I have in this case is an assurance from Mr Shah that the issue of
    the NHS medical card was dealt with at the beginning of the hearing and
    the judge was invited and seems to have said he accepted that this  was
    proper evidence that indicated when the first Appellant arrived in  the
    UK.  That is not what he said in paragraph 43 where he  explained  that
    he had reservations about the card because of the name, date  of  birth
    and address on it.  Those discrepancies that  seemed  apparent  to  him
    were not explained in the first Appellant's statement.  He then said he
    made no findings of when the first Appellant arrived in the  UK,  which
    is an undoubtedly inadequate finding to make because it was up  to  the
    judge to make a clear finding on when the first Appellant did arrive as
    this went very much into the scales of whether or not  the  Appellant's
    appeal should be allowed under Article 8 ECHR  outside  the  Rules.  It
    follows that not to make a clear factual finding on this point  was  an
    error in law.  It was also a rather unusual and  unhelpful  finding  to
    say that he "would observe" but not conclude that she  seemed  to  have
    been in the UK from about 2011.

13. Unfortunately, the judge's findings give the impression that there  has
    been a procedural mishap in this case.  Has the judge said  nothing  at
    all about the NHS medical card in his preliminary  observations  before
    the evidence was given then it might  be  that  the  judge  could  have
    simply made the findings about the NHS medical card that  he  did  make
    when he wrote his decision.  However, to give  the  impression  to  the
    Appellant that this card stood for what it said it stood, was  arguably
    unfair on the Appellant in that the judge did not  give  the  Appellant
    the opportunity to argue that the medical card should be regarded as  a
    sound  document.   It  therefore  seems  to  me  that  there  has  been
    unfairness to the Appellant in view of the later findings of the  judge
    that the medical card was not a document  which  could  be  relied  on.
    That was a material finding by the judge which  would  go  a  long  way
    towards determining whether the appeal under Article 8 should have been
    allowed or dismissed.

14. It therefore seems to me that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    is not safe and it must be set aside.  I have  concluded  that  because
    further fact-finding is necessary that the matter should be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a judge other than Judge  Pears.



15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and the practice statement 7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

17. I set aside the decision.

18. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. No anonymity order is made.




Signed   JG Macdonald                            Date 3rd September 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald




