
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24626/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 January 2020                   |On 4 February 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR MUHAMMAD ARFAN ARFAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Counsel, instructed by Hubers Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision issued on 22 July 2019 of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Iqbal which  allowed  Mr  Arfan's  Article  8  ECHR
    claim.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State for
    the Home Department as the respondent and to Mr Arfan as the appellant,
    reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Mr Arfan is a citizen of Pakistan born on 17 March 1986.

 4. This appeal concerns a  relatively  narrow  point  as  to  whether  the
    appellant undertook  lawful  "supplementary  studies".  The  respondent
    maintains that he did not, finding that the appellant's studies at  the
    London School of Marketing were not lawful and  breached  a  condition,
    leading to the decision dated 27 November 2018 under challenge in these
    proceedings which refusing the appellant's application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain (ILR) under paragraph 322(3) of the Immigration Rules.

 5. In order to find an answer to this issue, it is necessary  to  look  at
    the appellant's immigration history. The history set out below  is  not
    in dispute. I was grateful to Ms Everett and Mr Nath  for  the  clarity
    they provided where the papers provided were not of the clearest.

 6. The appellant came to the UK in  2008  with  leave  as  a  student  and
    obtained further grants of leave until 28 February 2014. On 28 February
    2014 the appellant applied in-time for an extension of leave as a  Tier
    4 Migrant.

 7. I should indicate in passing that there is a mistake about the type  of
    application he made at that time in the  Home  Office  decision  letter
    under challenge here dated 27 November 2018. On page 2 of 9 this letter
    refers to the appellant making to an application as a Tier 1  dependent
    partner. He did not. He made an application for an extension  of  leave
    as a Tier 4  student.  This  mistake  is  repeated  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in paragraph 2 of the decision under challenge here.  Mr
    Nath, on behalf of  the  appellant,  confirmed  this  mistake  and  the
    correct basis on which the  appellant  applied  for  further  leave  in
    February 2014, referring me to paragraph 5 of the  appellant's  witness
    statement dated 28 June 2019. Ms Everett  agreed  with  that  position,
    referring me to a letter from the respondent to the appellant dated  26
    October 2016 at  page  79  of  the  appellant's  bundle  which  refers,
    correctly, to his Tier 4 (General) Migrant application on  28  February
    2014.

 8. The appellant's application for further leave as a student made  on  28
    February 2014, included a Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies  (CAS)
    with the reference  number  E4G6JQ7D15NOL7  accepting  him  on  a  BTEC
    extended diploma in strategic management and leadership  (level  7)  at
    the City of London Academy.  That document is on pages 86 and 87 of the
    appellant's bundle.

 9. The application for further leave  was  refused  on  8  May  2014.  The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. Before  his  appeal  was
    heard, the respondent revoked the licence of the London City Academy on
    29 September 2014.

10. The appellant's  appeal  remained  outstanding,  however,  and  it  was
    allowed in a decision issued on 14 October 2014 by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mensah. The appeal was decided on  the  papers.  The  appeal  was
    allowed on the basis that the appellant had asked for an  extension  of
    time prior to the decision being made in order to allow him  to  submit
    financial evidence but the respondent had not considered  that  request
    and had proceeded to make the decision without the additional material.



11. Following the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, in  line  with  what
    has become standard practice, on 26 October 2016, the respondent issued
    the appellant with a period of 60 days' leave in order to  enrol  on  a
    new course and obtain a valid CAS. The appellant is  concerned  at  the
    delay in issuing him with  further  leave  some  two  years  after  the
    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  CAS  from  London  City
    Academy becoming invalid. He could not obtain a CAS within the 60  days
    afforded to him and so he applied for further time and  was  granted  a
    further period of leave until 31 January 2017.

12. The appellant was still unable to obtain a  valid  CAS  by  31  January
    2017. In correspondence with the respondent on 31 January  2017  and  1
    February 2017 he informed the respondent that he had not been  able  to
    find an educational sponsor as he could not show the required  academic
    progression. He also informed the  respondent  that  he  had  commenced
    studying at the London School of Marketing and expected to  receive  an
    MBA from the University of Northampton in March 2017. As the  appellant
    set out in paragraph 11 of his witness statement  on  page  12  of  his
    bundle:

         "Even though my Section 3C leave had been continuing,  I  could  no
         (sic) enrol on  a  course  of  study  during  this  time  and  most
         universities required Academic Progression from  me.   I  therefore
         decided to enrol on a course which did not require me to  obtain  a
         CAS, with London School of Marketing which was  due  to  finish  in
         April 2017 and I would have been in a position to obtain a  CAS  by
         showing academic progression".

13. On 21 February 2017 the respondent refused the application for  further
    leave (made on 28 February 2014); see pages 60-65  of  the  appellant's
    bundle.

14. The application was refused, firstly, on the basis that  the  appellant
    had not provided a valid CAS. The respondent maintained that this meant
    that paragraph 322(9) of the Immigration  Rules  was  not  met  as  the
    appellant had not provided  a  document  requested  by  the  respondent
    within a reasonable time.

15. The  application  was  also  refused  under  paragraph  322(3)  of  the
    Immigration Rules where the applicant was considered to have breached a
    condition of his leave by studying at the London School  of  Marketing.
    The respondent set out that the appellant had never had  permission  to
    study at either the London School of Marketing  or  the  University  of
    Northampton. He had never obtained a CAS  from  the  London  School  of
    Marketing and could not have done so where this  organisation  was  not
    authorised to issue a CAS to foreign  students.  He  was  not  studying
    directly with the University of Northampton and, if that had  been  the
    case, he could be expected to have obtained a CAS from the university.

16. The respondent considered whether to exercise discretion concerning the
    application of both paragraph 322(9) and 322(3) but declined to do so.

17. The appellant appealed again  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  on  human
    rights grounds. In a decision dated 16 May  2018,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Telford refused the appeal. The First-tier  Tribunal  found  that
    the appellant's studies at the London School of Marketing amounted to a
    breach of  his  leave  and  that  paragraph  322(3)  had  been  applied
    correctly. Although he did not require permission to  study  online  at
    the college without a CAS this did not  put  him  in  the  position  of
    remaining within the terms of his leave which had been issued to  study
    elsewhere or mean that he did not require permission or a valid CAS  to
    comply with the conditions of his  leave.  The  judge  also  found  the
    appellant to lack credibility and did not consider that  discretion  as
    to the  application  of  the  general  grounds  of  refusal  should  be
    exercised in his favour.

18. On 30 May 2018 the appellant applied for  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    (ILR) on the basis of 10 years' continuous lawful residence.  That  led
    to the decision currently under challenge dated 27 November 2018.   The
    current decision takes the same position as the refusal of leave  dated
    21 February 2017, applying paragraph 322(9) of the Immigration Rules as
    the applicant had not provided a document when required to  do  so  and
    paragraph 322(3) where he had breached the conditions of his  leave  by
    studying at the London School of Marketing.

19. Before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  appellant  sought  to  argue  as
    follows, set out in paragraphs 24 to 26 of  the  witness  statement  on
    pages 14 and 15 of his bundle:

         "24. With regards to the Home Office's allegation  under  paragraph
             322(3) of the Immigration Rules, I would  respectfully  submit
             that the Home Office is somewhat misguided as to the nature of
             my studies and course at London School of Marketing.

         25.  Firstly, and I would emphasise on this point, that  my  course
             was not one where I was required to attend any  university  or
             college for attendance.  I was not required to obtain any  CAS
             from a licensed sponsor and that this course can be studied by
             anyone regardless of where they are resident given  that  they
             meet the requirements (academic)  to  enrol  for  the  course.
             Home  Office  had  requested  a  valid  CAS  to  determine  my
             application and university required me to show progression.  I
             was in a limbo not being  able  to  satisfy  either  side  and
             therefore decided to enrol for a distance learning  course  to
             fulfil the university and Home Office requirements  of  a  CAS
             letter.  I did not seek  to  obtain  a  CAS  letter  from  the
             University of Northampton  as  they  were  not  even  licensed
             sponsors.  My course was merely an attempt  to  supplement  my
             studies in my spare time and to show academic progression.

         26.  Even the Honourable Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  its
             determination of 01 May 2018, at  paragraph  13,  acknowledged
             the fact that my course at London School of  Marketing  was  a
             'distance learning' course which did not require me to  obtain
             a CAS before commencement and hence it was a 'non-CAS place of
             study'.  The Honourable Judge further stated at  paragraph  14
             of the determination that 'Tier 4  is  simply  not  comparable
             with non-CAS distance learning.  Distance learning can be done
             from any venue around the world', and my understanding was the
             same at the time I enrolled for the  course  that  this  is  a
             distance  learning  course,   where   rather   spending   time
             socialising  online,  I  would  rather  spend  my  time  in  a
             productive manner and instead I perused (sic) my primary  goal
             of being in the UK which was to study  and  better  my  future
             prospects.   I  paid  over  6,000  GBP  to  enrol   for   this
             progression course so that I  could  continue  studying  in  a
             licensed university through production of a valid CAS".

20. The appeal came before Judge Iqbal on 24 June 2019. She considered  the
    question of the appellant studying at the London  School  of  Marketing
    for an MBA awarded by the University of Northampton in paragraphs 28 to
    31 of the decision:

         "28.  With  reference  to  paragraph  322(3)  the  terms   of   the
             Immigration Rules  require  'a  failure  to  comply  with  the
             condition attached to the current or previous grant  of  leave
             to enter or remain  unless  leave  had  been  granted  in  the
             knowledge of  previous  breach'.   I  have  been  referred  to
             paragraph 245ZY(c)(iv) which provides '(iv) no  study  at  the
             institution that the Confirmation of Acceptance  for  Studies,
             Checking Services records as a migrant sponsor, unless ... (c)
             the study is a supplemental study'.

         29.  In addition, in relation to the supplementary courses, I  have
             been  referred  to  the  Tier  4  points-based  system  policy
             guidance for applications made on or after 11 January 2019  in
             particular 'Can students do extra studies whilst  in  the  UK?
             334. You are allowed to do a supplementary course for  example
             an evening class as well as your main course  of  study.   The
             supplementary course can be in any subject, does not  have  to
             relate to  your  main  course  of  study.   You  do  not  need
             permission from us to undertake a supplementary course and you
             are not required  to  tell  your  Tier  4  sponsor.   You  can
             undertake supplementary study at any time during the period of
             leave granted for your main course of study.  However you must
             make sure that your supplementary course of study does not  in
             any way hinder  your  progress  or  on  your  main  course  of
             studies'.

         30.  I note when considering this issue that on 18 April 2013,  the
             Appellant was last  granted  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
             (General) Student Migrant at a named college until 28 February
             2014 and this leave was subsequently  extended  by  virtue  of
             Section 3C subject  to  the  same  conditions.   I  have  been
             provided with evidence to demonstrate that he was studying  at
             the time at the London College  of  Computing  and  Management
             Sciences.  The Appellant states that it is during this  period
             that he commenced an online distance learning course with  the
             University of Northampton for an MBA with the London School of
             Marketing.

         31.  Therefore, I find that as long as the Appellant studied during
             a period of time when he was considered to  have  leave  as  a
             student for a different named college  (even  if  extended  by
             virtue of 3C, then  I  am  satisfied  on  balance  his  online
             studies for his MBA was  indeed  a  supplementary  course  for
             which the Appellant did not require permission  and  certainly
             therefore no CAS.  For  these  reasons  I  am  satisfied  that
             paragraph 322(3) does not apply to the Appellant as he was not
             in breach of the conditions of his previously granted  leave".



21. Judge Iqbal  also  found  the  respondent  was  incorrect  in  applying
    paragraph 322(9); see paragraph 33. She concluded  that  the  appellant
    had shown that he met the requirements of paragraph 276B and  that  the
    decision refusing ILR  was  disproportionate  where  that  was  so  and
    allowed the appeal.

22. It is my  view  that  the  reasoning  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    paragraph 322(3) discloses an error on a point of  law.  As  the  judge
    identified, the appellant had been studying at the  London  College  of
    Computing and Management Sciences when he applied for further leave  on
    28 February 2014. The CAS he used to support the application made on 28
    February 2014 was issued  by  the  City  of  London  Academy.  From  29
    September 2014 onwards and at the time that the appellant commenced his
    studies at the London School of Marketing in 2016, he did  not  have  a
    valid CAS to study at either of these institutions.  He  did  not  have
    permission or a valid CAS to study anywhere. Permission to study and  a
    valid CAS were conditions of his leave. He did not have either from  29
    September 2014 onwards. That is so even if his appeals and applications
    thereafter extended his leave under s.3C leave from  28  February  2014
    onwards. The respondent was correct to find that  his  studies  at  the
    London School of Marketing amounted to a breach of a condition  of  his
    leave. He was not entitled to follow "supplementary study"  when  there
    were no underlying lawful studies to supplement.  It  is  not  relevant
    that online studies at the London School of Marketing did  not  require
    him to have a CAS. He did not meet the prerequisite requirement to have
    leave supported by a valid CAS and permission to study.

23. For these reasons I am satisfied that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal discloses a material error on a point of  law  such  that  the
    decision regarding paragraph 322(3) of the Immigration Rules must be re-
    made.  Having found an error on this basis,  it  is  not  necessary  to
    consider the respondent's challenge to the decision of Judge  Iqbal  on
    paragraph 322(9) and I proceed to re-make the appeal on the basis  that
    this paragraph did not stand to be applied.

24. The re-making of the appeal is relatively straightforward as it follows
    from the reasoning above that the appellant did breach  the  conditions
    of his leave by studying at the London School of Marketing. The  course
    that he took could not be "supplementary" where there was no underlying
    leave with permission to study and a  valid  CAS.  The  respondent  was
    entitled to apply paragraph 322(3) and find that paragraph 276B(iii) of
    the Immigration Rules was not met as a result.

25. Where that is so I see nothing further here showing that  the  decision
    of the respondent is disproportionate.  He cannot meet  the  provisions
    of the Immigration Rules. He has been in the UK for nearly 12 years but
    has only ever had  limited  leave  as  a  student.   His  private  life
    attracts little weight where that is so.  He seeks to argue  unfairness
    where he found difficulty in obtaining a new CAS from 2014 onwards  but
    it is my judgment  that  those  arguments  do  not  attract  sufficient
    weight. As well as the respondent affording him two  periods  leave  to
    obtain a CAS, he had a great deal of time to  regularise  his  position
    from 2014 onwards and could have corresponded with  the  respondent  if
    there were difficulties at that time in obtaining  a  CAS.  I  was  not
    taken to any evidence showing that he attempted to find an  educational
    sponsor and obtain a valid CAS prior to commencing his studies  at  the
    London School of Marketing in 2016. The documents at pages  17  -21  of
    the appellant's bundle at best show that he made preliminary  enquiries
    to four educational institutions but nothing beyond that. It  was  also
    open to him to leave the UK to pursue studies in Pakistan or  to  apply
    from Pakistan to return to  the  UK  with  a  valid  CAS  in  order  to
    recommence his studies here and that  was  a  proportionate  course  of
    action to expect him to follow where he could not meet the  Immigration
    Rules.

26. It is therefore my conclusion the respondent was entitled to refuse the
    appellant's indefinite leave to remain  application  on  the  basis  of
    paragraph 322(3) of the Immigration Rules and  that  the  circumstances
    here do not show anything that is capable  of  outweighing  the  public
    interest the maintenance of effective immigration controls.

Notice of Decision

27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error of  law  and
    is set aside to be re-made.

28. The appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds is refused.


Signed: [pic]                                         Date: 31 January 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


