
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24068/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 April 2019                             |On 09 May 2019                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                 SAQLAIN ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Shoker of H & McLaws Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andrew promulgated on 11 February 2019 dismissing an appeal  against  a
    decision of the Respondent dated  13  November  2018  on  human  rights
    grounds.

2.   In the circumstances explained below it is  not  necessary  for  me  to
    rehearse the history and details  of  the  Appellant's  status  in  the
    United Kingdom, or the substance of his human rights claim.

3.   It is accepted by Mr Avery that I should find error of law on the  part
    of the First-tier Tribunal and set aside the decision,  and  also  that
    the consequence is the decision in the appeal requires to be re-made in
    favour of the Appellant.

4.   Mr Avery's  concessions  in  this  regard  are  made  pursuant  to  the
    decisions in the cases of KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53, JG  (s  117B(6):
    "reasonable to leave" UK) Turkey [2019] UKUT 72  (IAC),  and  also  the
    more recent decision of AB and AO v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2019] EWCA Civ 661.

5.   The focus of the Appellant's case before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    in respect of his relationship with 'qualifying' children.   The  Judge
    made the following finding:

         "I then turn to Section 117B(6).  I accept that the  Appellant  now
         has a genuine and subsisting relationship with qualifying children.
          I also accept that it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         children to leave the United Kingdom.  I further  accept  that  the
         Section says that in these circumstances the public  interest  does
         not require the person's removal". (paragraph 16)

6.   Notwithstanding the clear finding that section 117B(6) was engaged  and
    that accordingly the public interest did not  require  the  Appellant's
    removal, the Judge went on to consider  other  aspects  of  the  public
    interest  considerations  under  section  117B  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to reach  a  'global'  assessment.   In
    this regard it is to be noted that it  is  plain  that  the  Judge  was
    concerned about the very poor immigration history of  the  Appellant  -
    indeed most of the findings in the Decision  up  to  paragraph  16  are
    adverse.  The Judge's  approach,  and  conclusion  that  the  Appellant
    should not succeed in his appeal, essentially marginalised  or  negated
    the effect of section 117B(6).

7.   The effect of the case law cited above now makes it plain that  section
    117B(6) means exactly what it appears to mean -, which is to  say  that
    once it is  engaged  there  is  no  public  interest  in  removing  the
    applicant / appellant.  It was expressly recognised in the case  of  JG
    that this might lead to "an undeserving individual or family  remaining
    in the United Kingdom" (paragraph 41). In AB and AO the Court of Appeal
    agreed with the interpretation given to section 117B(6)(b) by the Upper
    Tribunal in JG (paragraph 72).

8.   The grant of permission to  appeal  acknowledges  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge would have been unaware of JG because it was promulgated
    after her Decision.  Be that as it may, as I have indicated,  Mr  Avery
    acknowledges that the effect of these decisions is that the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal cannot stand.  The findings however, which  are
    sound and are not the subject of any cross-challenge, do mean that  the
    consequence of the conclusion  at  paragraph  16  is  that  the  public
    interest does not require the removal of the Appellant from the  United
    Kingdom. His appeal succeeds on that basis.

    Notice of Decision

9.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.

10.  I re-make the decision in the appeal. The appeal is  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds.

11.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed                                  Date: 2 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and in all  the  circumstances  make  a  full  fee
award.


Signed                                  Date: 2 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
(qua a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal)
