
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH--V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24263/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 5 March 2020                     |On 18 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR SHAMSHER SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer,

For the Respondent:    Mr S Tariq, legal representative, West London
Solicitors Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lebasci, promulgated on  20  August  2019.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan on 21 January 2020.



Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now.

Background

 3. On 24 May 2018, the respondent sought leave to enter the United Kingdom
    under Appendix FM, as the  partner  of  Sukhraj  Kaur  Bal,  a  British
    citizen whom he married in India  in  2015.  Hitherto,  the  respondent
    entered the United Kingdom clandestinely during 2005  and  remained  in
    the United Kingdom without  leave  until  18  November  2015,  when  he
    voluntarily returned  to  India.  While  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    respondent used the name Sandeep Singh Sidhu.  A  previous  application
    made for leave to enter the UK as a partner was  refused  on  14  March
    2016 and his appeal against that decision was unsuccessful.

 4. In refusing the application on 20 November  2018,  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer considered the respondent's history and was satisfied  that  he
    had "previously  contrived  in  a  significant  way  to  frustrate  the
    intentions of the Immigration Rules." Reference was made to his illegal
    entry, using an assumed identity, working without leave, absconding and
    residing in the UK for a decade without seeking to regularise his stay.
    The ECO considered that the respondent's exclusion was conducive to the
    public good and refused the application under EC-P.1.1(c)  of  Appendix
    FM, with reference to S-EC-.1.5. Otherwise, it was  accepted  that  the
    respondent met the eligibility,  relationship,  financial  and  English
    language requirements. In assessing whether there were any  exceptional
    circumstances, the ECO considered the medical evidence relating to  the
    sponsor but was nonetheless satisfied that the interference with family
    and private life was proportionate. It was noted that at the  time  the
    respondent met the sponsor, he had been in the UK for 9  years  without
    valid leave and it was reasonable to assume they  knew  the  precarious
    nature of his stay.  Reference was made to the comments of the judge as
    to the respondent's behaviour when his  previous  appeal  on  the  same
    basis  was  being  considered.  The  ECO  was  of  the  view  that  the
    relationship could continue through messaging,  calls  and  visits  and
    that there were no exceptional circumstances  to  suggest  the  sponsor
    could not join him in India.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The judge accepted that the respondent could not meet  the  suitability
    criteria. Thereafter, she set out the findings of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lewis but found that they did not preclude genuine contrition  by
    the respondent  for  his  past  behaviour.  Mention  was  made  of  the
    sponsor's sister who has a disability as well as the  deterioration  of
    the sponsor's mental state. The judge concluded that the sponsor  would
    "feel unable" to join the respondent in India and thus  they  would  be
    unable to  enjoy  their  married  life  together.  The  effect  of  the
    Secretary of State's decision was said to amount to a  disproportionate
    breach of the family life of the respondent and his sponsor.



The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds were twofold. Firstly, it was argued that the judge lowered
    the threshold of insurmountable obstacles and that her findings were in
    conflict with the guidance given in Agyarko [2017] UKSC  11.  Secondly,
    it was said that the judge did not take the findings  of  the  previous
    judge as a starting point and appeared to have  considered  the  matter
    afresh, in circumstances where the facts were fundamentally the same.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought. In addition,  the
    judge granting permission made the following comment:

    "it is also arguable that there may not have been adequate scrutiny  of
    the weight to be given to public interest considerations  in  light  of
    the findings made by the previous First-tier Tribunal and  the  judge's
    own finding that the appellant's conduct justified  refusal  under  the
    'Suitability' criteria."

 8. The respondent's Rule 24 response  was  received  on  the  day  of  the
    hearing and established that the appeal was  opposed.  Essentially,  it
    was argued that the issue of insurmountable obstacles was no more  than
    a  relevant  factor  in  considering  Article  8  outside  the   Rules,
    considering GM (Sri Lanka) [2019] EWCA Civ 1630 at [48]. It was further
    argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  gave   adequate   and   proper
    consideration to the public interest.

The hearing

 9. Ms Everett relied on the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal as well
    as the grant of permission. She argued that the judge failed to provide
    adequate reasons for finding there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life taking place in India. Furthermore, the judge did not  give
    consideration to the public interest  on  the  basis  of  the  previous
    judge's findings but made findings solely based on future  reoffending.
    Ms Everett rejected the  suggestion  that  the  test  under  Article  8
    outside the Rules was less onerous to that under the Rules.

10. In response, Mr Tariq emphasised  that  the  judge  had  dismissed  the
    appeal under the Rules and that the issue of  insurmountable  obstacles
    was part of that assessment. Referring to GM, he  argued  that  it  was
    wrong to say that a failure to qualify under the Rules meant  that  the
    claim must fail outside the Rules and that there  was  no  need  for  a
    unique feature. Mr Tariq argued that the  respondent's  case  could  be
    distinguished from that of the claimants in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11. The
    judge had mentioned Hesham Ali {201]6  UKSC  60  at  [28],  taken  into
    account that the sponsor's sister had learning difficulties  and  there
    had been a sufficient balancing exercise.

11. In closing, Ms Everett  argued  that  the  judge  when  conducting  the
    proportionality assessment at [39] onwards says that the sponsor  feels
    unable to join the respondent  and  they  are  unable  to  enjoy  their
    married life in India. There was not  enough  emphasis  on  the  public
    interest and an inadequate Article 8 consideration.

12. At the end of the hearing I announced that the First-tier Tribunal made
    material errors of law and that the decision was therefore set aside. I
    give my reasons below.

Decision on error of law

13. In one brief paragraph, the judge  allowed  the  appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds outside the Rules, principally because the sponsor "would  feel
    unable" to go to India for dietary reasons and also owing to her  close
    relationships with her disabled sister and parents in the UK. The judge
    did so without consideration of the test approved in Agyarko at [60]:

         "It remains the position that the ultimate question is how  a  fair
         balance  should  be  struck  between  the  competing   public   and
         individual interests involved, applying a proportionality test. The
         Rules and Instructions in issue in the present case do  not  depart
         from that position. The Secretary of State has not imposed  a  test
         of exceptionality, in the sense which Lord  Bingham  had  in  mind:
         that is to say, a requirement that the  case  should  exhibit  some
         highly unusual feature, over and above the application of the  test
         of proportionality. On the  contrary,  she  has  defined  the  word
         "exceptional", as already explained, as meaning  "circumstances  in
         which refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for
         the individual such that the refusal of the application  would  not
         be proportionate". So understood, the provision in the Instructions
         that leave can be  granted  outside  the  Rules  where  exceptional
         circumstances  apply  involves  the  application  of  the  test  of
         proportionality to the circumstances of the  individual  case,  and
         cannot be regarded as incompatible with article 8. That  conclusion
         is fortified by the express  statement  in  the  Instructions  that
         "exceptional" does not mean "unusual"  or  "unique":  see  para  19
         above.

14. While it was not necessary for the judge to cite Agyarko,  it  was  not
    necessary for her to apply it. There is no indication that she did  so.
    The phrase "unjustifiably harsh consequences" appears  nowhere  in  her
    findings. Consequently, the judge materially erred in arriving  at  her
    conclusions without assessing whether this test was met.

15. At [38], the judge very briefly mentioned the public interest and  made
    a passing reference to the respondent's immigration  history.  Yet,  in
    carrying out the balancing exercise at [39], the judge  mentioned  only
    factors on the respondent's side of the balance, such as that his  wife
    felt unable to join him in India, that the respondent would not pose  a
    future risk and the strength of the various family  relationships.  All
    were relevant factors, but in  failing  to  balance  them  against  the
    factors set out in section 117B of the 2002 Act,  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's concerns, the previous findings under paragraph 320  and  the
    judge's own findings regarding suitability, she materially erred.

16. Lastly, while the judge summarised the previous  judge's  findings  and
    provided an extract from Devaseelan, she did not demonstrate  that  she
    took the previous decision as a  starting  point  when  conducting  her
    findings in relation to Article 8 outside the  Rules.  What  the  judge
    said at [37] was that she had taken Judge  Lewis'  determination  "into
    account." This was insufficient given the previous findings  made  just
    two years earlier  as  to  the  appellant's  conduct,  credibility  and
    contrition.

17. For the foregoing reasons, the judge's decision and reasons  is  unsafe
    and is set aside, with no findings preserved.

18. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is my view that the  respondent  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of his human rights appeal at the
    First-tier Tribunal, in that the  suitability  issue  was  inadequately
    challenged on his behalf at the previous hearing. I had  no  confidence
    that it would be adequately addressed by the representative  from  West
    London Solicitors Ltd if  I  proceeded  immediately  to  remaking  this
    appeal. I suggested to Mr Tariq that counsel be  instructed  to  assist
    with this appeal. I consider that it would be  unfair  to  deprive  the
    respondent of such assistance.




Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Newport, with a time estimate of 2 hours by any judge  except  First-tier
Tribunal Judge J Lebasci.


Signed:
   Date: 6 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

