
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24780/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th January 2019                  |On 16th January 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                 USHA KUMARI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, instructed by Maalik & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb extended time and granted permission  to
         appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Telford who, in  a
         decision promulgated on 8 January 2018, dismissed  the  appellant's
         appeal against the refusal of  her  human  rights  claim.  She  had
         sought leave to remain in the UK as the spouse  of  Muhammad  Afzal
         Shafiff.

      2. Permission was granted primarily because  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge had arguably wrongly  excluded  consideration  of  a  divorce
         certificate because it was submitted on the day, yet  had  accepted
         evidence produced by the respondent and had irrationally discounted
         supporting evidence including that from the couple's landlady.

      3. The appellant had  also,  at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  alleged  that  she  had  been  wrongly  advised  by   her
         solicitors in connection with a possible challenge to the interview
         by the immigration officer. She  continues  to  be  represented  by
         those solicitors.

      4. The First-tier Tribunal judge relied on the divorce certificate  in
         making adverse credibility findings against the  appellant,  failed
         to address the issues raised in the reasons for the refusal  letter
         and gave an irrational reason for not placing  any  weight  on  the
         landlady's evidence - that they were connected and so the  evidence
         was not independent.

      5. Taking the decision as  a  whole,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
         refused to admit as evidence a document that may have a significant
         bearing on the outcome of the appeal and, in the alternative relied
         upon that document in making adverse  credibility  findings.  There
         was significant procedural unfairness in his approach to  the  copy
         divorce document.

      6. The reason given by the First-tier Tribunal judge to  the  lack  of
         any weight upon the landlady's  evidence  was  irrational.  On  the
         basis  put  forward  by  him,  which  in  any  event   was   highly
         speculative, nobody would be able to give evidence in support of an
         appellant.

      7. The First-tier Tribunal judge materially erred in law  in  reaching
         the findings he reached, such findings being significantly infected
         by his errors.

      8. The appellant not having had a hearing at which her evidence  could
         be properly evaluated, I set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision
         and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh,
         no findings preserved.

      9. It was not clear before me whether the appellant continued to  rely
         on the very serious allegation made to the First-tier Tribunal that
         the immigration officer had  fabricated  his  report  or  that  her
         solicitors had either failed to follow her  instructions  or  given
         her 'bad' advice. No doubt if she intends to continue  to  rely  on
         such matters that will be made clear to the First-tier Tribunal and
         the respondent.

         Conclusions:

         The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve
         the making of an error on a point of law.

         I set aside the decision and remit the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal, no findings preserved.


[pic]
     Date 7th January 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
