
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/24546/2018 (V)
                                                           HU/24549/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Working Remotely by Skype for Business        |                              |
|On 4 February 2021                            |On 1 March 2021               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                bishal kuNwar
                                birat kunwar
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Jesurum instructed by Everest Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. The appellants ("A1" and "A2" respectively) are brothers  and  citizens
    of Nepal who were born respectively on 5 November 1989 and  25  January
    1991.

 2. On 11 September 2018, A1 and A2 each applied  for  entry  clearance  to
    settle in the United Kingdom with  their  father,  Kusharai  Kunwar,  a
    retired Ghurkha soldier,  and  their  mother,  Bindu  Kunwar,  who  had
    arrived in the UK in 2009 and 2011 and were settled in the UK.

 3. On 19 November 2018, the Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO")  refused  each
    of the appellants' applications.  The decisions mirrored  one  another.
    The ECO was not satisfied that the appellants met the  requirements  of
    the Rules in order to enter the UK as an adult dependent child  or  the
    requirements of Annex K of IDI Chapter 15, Section  2A.   The  ECO  was
    also not satisfied that  the  appellants  were  wholly  financially  or
    emotionally dependent upon the sponsor, their father.  As regards Art 8
    of the ECHR, the ECO was not satisfied that, as adult children  of  the
    sponsor,  the  appellants  had   established   'family   life'   by   a
    demonstration of "real" or  "committed"  or  "effective"  support  from
    their parents.  In any event,  even  having  regard  to  the  'historic
    injustice', the ECO concluded that any interference with  their  family
    and private life would be proportionate and, therefore, not a breach of
    Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellants appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Bulpitt
    dismissed each of their appeals under Art 8.   Judge  Bulpitt  was  not
    satisfied that the appellants had each established  that  Art  8.1  was
    engaged because that they had failed to prove that  there  was  'family
    life' between each of them and the sponsor.  The judge  found  that  it
    was likely that both appellants, as adults, were  living  independently
    from their parents and had  not  established  that  there  was  support
    amounting to dependency by their parents.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   On
    14  May  2020  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Foudy)  granted   the
    appellants permission to appeal.

 6. Following the issue of directions by the UT in the light of the  COVID-
    19 crisis, the respondent filed submissions on 16 July 2020 seeking  to
    uphold Judge Bulpitt's decision.

 7. Thereafter, the appeal was listed for hearing via Skype for Business on
    4 February 2021 at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre.  The court was working
    remotely and  Mr  Jesurum,  who  represented  the  appellants,  and  Mr
    Howells, who represented the respondent, joined the hearing remotely by
    Skype for Business.

 8. At that hearing, Mr Jesurum sought  permission  to  admit  his  witness
    statement dated 2 January 2020  setting  out  questions  asked  by  the
    Presenting Officer and judge of the sponsor at the hearing in the First-
    tier Tribunal and the sponsor's answers.  Mr Jesurum relied  upon  this
    evidence in support of his grounds of appeal that included a  challenge
    to the fairness of the proceedings due to matters being  taken  against
    the appellants by the judge which had not been raised at  the  hearing.
    Mr Howells did not object to this  evidence  being  admitted  which  he
    accepted as accurate.  I, therefore, admitted this evidence under  rule
    15(2A) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI
    2008/2689 as amended).  Given that  the  evidence  was  not  contested,
    there was, therefore, no objection to Mr Jesurum  also  acting  as  the
    appellants' advocate.

The Judge's Decision

 9. Before Judge Bulpitt, the parents of the appellants and  their  younger
    brother, Kushal gave oral evidence.  In addition, the appellants relied
    upon two substantial bundles of documents.

10. The background to the appeals is that both  appellants  had  previously
    been refused entry and had unsuccessfully appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In an earlier appeal, Judge Hussain on  22  March  2017  had
    dismissed each of the appellants' appeals under Art 8 on the basis that
    he  was  not  satisfied  that  there  was  'family  life'  between  the
    appellants and their parents in the UK.   In  his  determination  Judge
    Bulpitt, in accordance with Devaseelan, took Judge  Hussain's  findings
    as authoritative of the assessment of the  appellants'  status  at  the
    time of the decision but that he had to reach his own findings,  taking
    into account all the evidence adduced before him.

11. Judge Bulpitt dealt first with A1's circumstances at paras  18-23.   He
    set out A1's evidence  in  his  statement  dated  27  August  2019,  in
    particular, that A1 had "never looked for work" and had "never lived an
    independent life".  A1's evidence at the hearing was that he lived from
    his father's pension and later from money which his father  had  earned
    in the UK and sent to him.  A1's case was, therefore, that he  was  not
    independent of his father and that he was  financially  dependent  upon
    him and that that amounted to 'family life' for  the  purposes  of  Art
    8.1.

12. At paras 19-21, Judge Bulpitt considered  evidence,  including  medical
    evidence, concerning A1's health.  At para 21, Judge Bulpitt said this:



         "21. It is significant that there is  no  recent  medical  evidence
             about the  first  appellant's  medical  condition,  no  report
             setting out clearly  the  history  of  the  first  appellant's
             condition, his current position, his needs or  his  treatment.
             All  the  documents  which  had  been  provided  pre-date  the
             previous hearing and so would have been documents which  could
             have been presented to  Judge  Hussain  and  either  were  not
             produced or were not given much  weight  by  the  Judge.   The
             witnesses'  evidence  about  the  first  appellant's   medical
             condition was additionally extremely vague  and  non-specific,
             with the appellant's brother  and  father  appearing  to  have
             little if any insight into what that  medical  condition  was.
             As such, and in the glaring absence of any recent  documentary
             evidence as to his condition I treat the evidence of the first
             appellant's  medical  condition   with   a   great   deal   of
             circumspection.  The indisputable fact  is  that  despite  any
             medical condition the first appellant may suffer from  he  has
             been living separately from his father for a decade  and  from
             his mother for eight years and there is no persuasive evidence
             of him suffering any medical problem as a consequence".

    Then at paras 22-23, Judge Bulpitt reached the following conclusions:

         "22. In the absence of any recent medical evidence, in the light of
             the very limited detail that any of the witnesses were able to
             give and in view of the plain fact that the appellant has been
             living separately from  his  parents  for  such  a  long  time
             without any adverse consequences I attach little weight to the
             claim that the first appellant requires  or  receives  support
             from his parents to manage his medical condition.

         23.  I further attach little weight to the general  assertion  made
             that the first appellant has never worked and never  lived  an
             independent  life.   Given  the  inadequacy  of  the   medical
             evidence identified above I find  that  the  medical  evidence
             does  not  support  these  bland  assertions.   The  claim  is
             contradicted in the second appellant's application  from  2014
             (discussed below).  No detail is given by any of the witnesses
             about how the first appellant has occupied  himself  during  a
             period of more than a decade since he left school.  I find the
             suggestion the first appellant would make no attempt  even  to
             find work during that time inherently  unlikely,  particularly
             given his success at school and the  family's  work  ethic  as
             demonstrated by the appellant['s] father, mother and  youngest
             brother.  In the  context  of  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  I
             consider this suggestion is likely to be a conceit in order to
             try to make a successful application to settle in  the  United
             Kingdom having previously seen an application refused".

13. Consequently, Judge Bulpitt did not accept that the medical evidence  -
    put forward to show that  A1  suffered  from  mental  health  problems,
    including epilepsy, mood disorder and borderline personality disorder -
    established that A1 was unable to work (and therefore had not worked as
    he claimed) and also that there  was  some  dependency  (financial  and
    emotional) upon his parents as a result.

14. Judge Bulpitt then turned to the circumstances of A2 at paras 24-28  of
    his determination.  The evidence concerning A2 was somewhat  different.
    In his earlier 2014 visit visa application, A2 had claimed that he  was
    working.  A2 now claimed that he had lied in that  application  and  in
    the appeal heard by Judge Hussain in 2017 when he had  claimed  he  was
    working.  He also now claimed that he had been untruthful in his August
    2019 statement, which was prepared for the appeal in the  instant  case
    some months before the eventual hearing in front of Judge Bulpitt, when
    he had said that he had not been asked questions about  his  employment
    in his interview in relation to his 2014 visa application.

15. Judge Bulpitt dealt with A2's evidence at paras 24-26 as follows:

         "24. One of Judge Hussain's findings in 2017 was that in  his  2014
             application for leave to enter the United Kingdom in order  to
             study, the  second  appellant  had  claimed  that  he  was  an
             accounts assistant with an income  of  20,000  rupees.   Judge
             Hussain refers in his decision to evidence to that  effect  in
             the refusal letter and to the fact that in his  statement  for
             that appeal the appellant had not commented on this allegation
             at  all.   Subsequent  to  Judge  Hussain's   decision   being
             promulgated, and in anticipation of a substantive  hearing  of
             this appeal, in August 2019 the second  appellant  provided  a
             new witness statement which began with a declaration  that  it
             was made 'knowing it to be true to the best  of  my  knowledge
             and belief and knowing it will be placed before  the  Tribunal
             in support of my appeal'.  In  that  statement  he  said  that
             there were no questions put to him about any employment during
             his interview in connection with  the  2014  application.   He
             went on  to  say  that  after  Judge  Hussain's  decision  was
             promulgated his father asked him where the  information  about
             the appellant earning 20,000 rupees had  come  from  and  that
             this 'came as a surprise to me'.  He states that  he  went  to
             the visa agent who had completed his application and the agent
             told him that the agent had  put  this  information  into  the
             application as something he  regularly  does.   He  said  that
             although advised to report the agent to the police he had  not
             done so because he fears the police in Nepal.  He also says in
             that  statement  that  the  money  in  his  account  for   the
             application was provided by a friend called Jagat.

         25.  The transcript of the interview  with  the  second  appellant,
             conducted in 2014 was subsequently produced by the respondent.
              This showed that contrary to what the second  appellant  said
             in his August 2019  statement,  he  had  been  asked  in  that
             interview about employment and that  he  himself  had  replied
             that he had worked as an  accounts  assistant  earning  20,000
             rupees.  He also stated in that interview that  he  had  twice
             tried to join the Nepalese Army and that his father would  pay
             for his studies 'and my  big  brother  will  also  contribute'
             later stating that his brother was one of the people  who  had
             lent him money and additionally that 'tuition fees from father
             and brother'.  In response to this  transcript  being  adduced
             the appellant made another statement on 1 November 2019  which
             again started with a declaration as to truth,  but  this  time
             said that not only had he lied in  his  2014  application  but
             also that he had lied in his August 2019 statement.

         26.  It is evident therefore that in 2014 when seeking entry to the
             United Kingdom  the  second  appellant  claimed  that  he  was
             working and also that the first appellant was  working  or  at
             least had an independent source of income from which he  could
             contribute towards payment for the second appellant's  tuition
             in the United Kingdom.  By the time of the hearing  before  me
             however  the  second  appellant  had  completely  changed  his
             account and was now claiming that neither he nor his  brother,
             the first appellant had ever worked.   I  have  no  confidence
             that this latest version of events is true.   Instead  I  find
             that he will say whatever he thinks will  give  him  the  best
             opportunity to succeed in his  applications  to  come  to  the
             United Kingdom and will try to deceive the Tribunal and  those
             considering  his  applications  wherever   he   considers   it
             advantageous to do so".

16. Before me, Mr Jesurum submitted that A2  had  lied  both  in  his  2014
    application and also in his August 2019 statement.  He acknowledged the
    difficulties that that presented for A2.  Of course,  it  was  for  the
    judge to decide which version of A2's circumstances he accepted as true
    or, indeed, whether, given A2's contradictory evidence, he could accept
    either version now put forward by A2. A2's  evidence  was  relevant  to
    both his own circumstances and, given what he said about A1, also  A1's
    circumstances.

17. A1 and A2 were not, of course, available to give  oral  evidence.   The
    judge heard oral evidence, however, from the appellants' family on  the
    UK: the appellants' father, their  mother  and  younger  brother.   The
    judge dealt with their oral evidence at para 27 as follows:

         "27. When the appellants' father gave evidence, I asked  him  about
             the second appellant's 2014 application and he  answered  that
             he did not know anything about the second  appellant  applying
             to come to the United Kingdom and that he only found out about
             the application later.  Though he did not know when.   In  re-
             examination he was asked whether he meant that he did not know
             about the application or he did not know about the  lie  until
             later and replied that he did not know  about  the  lie  until
             later.  I found the evidence  from  Kusharai  Kunwar  on  this
             topic entirely unconvincing.  Perhaps surprisingly  given  the
             deceit which had been practised  he  was  at  best  vague  and
             inconsistent about what he knew of the application and when he
             found out about it.  When she gave  evidence  the  appellants'
             mother said she knew about the 2014 application being  refused
             but that she did not know much about the details.   While  the
             appellants' younger brother Kushal said he did not  know  that
             the second appellant had had an application  to  come  to  the
             United Kingdom refused".

18. Then at para 28, Judge Bulpitt reached the following conclusion:

         "28. Overall the witnesses' evidence about the second appellant was
             inconsistent, vague and contradictory.  The  second  appellant
             admits that he had lied in a statement  at  the  beginning  of
             which he declared to the Tribunal the truth of  its  contents.
             I find that I can attach no weight to the  second  appellant's
             latest evidence that he has not worked and that he enjoys  the
             real, committed and effective support of his parents.  Instead
             I find that this is likely to be the  latest  deceit  designed
             with the intention of ensuring success for the application  to
             come to the United Kingdom".

19. At paras 29-33, Judge Bulpitt dealt with other parts of  the  evidence,
    in particular documentary evidence including text exchanges which  also
    led him to doubt A2's evidence concerning his circumstances.   At  para
    32,  the  judge  dealt  with  documentary  evidence  showing  that  the
    appellants received money from their parents  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    The judge concluded:

         "32. On the basis of this evidence I am  satisfied  that  money  is
             sent from the appellants' parents in the United  Kingdom  back
             to the appellant[s] in Nepal.  What is done  with  that  money
             however is  far  less  clear.   I  am  not  satisfied  by  the
             generalised suggestion that the money is the  only  means  the
             appellants have of living or that this practice indicates  the
             real, committed and effective support of the appellants by the
             parents.  Instead I find the provision of money earned by  the
             parents in the United Kingdom to the appellants in Nepal where
             it is of far more value is no  more  than  what  most  parents
             would  do  to  share  their  good  fortune  with  their  adult
             children".

20. Then at para 34 Judge Bulpitt reached the following conclusion:

         "34. Bringing all this  evidence  together  I  find  that  the  two
             appellants have sought to construct a narrative of  dependence
             and an unusually close relationship with their  parents  which
             supports their application while the evidence  points  in  the
             opposite direction.  I find  that  the  contradictory,  vague,
             incomplete and at times outright dishonest evidence  from  the
             second appellant about what  they  have  done  since  becoming
             adults points towards them  being  far  more  independent  and
             established in their own right  than  they  seek  to  present.
             When viewed holistically I find  that  the  evidence  suggests
             that they have independent relationships and  adult  lives  in
             Nepal which are separate from their parents - much  like  most
             28 or 30 year olds, but that they have  sought  to  portray  a
             different picture for the purposes of this appeal".

21. In other words, the judge rejected all  the  witnesses'  evidence  (and
    that of A1 and A2) that the  appellants  were  not  working,  were  not
    independent of their parents and were dependent upon their  parents  in
    the UK and made positive findings against A1 and A2 on these issues.

22. Then at paras 35-39, the judge went on to apply  his  findings  to  the
    law, citing Kugathas v  SSHD  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31  and  Rai  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer [2017] EWCA Civ 320 and, in particular  referring  to
    Sedley LJ in Kugathas at [17], Judge Bulpitt (at para  36)  noted  that
    the support, in order to amount to  'family  life'  must  be  "real  or
    committed or  effective".   At  para  38  Judge  Bulpitt  reached  this
    conclusion:

         "38. Here, for the reasons given I find that  the  appellants  have
             not been honest in their portrayal of their lives in Nepal but
             have tried to create a narrative which meets the definition of
             a family life provided in the  case  law.   Overall  when  the
             evidence is carefully analysed it most likely  points  towards
             two adults who  have  been  living  independently  from  their
             parents  for  a  number  of  years  and  have  established  an
             independent life entirely in keeping with their  ages.   There
             is no doubt that the  appellants  and  their  parents  show  a
             mutual love and affection and equally there is no  doubt  that
             the appellants would like to benefit  from  the  opportunities
             that living in the United Kingdom  will  provide.   However  I
             find, as Judge Hussain did in 2017, that there  is  no  family
             life between the appellants and their  parents  which  engages
             Article 8 of the Convention and that their attempts to suggest
             that there is such a family life is simply  an  indication  of
             their desire to see their applications granted".

23. As a consequence, Judge  Bulpitt  dismissed  each  of  the  appellants'
    appeals under Art 8.

The Grounds of Appeal

24. The appellants rely upon five grounds of appeal which  were  developed,
    in some detail, by Mr Jesurum in his oral submissions.

25. Ground 1 contends that the judge was unfair  in  reaching  his  adverse
    finding in relation to A1.  It is submitted that it was unfair for  the
    judge to doubt whether A1 worked given that that had not been raised in
    the refusal letter or in cross-examination at the hearing.  In reaching
    that conclusion, the judge took into account, against A1, that  he  did
    not accept A1's medical condition despite that  condition  never  being
    disputed by the respondent.

26. The ground contends that it was improper and unfair for the judge to go
    behind the unchallenged evidence that  A1  was  unwell  and  had  never
    worked.  Reliance is placed upon the cases of Browne v Dunn (1893) 6  R
    67 (HL) per Lord Herschell LC at p.70 and MS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1548 at [14] per Maurice Kay LJ that if a finder of fact is to
    be invited to disbelieve evidence,  then  fairness  requires  that  the
    witness be made aware of the imputation that their evidence  is  untrue
    so that they may  offer  an  explanation  and  where  evidence  is  not
    challenged in cross-examination it is to be taken as  accepted  or  not
    disputed by the opposing party.

27. Ground 2 contends that, despite A2's acceptance that he had  previously
    lied in his 2014 application and in his appeal  statement  prepared  in
    August 2019, the sponsor's evidence was not challenged in the  decision
    letter or  cross-examination  that  he  was  unaware  of  A2's  deceit.
    Nevertheless,  without  being  given  an  opportunity  to  dispute  any
    contention that he was aware of A2's deceit, the judge  concluded  that
    the sponsor's evidence as to A1 and A2's  circumstances  could  not  be
    relied upon because he was aware of A2's deceit.

28. Relying upon the evidence of questions put to  the  sponsor  in  cross-
    examination and by the judge, Mr Jesurum submitted that the  respondent
    had specifically confirmed, at the conclusion of the questions  put  to
    the sponsor, that nothing new was being asserted.   It  had  previously
    not been suggested that  the  sponsor  was  a  party  to  A2's  deceit.
    Reliance is again placed upon the case law such as Browne  v  Dunn  and
    that fairness requires that a witness be made aware of an imputation as
    to the truthfulness of his evidence.

29. Ground 3 contends that the judge failed  to  take  into  account,  when
    assessing the credibility of the sponsor,  that  he  was  a  person  of
    positive good character as a result of his  military  service  and  his
    "exemplary" record of conduct.

30. Ground 4 contends that the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  two
    supporting documents contained in the appellants' bundle  and  addendum
    bundle supporting the appellants' contention that they were  unemployed
    and dependent on their parents: (1) a letter from the  local  authority
    in Nepal (at  p.74  of  the  appellants'  bundle)  and  (2)  a  witness
    statement from Nagendra Kumar Dura (p.15 of  the  appellants'  addendum
    bundle).  Whilst that evidence was not determinative of the question of
    whether the appellants worked, it is submitted that it was material and
    that, applying 'anxious scrutiny' the judge should have taken  it  into
    account.

31. Ground 5 contends that the judge failed to apply the proper approach to
    the existence of 'family life' under Art 8.1.  It is contended that the
    judge misapplied Kugathas by requiring that there be  "real,  committed
    and effective" support (my emphasis).  The correct test  as  identified
    in Kugathas at [17] and in Rai at [17] is  that  the  support  must  be
    "real" or "committed" or "effective".  In other words, the requirements
    were to be read disjunctively rather than conjunctively.  The judge, it
    is submitted, erred in law at paras 28 and  39  by  stating  the  three
    elements conjunctively.

32. Further, under ground 5 it  is  contended  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider the issue  of  'family  life'  from  the  perspective  of  the
    appellants' parents, in particular their  mother  in  respect  of  whom
    there was evidence that she suffered from  bipolar  disorder  and  that
    there was emotional dependency between her and the appellants.

Discussion

33. Logically, ground 5 should be addressed first since  it  contends  that
    the judge applied the wrong test to  establish  whether  'family  life'
    existed between the appellants and their parents in the UK.

    Ground 5

34. The correct approach to establishing 'family life' under  Art  8.1  was
    summarised by the Court of Appeal in Rai at [17]-[20].  The approach of
    the Court is particularly pertinent to these appeals as the  Court  was
    also concerned with an Art 8 claim by an adult child of a former Gurkha
    soldier.  Lindblom LJ (with whom Beatson and Henderson LJJ agreed) said
    this:
         "17.  In Kugathas   v   Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home
         Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31, Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph 17 of
         his  judgment)  that  "if  dependency  is  read  down  as   meaning
         "support", in the personal sense, and  if  one  adds,  echoing  the
         Strasbourg jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or  "effective"  to
         the word "support", then it represents ... the irreducible  minimum
         of what family life implies". Arden L.J. said (in paragraph  24  of
         her judgment) that the "relevant factors  ...  include  identifying
         who are the near relatives of the  appellant,  the  nature  of  the
         links between them and the appellant, the  age  of  the  appellant,
         where and with whom he has resided in the past, and  the  forms  of
         contact he has maintained with the other members of the family with
         whom he claims  to  have  a  family  life".  She  acknowledged  (at
         paragraph 25) that "there is no presumption of family  life".  Thus
         "a family life is not established between an adult  child  and  his
         surviving parent or other siblings  unless  something  more  exists
         than normal emotional ties". She  added  that  "[such]  ties  might
         exist if the appellant were dependent on his family or vice versa",
         but it was "not ... essential that the members of the family should
         be in the same country". In Patel and  others  v  Entry  Clearance
         Officer, Mumbai [2010] EWCA Civ 17, Sedley L.J. said (in paragraph
         14 of his judgment, with which Longmore and  Aikens  L.JJ.  agreed)
         that "what may constitute an extant family life falls well short of
         what constitutes dependency, and a good many adult children ... may
         still have a family life with parents who are now settled here  not
         by leave or by force of circumstance but by long-delayed right".
         18. In Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha  policy) the  Upper
         Tribunal accepted (in paragraph 56 of its determination)  that  the
         judgments in Kugathas had been "interpreted too restrictively  in
         the past and ought to be read in the light of subsequent  decisions
         of the domestic and Strasbourg courts", and (in paragraph 60)  that
         "some of the [Strasbourg] Court's decisions  indicate  that  family
         life between adult children and  parents  will  readily  be  found,
         without evidence of exceptional dependence". It went on to say  (in
         paragraph 61):
             "61. Recently,  the  [European  Court  of  Human  Rights]  has
             reviewed the case law, in [AA v  United  Kingdom [2012]  Imm.
             A.R.1], finding that a significant factor will be  whether  or
             not the adult child has founded a family of his own. If he  is
             still single and living with his  parents,  he  is  likely  to
             enjoy family life with them. ...".
         The Upper Tribunal set out the  relevant  passage  in  the  court's
         judgment in AA v United Kingdom (in paragraphs 46 to  49),  which
         ended with this (in paragraph 49):
             "49. An examination of the  Court's  case-law  would  tend  to
             suggest that the applicant, a young adult of 24 years old, who
             resides with his mother and has not yet founded  a  family  of
             his own, can be regarded as having "family life"."
         19. Ultimately, as Lord  Dyson  M.R.  emphasized  when  giving  the
         judgment of the court in Gurung (at paragraph 45), "the  question
         whether an individual enjoys family life is one of fact and depends
         on a careful  consideration  of  all  the  relevant  facts  of  the
         particular case". In some instances "an adult  child  (particularly
         if he does not have a partner or children of his own) may establish
         that he has a family life with his parents".  As  Lord  Dyson  M.R.
         said, "[it] all depends on the facts". The court expressly endorsed
         (at paragraph 46), as  "useful"  and  as  indicating  "the  correct
         approach to  be  adopted",  the  Upper  Tribunal's  review  of  the
         relevant jurisprudence in paragraphs 50 to 62 of its  determination
         in Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy),  including  its
         observation (at paragraph 62) that  "[the]  different  outcomes  in
         cases with superficially similar features emphasises to us that the
         issue under Article 8(1) is highly fact-sensitive".
         20. To similar  effect  were  these  observations  of  Sir  Stanley
         Burnton  in Singh   v   Secretary   of   State   for   the   Home
         Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630 (in paragraph 24 of his judgment):
             "24. I do not  think  that  the  judgments  to  which  I  have
             referred lead to any difficulty  in  determining  the  correct
             approach to Article 8 in cases involving  adult  children.  In
             the case of adults, in the  context  of  immigration  control,
             there is no legal or factual presumption as to  the  existence
             or absence of family life for the purposes  of  Article  8.  I
             point out that the approach of  the  European  Commission  for
             Human Rights cited approvingly in Kugathas did not include any
             requirement of exceptionality. It all depends  on  the  facts.
             The love and affection between an adult  and  his  parents  or
             siblings will not of itself justify  a  finding  of  a  family
             life. There has to be something more.  A  young  adult  living
             with his parents or siblings will normally have a family  life
             to be respected under Article 8. A  child  enjoying  a  family
             life with his parents does not suddenly cease to have a family
             life at midnight as he turns 18 years of  age.  On  the  other
             hand, a young adult living independently of  his  parents  may
             well not have a family life for the purposes of Article 8."

35. As will be clear, Mr Jesurum (who also  represented  the  appellant  in
    Rai) correctly identifies the test: that  there  be  support  from  the
    parents which is "real" or "committed" or  "effective".   The  test  is
    disjunctive and not conjunctive or cumulative.




36. Mr Howells accepted that the judge had referred to the need  for  there
    to be "real, committed and effective support" at paras 28 and 32 of his
    determination.  However, he submitted that, in the light of the judge's
    correct self-direction in para 36, those should be  seen  as  merely  a
    slip and that the judge correctly  applied  the  test  as  set  out  in
    Kugathas and Rai.


37. I accept that submission.  In  this  appeal,  Judge  Bulpitt  correctly
    cited passages from Kugathas  and  Rai  at  paras  35  and  36  of  his
    determination  which  set  out,  inter  alia,  the  test  disjunctively
    expressed.  I am wholly persuaded  that  the  judge,  having  correctly
    directed himself in accordance with the case law,  simply  committed  a
    'slip of the pen' at paras 28 and 32 by substituting the word "and" for
    the word "or" found in the citations in the case law.


38. In any event, the judge found that  both  appellants  were  leading  an
    independent life, were working and,  in  effect,  were  not  materially
    supported by their parents.  Although the judge accepted there was some
    financial support, he found that was no more than the type  of  support
    that might be expected from a parent who was, in his words,  "shar[ing]
    their good fortune with their adult children".  Given his finding  that
    both appellants were independent and working, they could not succeed on
    any basis in establishing that they had the necessary "support" to give
    rise to 'family life'.  Any error made by the  judge  in  applying  the
    test for 'family life', which of course I do not accept he  fell  into,
    was therefore immaterial to the outcome of his  decision.   Of  course,
    that  presupposes  that  the  judge's  factual  findings,   which   are
    challenged in the remaining grounds of appeal, are sustainable.

39. One final point under ground 5 concerns the contention that  the  judge
    failed to look at the 'family life' issue from the perspective  of  the
    appellants' mother.   The  grounds  contend  that  the  judge  made  no
    findings on whether the appellants provide their  mother  with  support
    given that it is not disputed that she suffers  from  bipolar  disorder
    severe enough to have required hospitalisation in the UK and  that  the
    appellants previously looked after her in Nepal.  Whilst this point was
    referred to  in  Counsel's  skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (at paras 24(3) and (4)), direct involvement with their mother
    dates back to 2013 when she last visited Nepal and A2 assisted her,  it
    is said, by remaining at her bedside and cooking for  her.   The  judge
    did not explicitly refer to this evidence, he  did  find,  however,  at
    para  38  that  there  is  "mutual  love  and  affection"  between  the
    appellants and their parents.  It is not  said  that  either  appellant
    currently provides the direct support that A2 provided  in  2013  given
    that the appellants and their parents live in different countries.  The
    thrust of the appellants' case before the  judge  was  that  they  were
    dependent upon their parents (in particular their father)  rather  than
    the  reverse.   Standing  alone,  I  am  unpersuaded  that  the   judge
    materially erred in law by failing to consider and  find  that  'family
    life' existed based upon any claim of  support  or  dependency  by  the
    appellants' mother upon them.

40. I turn now to consider the remaining grounds.  As  will  become  clear,
    the burden of succeeding in these  appeals  rests,  in  my  view,  upon
    grounds 1 and 2 in particular.

    Grounds 1 and 2

41. These grounds rely upon unfairness in relation to the judge's  findings
    adverse to A1 and A2 in that the judge  went  behind  the  unchallenged
    evidence  and,  in  particular,  that  A1  was  working  and  was   not
    independent of his parents and that the sponsor was  a  party  to  A2's
    admitted deceit.

42. Mr Jesurum relied upon a number of authorities that developed two lines
    of argument.

43. First, fairness requires that a witness be made aware of any imputation
    that their evidence is untrue in order to have an opportunity to  offer
    an explanation or deal with the alleged imputation  of  untruthfulness.
    That line of authority began with Browne v Dunn dating from  1893.   Mr
    Jesurum also  relied  upon  what  was  said  in  Deepak  Fertilizers  &
    Petrochemical Ltd v Davy McKee (UK) London Ltd [2002] EWCA Civ 1396  at
    [49]-[50].

44. Secondly, a party is to be taken to  accept  or  not  dispute  evidence
    which is not challenged in cross-examination: MS (Sri Lanka) at [14].

45. In Browne v Dunn, Lord Herschell LC said this at p.70:

         "It will not do to impeach the credibility  of  a  witness  upon  a
         matter on which  he  has  not  had  an  opportunity  of  giving  an
         explanation by reason of there having been no  suggestion  whatever
         in the course of the case that his story is not accepted".

46. That  approach,  or  "general  rule"  in  adversarial  proceedings  was
    recognised in the Deepak Fertilizers case, to which Mr Jesurum referred
    me, where Latham LJ said this at ([49]-[50)
         "49. The general rule in adversarial proceedings,  as  between  the
         parties, is that one party should not be  entitled  to  impugn  the
         evidence of another party's witness if he has not asked appropriate
         questions enabling the witness to deal with the criticisms that are
         being made. This general rule is  stated  in  Phipson  on  Evidence
         15th Edition at paragraph 11-26 in the following terms:
              "As a rule a party should  put  to  each  of  his  opponent's
              witnesses in turn so much of his own case  as  concerns  that
              particular witness, or in which he had a  share,  eg  if  the
              witness has deposed  a  conversation,  the  opposing  counsel
              should put to the witnesses any significant differences  from
              his own case. If he asks no questions he  will  generally  be
              taken to  accept  the  witness's  account  and  will  not  be
              permitted to attack it in his final speech. ..... Failure  to
              cross-examine will not, however, always amount to  acceptance
              of the witness's testimony, if for example  the  witness  has
              had notice to the contrary beforehand, or the story itself is
              of an incredible or romancing character."
         50. The caveat  in  the  last  sentence  that  I  have  quoted,  is
         important particularly in the context of the Civil Procure Rules in
         which, by Part 32 r. 1(3) the court is given a power to limit cross-
         examination. Nonetheless, the general rule remains a valid rule  of
         good practice and fairness. The judge of fact  is,  however,  in  a
         different position from the  protagonists.  So  long  as  a  matter
         remains clearly in issue, it is the judge's task to  determine  the
         facts on which the issue is to be decided. However it seems  to  me
         that where, as in the present case, an issue has  been  identified,
         but then counsel asks no questions, the judge  should  be  slow  to
         conclude that it remains an issue which has to be determined on the
         basis of  an  assessment  of  reliability  or  credibility  without
         enquiry of the parties as to their position. The  judge  should  be
         particularly cautious of doing so if he or she has  not  given  any
         indication of concern about the evidence so as to alert the witness
         or counsel acting on the side calling the witness, to the fact that
         it may be that further explanation should be given in  relation  to
         the issue in question."

47. As will be apparent, therefore, as a "general rule"  fairness  requires
    that a witness be given an opportunity to deal with any imputation  (in
    particular of untruthfulness) that the other  party  or  the  judge  in
    reaching a decision on the facts intends to rely upon.  I have no doubt
    that the  approach  applies  equally  to  the  essentially  adversarial
    proceedings in the FtT or UT if re-making a decision.

48. The  issue  is,  however,  fact-sensitive  and  depends  upon  all  the
    circumstances in the particular case.   This  was  made  clear  in  the
    judgment of the Privy Council in Chen v  Ng  (British  Virgin  Islands)
    [2017] UKPC 27 where, in the joint  judgment  of  Lords  Neuberger  and
    Clarke, the Judicial Committee said this at [52]-[54]:


         "52. In a perfect world, any ground for doubting the evidence of a
         witness ought to be put to him, and a judge should only rely  on  a
         ground for disbelieving a witness which that  witness  has  had  an
         opportunity of explaining. However, the world is not perfect,  and,
         while both points remain ideals which should always be in the minds
         of cross-examiners  and  trial  judges,  they  cannot  be  absolute
         requirements in every case. Even in a very full trial, it may often
         be disproportionate and unrealistic to expect a  cross-examiner  to
         put every possible  reason  for  disbelieving  a  witness  to  that
         witness, especially in a complex case, and it may  be  particularly
         difficult to do so in a case such as this, where the Judge sensibly
         rationed the time for cross-examination and the  witness  concerned
         needed an interpreter. Once it is accepted that not every point may
         be put, it is inevitable that there will be  cases  where  a  point
         which strikes the judge as a significant  reason  for  disbelieving
         some evidence when he comes to give judgment, has not been  put  to
         the witness who gave it.


         53. Mr Parker relies on a general rule, namely that "it will not do
         to impeach the credibility of a witness upon a matter on  which  he
         has not had any opportunity of giving an explanation by  reason  of
         there having been no suggestion whatever in the course of the  case
         that his story is not  accepted",  as  Lord  Herschell  LC  put  it
         in Browne v Dunn (1893) 6 R 67, 71. In other words, where it is not
         made clear during (or before) a  trial  that  the  evidence,  or  a
         significant aspect of the evidence, of a witness (especially if  he
         is a party in the proceedings) is challenged as inaccurate,  it  is
         not appropriate, at least in the absence of further relevant facts,
         for the evidence then to be challenged in closing  speeches  or  in
         the  subsequent  judgment.  A  relatively  recent  example  of  the
         application of this rule by the English  Court  of  Appeal  can  be
         found in Markem Corpn v Zipher Ltd [2005] RPC 31.


         54. The Judge's rejection of Mr Ng's evidence, and his reasons for
         rejecting that evidence, do not infringe this general rule, because
         it was clear from the inception of  the  instant  proceedings,  and
         throughout the trial that Mr Ng's evidence as to the basis on which
         the Shares were transferred in October 2011 was rejected  by  Madam
         Chen. Indeed, Mr Ng was cross-examined on the basis that he was not
         telling the truth about this issue. The challenge is therefore more
         nuanced than if it was based on the general rule: it is based on an
         objection to the grounds for rejecting  Mr  Ng's  evidence,  rather
         than an objection to the rejection itself. It appears to the  Board
         that an appellate  court's  decision  whether  to  uphold  a  trial
         judge's decision to reject a witness's evidence  on  grounds  which
         were not put to the  witness  must  depend  on  the  facts  of  the
         particular case. Ultimately, it must turn on the  question  whether
         the trial, viewed overall,  was  fair  bearing  in  mind  that  the
         relevant issue  was  decided  on  the  basis  that  a  witness  was
         disbelieved on grounds which were not put to him."

49. The Privy Council's approach, after citing Browne v  Dunn,  espouses  a
    nuanced, fact-sensitive approach looking to the overall fairness of the
    proceedings whilst acknowledging a "general rule" that  a  witness,  if
    their truthfulness is to be disputed by a party and/or found  adversely
    by a judge, should usually be given an opportunity  to  deal  with  any
    allegation made.  That may be through cross-examination of the  witness
    but not necessarily so providing that the party has a fair  opportunity
    to deal with the imputation by evidence or otherwise.

50. In MS (Sri Lanka) the Court of Appeal acknowledged, in the  immigration
    context, that if the Secretary of State's representative did not cross-
    examine an appellant (at [14] per Maurice Kay LJ):

         "that has the necessary consequence that  the  Secretary  of  State
         must  be  taken  to  accept,  or  at  least  not  to  dispute,  the
         appellant's factual account".

51. That comment must, in my judgment, take into account that even  in  the
    absence of cross-examination it may be clear that the truthfulness of a
    witness or the reliability of evidence is in issue.   The  fairness  of
    the proceedings must be seen, as the Privy Council made clear in Chen v
    Ng, overall.

52. In this appeal, of course, there was  no  question  of  cross-examining
    either A1 or A2.  They were abroad  and  not  available  to  be  cross-
    examined.  That, obviously,  was  not  the  case  in  relation  to  the
    sponsor.

53. The background to these appeals was the decision of  Judge  Hussain  in
    2017 who had found  that  'family  life'  did  not  exist  between  the
    appellants and their parents, not least because he found that they were
    independent and were working.  In the respective decision  letters  for
    each of the appellants, the respondent did not positively contend  that
    each of the appellants was working.  However, it was asserted that each
    was living independently from their parents and, although they had each
    asserted that they were "unemployed", without conceding  that  was  the
    case, the respondent was not satisfied, in the case of each  appellant,
    that they had demonstrated that they were reliant upon their parents as
    claimed in the UK either financially or emotionally.

54. By the time of the hearing, the position, at least for A2, had changed.
     He now claimed that he had lied in his 2014 application  when  he  had
    said that he was working.  He also claimed that  he  had  lied  in  his
    August 2019 statement that he had not been asked  about  this  in   his
    earlier interview.  A2's case was now that he was  unemployed  contrary
    to what he had previously said.  In those circumstances,  it  is  quite
    impossible to conceive that the underlying factual issues  relevant  to
    whether A2 had established 'family  life'  -  namely,  whether  he  was
    independent and/or working - were not live issues at the hearing.  They
    plainly were.  But, that was also the case  in  relation  to  A1.   The
    respondent may not  have  directly  challenged  those  matters  in  the
    decision letter but now, as a result of  A2's  assertion  that  he  had
    previously lied, his evidence concerning  his  and  A1's  circumstances
    were now undoubtedly live issues.  It was,  after  all,  part  of  A2's
    earlier evidence (in his interview) that A1 would be in a  position  to
    contribute to his tuition fees if he had come to the UK  following  his
    2014  student  visa   application.    Of   course,   the   respondent's
    representative could not put these  matters  to  A2  or  A1  in  cross-
    examination since they were not called  as  witnesses.   It  cannot  be
    said,   however,   that   both   appellants   (through   their    legal
    representatives) could not reasonably  be  aware  that  the  underlying
    issues for A1 and A2 as to their employment  and/or  independence  from
    their parents was very much in issue.  Indeed, the  sponsor's  evidence
    was directed to both of  those  issues  presumably  because  they  were
    relevant and considered to be in dispute.

55.  I  do  not,  therefore,  accept  Mr  Jesurum's  submission  that   the
    proceedings were unfair to the extent that the  judge  considered  that
    the issues of whether A1 and A2 were  employed  and/or  independent  of
    their parents were contested issues upon which he had to reach  factual
    determinations.  In reality, A2's evidence inevitably changed the focus
    of the respondent's case.

56. In relation to the remaining point made in ground 1, I  am  unpersuaded
    that the judge unfairly took into account his  view  that  the  medical
    evidence did not establish that A1 was unable to work.  As I have  made
    clear above, whether or not A1 was working was a live issue  which  had
    not been conceded by the respondent.  The judge was  entitled  to  take
    into account his view as to whether the medical  evidence  supported  a
    conclusion that A1 was not working because he was unable to do so.  The
    medical evidence, as the judge noted in para 21, was largely  available
    at the time of Judge Hussain's decision in  2017.   That  A1's  medical
    condition was a live issue at the hearing, is clear from the fact  that
    both  of  A1's  parents  were  asked  about  his  treatment  in  cross-
    examination.  Ground 1 does not in any significant  way  challenge  the
    judge's assessment of the evidence but rather contends that  there  was
    never any dispute concerning the medical evidence.  I am unpersuaded of
    that argument given, and not least because of, the cross-examination of
    A1's parents about his medical condition.

57. Where, however, I consider that the judge did fall into  error  is,  as
    set out in ground 2, in his assessment of the sponsor's evidence.

58.  Plainly,  the  sponsor  gave  supporting  evidence,  relevant  to  the
    assessment of whether the underlying  issues  I  have  identified  were
    established.  The judge had to assess the credibility  and  reliability
    of the sponsor's evidence.  However, the judge discounted the sponsor's
    evidence, in significant part, because he concluded  that  the  sponsor
    was in some way implicated (through knowledge  or  otherwise)  in  A2's
    deceitful application in 2014.  However, that was  not  a  matter  upon
    which the judge was entitled to rely given the cross-examination by the
    HOPO of the sponsor, the questions asked by the judge  of  the  sponsor
    and the HOPO's response to an enquiry from counsel for  the  appellants
    following those questions.

59. Those matters are, contentiously,  set  out  in  the  statement  of  Mr
    Jesurum which Mr Howells accepted.  In cross-examination,  the  sponsor
    was asked whether he accepted that A2 was  lying  about  statements  he
    previously made about  his  circumstances  in  Nepal  and  the  sponsor
    answered "yes".  He was asked whether he knew whether A2 was lying  and
    replied "no - I didn't  know,  came  to  light  later".   When  it  was
    suggested to him that that indicated he was not  emotionally  connected
    to A2, the sponsor replied "we have a close relationship".   The  judge
    then asked a number of questions by way of clarification.  The  sponsor
    repeated that his relationship with A2 was a close  one  and  that  "he
    didn't tell me for some time, and later told me".  The judge then asked
    who arranged the agent for A2's application in  2014  and  the  sponsor
    replied "I only came to know later".  The judge then asked whether  the
    sponsor knew that A2 was applying to come to the UK in  2014  to  which
    the  sponsor  replied  "I  don't  know  about   anything   before   the
    application".  He was then asked by the judge when  had  he  found  out
    about the application and he replied "he only  told  later".   He  said
    that he did not remember when.

60. Importantly, at the end of those questions, counsel for the  appellants
    asked the judge whether there were any concerns that  the  sponsor  had
    played any part in A2's deception and the  respondent's  representative
    replied "nothing new is being asserted".

61. A fair reading of that questioning would not lead a reasonable observer
    to conclude that the respondent was putting forward, or the  judge  was
    contemplating, a positive case that the sponsor was implicated in  A2's
    deceit and that,  therefore,  that  issue  could  be  relevant  to  the
    sponsor's credibility and reliability as a witness.  Indeed, the HOPO's
    specific confirmation that nothing new was being asserted,  could  only
    lead to the conclusion that the sponsor's knowing  involvement  in  the
    deceit was not being relied upon.  Yet, in his determination, the judge
    did reach such a view, in particular in para 27 of  his  determination.
    In those circumstances, the judge went on  to  discount  the  otherwise
    supportive evidence of the sponsor relevant to the live issues  in  the
    appeal concerning A1's and A2's circumstances in Nepal.  That  was,  in
    my judgment, unfair.  The sponsor was denied an opportunity  to  engage
    fully  with  such  an  adverse  imputation  being   drawn   about   his
    involvement.  It may well be  that  A2's  case  presented  considerable
    difficulties given his  claim  that  he  had  lied  both  in  his  2014
    application and also in his August  2019  statement  prepared  for  the
    appeal hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   A1'  s  case  was,
    however, not necessarily  tainted  in  the  same  way.   However,  both
    appellants  were  entitled  to  have  the  sponsor's  evidence   fairly
    assessed.  In my judgment, and for the reasons I have given, the  judge
    did not do so and that was material to his adverse findings not only in
    relation to A1 but also A2.

62. In those circumstances, based upon ground 2, I am  satisfied  that  the
    judge materially erred in law and his findings and decision  cannot  be
    sustained.

63. It is strictly, therefore, unnecessary for me to reach  conclusions  on
    the remaining grounds.  I would, however, say this about grounds 3  and
    4.

    Ground 3

64. As regards ground 3, it is no doubt a relevant factor in assessing  the
    credibility (or truthfilness) of a witness that they have an  exemplary
    good character.  That is well recognised in the criminal context (see R
    v Hunter & Ors [2015] EWCA Crim 631) and no doubt holds  good  also  in
    the civil context.  Whilst relevant, its weight is essentially a matter
    for the fact-finder having regard to the evidence as a whole.  Had  the
    findings  in  relation  to  the  sponsor's  evidence   been   otherwise
    sustainable, I would not be persuaded that the judge erred  by  failing
    to take into account,  in  assessing  the  sponsor's  credibility,  his
    previous good character reflected in his  exemplary  military  service.
    The  judge refers to it in his "preliminary findings of fact"  at  para
    4(c).  There is no reason to doubt that the judge had this in mind when
    assessing the sponsor's evidence.  What weight was to be  given  to  it
    was quintessentially for the judge when reaching his  factual  findings
    in the light of all the evidence.   I  do  not,  therefore,  accept  Mr
    Jesurum's submission that the judge erred in law  by  failing  to  have
    regard to the good character of the sponsor.

    Ground 4

65. In relation to ground 4, I accept that there was supporting evidence in
    the form of a local authority letter and witness statement relating  to
    whether the  appellants  were  employed  and/or  dependent  upon  their
    parents.   However,  it  is  not  clear  whether  this   evidence   was
    specifically drawn to the attention of the judge and explicit  reliance
    placed upon it.  Whilst the judge was (as  a  generality)  required  to
    take into account all relevant  evidence  as  reflected  in  the  well-
    travelled requirement to give the case "anxious scrutiny" (see R(YH)  v
    SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 116 at [24] per Carnwath LJ),  it  cannot  suffice
    that an appellant  places  before  a  judge  a  substantial  bundle  of
    evidence (in this case running to over 1,000 pages  in  total)  without
    indicating what parts of the evidence are  relied  upon  and  then,  in
    hindsight, and then successfully challenge  a  judge's  decision  based
    upon a failure to consider a document or piece of evidence buried  (but
    unidentified) deep in a substantial bundle.  That  is  an  unattractive
    argument to make to an appellant Court or Tribunal.  As I have said, it
    is unclear to me  whether  this  material  was  drawn  to  the  judge's
    attention and specifically relied upon at the hearing.  In the  absence
    of clarity on that issue, and given that the appellants do not need  to
    establish this point in order to succeed in this appeal, I  prefer  not
    to express a view as to  whether  the  judge's  failure  to  take  that
    evidence into account was a material error of law in itself.





Decision

66. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss each of the appellants' appeals under Art 8 involved the making
    of a material error of law.  The  decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
    aside.

67. It  was  accepted  by  both  representatives  that  if  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision could not stand then the  proper  disposal  of  the
    appeal was to remit it  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    rehearing and I was invited to do so.  I agree.

68. Having regard to the nature and extend of fact-finding required, and to
    para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement,  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo  rehearing  before  a
    judge other than Judge Bulpitt.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            12 February 2021

