
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24536/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 29 October 2020                  |On 5 November 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [s I]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Ball, instructed by JCWI


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This has been a remote hearing to which there  has  been  no  objection
    from the parties. The form of remote hearing was Skype for business.  A
    face to face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and
    all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  Mr  [I]'s
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse  his  human
    rights claim following the making of a deportation order  against  him.
    For the purposes of this decision, I shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent  and  Mr  [I]  as  the  appellant,
    reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 14 January 1974. His date
    of entry to the UK is not known, but he was issued with a 2 year multi-
    visit visa on 3 April 2008 and subsequently overstayed. He was arrested
    on suspicion of illegal entry and served with overstayer papers  on  11
    February 2014 but failed to report and absconded.  He  was  re-arrested
    several times and on 30 March 2015 he was convicted of  common  assault
    and sentenced to a Hospital Order under section 37 of the Mental Health
    Act 1983. Further convictions for harassment and common assault  on  13
    October 2015 and  30  June  2016  resulted  in  a  period  of  6  weeks
    imprisonment and a further Hospital Order under section 37 of  the  MHA
    1983.

 4. On 16 August 2018 the appellant was notified of an intention to make  a
    deportation order against him under section 5(1) of the Immigration Act
    1971 on the grounds that his deportation was deemed to be conducive  to
    the public good. Written representations were made on  the  appellant's
    behalf on 24 October 2018 on Article 3 human rights grounds in relation
    to his mental health condition and the risk of him  becoming  psychotic
    if he was returned to Nigeria. A psychiatric report was enclosed from a
    Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist at Barnet, Enfield and Haringey Mental
    Health Trust which had been prepared  for  the  Hospital  Managers  and
    which referred to  the  appellant  suffering  a  late  onset  psychotic
    illness which had led to his various offences and recommended  that  he
    not be discharged at that time.

 5. The respondent made a decision  on  23  November  2018  to  refuse  the
    appellant's human rights claim, referring to  his  offence  in  October
    2015 of sexual harassment and assault. The respondent did not  consider
    that  the  appellant's  mental  health  condition  was  such  that  his
    deportation to Nigeria would meet the high threshold  for  establishing
    an Article 3 claim as there was medical treatment available in  Nigeria
    albeit not at the same level as in the UK. The respondent accepted that
    the appellant was socially and culturally integrated in the UK but  did
    not  accept  that  there  were  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
    integration in Nigeria. It was noted that the appellant would  continue
    to require considerable support in the community to prevent  a  relapse
    in his mental health, but the respondent considered that he had  family
    members in Nigeria who could support him and that his deportation would
    not breach his Article 8 human rights.

 6. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was allowed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shaerf on 22  April  2020.  The  appellant
    gave oral evidence before the judge,  as  did  his  social  worker  who
    accompanied him and his niece. The judge also had  before  him  several
    psychiatric reports and a medical legal report for the  appellant.  The
    appellant's social worker explained the  level  of  support  and  close
    monitoring he would require on discharge  from  hospital  in  order  to
    ensure that he continued to take his medication and to ensure that  his
    mental health did not deteriorate and he  explained  the  risk  of  the
    appellant relapsing if stressed or failing to take his  medication.  He
    explained the infrequent nature  of  the  family  visits  made  to  the
    appellant, by a brother in Italy and a niece in  the  UK,  and  to  the
    appellant's telephone calls to his mother  in  Nigeria  every  2  to  3
    weeks. The appellant, in his evidence, explained his previous role as a
    local councillor in Nigeria and the fact that he used to  live  in  the
    family compound as a child but lived alone in rented accommodation  for
    about 5 years before coming to the UK. He  explained  that  his  family
    members had gone their separate ways, some were  deceased,  his  mother
    lived with his eldest brother's daughter and the  family  compound  was
    rented out. He had not received any support from  his  family  when  he
    came to the UK. The appellant also mentioned a partner  in  Lagos  with
    whom he had been in a relationship for 7 years and  with  whom  he  had
    spoken recently and intended to marry. He  also  referred  to  a  third
    brother who had had mental health problems and turned to drink and  had
    died 8 or 9 years previously.

 7. Judge Shaerf was referred to various human  rights  reports  mentioning
    the chaining of mental health patients in mental health facilities.  He
    was asked by Mr Ball to treat the appellant's evidence about a  partner
    in Nigeria with caution as he had never previously mentioned to  anyone
    about having a partner. The judge noted that the appellant's  claim  to
    have a partner was  inconsistent  with  his  previous  account  of  his
    relationship having ended when he moved to the UK  and  considered  the
    previous account to be the correct one. He concluded from the  evidence
    that the appellant's immediate family was dispersed and  that  he  only
    remained in touch with his mother and his eldest brother in Nigeria and
    with his brother in Italy and  his  niece  in  the  UK.  He  noted  the
    evidence of the appellant's niece  that  her  father  had  shunned  his
    brother  in  Nigeria  who  had  had  mental  health  problems  and  had
    subsequently died,  and  he  concluded  that  that  behaviour  did  not
    indicate that he would be likely to support the appellant on his return
    to Nigeria. On the basis of the  medical  reports  and  the  background
    evidence about the  limited  nature  of  the  facilities  available  in
    Nigeria for patients with  mental  health  problems  and  the  risk  of
    psychiatric patients being subjected to ill-treatment such as chaining,
    and given that the appellant's family would be unlikely to come forward
    to assist him, the judge found  that  the  appellant's  deportation  to
    Nigeria would breach his Article 3 rights  and  that  there  were  very
    compelling circumstances for the purposes of Article 8.

 8. Permission was sought by the respondent to appeal that decision to  the
    Upper Tribunal on the following grounds: that the judge's findings  did
    not go so far as to find that the appellant's  deportation  to  Nigeria
    would result in inhuman or degrading treatment such as  to  breach  his
    Article 3 rights; that the judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  for
    not accepting the appellant's evidence that he had a partner  in  Lagos
    and thus that he would have supervision to  ensure  that  he  took  his
    medication; that the judge had failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    finding that none of the appellant's family members in Nigeria would be
    prepared to assist him; and that the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons  for  finding  that  the  appellant's  deportation   would   be
    disproportionate and in breach of Article 8.

 9. Permission was granted on 20 May 2020 on  the  basis  that,  since  the
    judge's decision, the  law  had  been  clarified  in  AM  (Zimbabwe)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] UKSC 17.  The  matter
    then came before me to decide if the judge had erred in law.

10. Both parties made submissions.  Mr  Jarvis  accepted  that  there  were
    inaccuracies in the grounds and that he was  only  pursuing  the  third
    ground in relation to the appellant's evidence about having  a  partner
    in Lagos. Mr Jarvis submitted that the judge had  failed  to  give  any
    proper reasons for rejecting the appellant's oral evidence about having
    a partner, particularly given that the appellant was  in  remission  at
    that time and that there was no suggestion that he was not fit to  give
    evidence. The judge's finding in that respect  was  therefore  unlawful
    and, furthermore, it gave rise  to  a  material  error  of  law  as  it
    impacted on his findings on Article 3 and 8 since there was evidence of
    there being someone available in Nigeria to administer  his  medication
    and prevent him from relapsing.

11. Mr Ball submitted that that was not material because  the  judge  found
    that the appellant was at risk of being shackled because of his  mental
    health problems in any event. Further, the judge was entitled to  treat
    with caution  the  appellant's  evidence  about  having  a  partner  in
    Nigeria, given that that was something he had never mentioned before to
    anyone and had taken everyone by surprise during the hearing  and  that
    his condition was exacerbated  by  stress,  and  also  considering  his
    forensic history of sexual advances on women and his fixation on women.
    Mr Ball referred to  various  parts  of  the  evidence,  including  the
    account given by the appellant to the Consultant Forensic  Psychiatrist
    Dr Low, where the appellant had said that he had no relationships.  The
    judge  was  simply  saying  that  he  did  not  accord  weight  to  the
    appellant's evidence about a relationship and he  was  entitled  to  do
    that. Mr Ball submitted that the judge  did  not  err  in  law  in  his
    findings on Article 3 or 8.

12. Mr Jarvis, in response, submitted that the judge's finding of the  risk
    of chaining was based on the  appellant  relapsing  and  was  therefore
    linked to his  finding  about  support  available  in  Nigeria  from  a
    partner. He otherwise reiterated the points previously made.

Discussion and Findings

13. Mr Jarvis helpfully conceded that the grounds,  other  than  ground  3,
    were misconceived, since the judge  had  plainly  considered  and  made
    reasoned findings on the matters which were asserted that he had failed
    to consider. The only ground of challenge was therefore ground 3  which
    related to the evidence of a partner in Lagos.

14. I agree with Mr Jarvis that, contrary to  Mr  Ball's  submission,  that
    matter was a material one since the judge was less likely to have found
    that the appellant was at risk of being subjected to ill-treatment  and
    chaining if he had found that there was support available to him from a
    partner in Nigeria who would be able to check that he  was  taking  his
    medication and thus prevent a relapse in his mental  health  condition.
    However, I do not agree with Mr Jarvis that the judge erred in  law  by
    making the finding that  he  did  about  the  appellant's  relationship
    status.

15. As Mr Ball submitted Judge Shaerf, at [45] of his decision, was  making
    a finding as to the weight to be given to the appellant's new  evidence
    at the hearing in the light of the previous evidence.  Clearly,  weight
    was a matter for the judge. Further, Judge Shaerf's decision to  prefer
    the appellant's previous evidence was not devoid of any  reasoning  and
    neither was it inconsistent with the various reports and other evidence
    in the appeal bundle, none of which made any reference to  any  ongoing
    relationship in Nigeria, despite making references to his circumstances
    in and ties to Nigeria. Indeed, the report from  Dr  Low  recorded  the
    appellant's account of the relationship he had had  in  Nigeria  having
    ended when he moved to the UK. That account, recorded at page 32 of the
    appeal bundle, was taken from a previous  psychology  report  dated  26
    September 2017.  The  same  account  appeared  in  the  report  of  the
    appellant's forensic social worker, Mr Curtis, at page 10 of the appeal
    bundle. Both reports were prepared shortly before  the  hearing  before
    Judge Shaerf and it is clear that both Dr Low and Mr Curtis had  had  a
    significant amount of involvement with the appellant, the former having
    previously interviewed him on a fortnightly basis as the  clinician  in
    charge of his care since August 2019 and the latter having worked  with
    him since 2016, and both were unaware of any  ongoing  relationship  in
    Nigeria. Neither did the  appellant's  own  statement  for  the  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal make  any  reference  to  a  partner  in
    Nigeria. In  light  of  all  that  evidence  which  was  based  upon  a
    continuous assessment of the appellant by professionals working closely
    with him, and considering the appellant's own prior evidence, it  seems
    to me that Judge Shaerf was perfectly entitled  to  reject  a  new  and
    material claim made at the last minute at the hearing when  considering
    the appellant's mental health condition and the stress of  giving  live
    evidence at a hearing.

16. Accordingly, there was no failure on the part  of  the  judge  to  give
    adequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's  evidence  of  having  a
    partner in Lagos  and  neither  was  such  a  finding  unreasonable  or
    inconsistent with the overall circumstances. It was  entirely  open  to
    the judge, on the evidence before him and for  the  reasons  fully  and
    properly given, to find that the appellant would have no support system
    in Nigeria and would therefore risk relapsing into  a  psychotic  state
    and being subjected to chaining in a mental health facility. The  judge
    was fully entitled to conclude that the high threshold for an Article 3
    claim had been met and to conclude that the appellant's deportation was
    not a  proportionate  response.  The  judge's  decision  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal was accordingly one which was open  to  him  on  the
    evidence available, was in accordance with the  relevant  caselaw,  and
    did not involve any errors of law.



DECISION

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    an error on a point of law requiring the decision to be set aside.  The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  allow  the  appellant's  appeal
    therefore stands.


Signed   S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Date: 30 October 2020
