
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
HU/24530/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1st December 2017                       |On 11th January 2018           |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                          mr mohidin sharif hussein
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia.  His date of birth  is  recorded
    as 1st January 1958.  On 26 April 2016,  he  made  an  application  for
    leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  family  and  private  life
    grounds.  Part of the Appellant's claim related to his contention  that
    he would be at risk of serious harm were he to be returned to  Somalia.
    The Appellant understood and continues to understand that  that  aspect
    of his claim is something which falls  outside  of  this  appeal.   The
    Secretary of State has informed the Appellant that if he wishes her  to
    consider an asylum claim he should make it in the  proper  form.   This
    matter is confined to human rights.  In the event the  application  was
    refused. The date of decision was 1st October 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed.  His appeal was  heard  on  16  December  2016,
    before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  McIntosh.   Judge  McIntosh
    dismissed the appeal.  Two  findings  were  made.   One  was  that  the
    Appellant had not proved that MMH was in fact the son of the  Appellant
    and even if he were, it had not been established that there was regular
    contact sufficient to engage Article 8.   Private  life  considerations
    were  given  to  the  appeal  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE. The  judge  was  unable  to  identify
    sufficient reason to allow  the  appeal  having  regard  to  the  wider
    application.

 3. Not content with that decision  by  Notice  dated  9th  July  2017  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 4. On 25th July 2017  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Kelly  granted
    permission identifying as an arguable basis  for  pursuing  the  appeal
    that there was no sufficient examination of the best interests  of  the
    child.

 5. My preliminary view of this matter was that there was no error  because
    there was no  need  for  the  judge  to  look  to  the  nature  of  the
    relationship with a person whom the judge had found was  not  the  son.
    Nor was there need to look at the nature of the relationship which  was
    at least tenuous.

 6. However, in the course of the proceedings it became  clear  that  there
    was another basis upon which it might be said that the judge had fallen
    into error.  The  refusal  makes  reference  to  the  appellant  having
    applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the parent of HMA.
     The person with that name is not, and it has never been claimed to be,
    the son of the Appellant.  He is a nephew of the  Appellant's  ex-wife.
    It is of note that at paragraph 4  of  Judge  McIntosh's  decision  and
    reasons reference is made to HMA  and  it  is  also  of  note  that  at
    paragraph 12 reference is made to MMH.

 7. Mr Melvin sought to persuade me that the  refusal  letter  reflected  a
    typographical error but that it was not material.  I do not agree.   In
    my view, there has been some confusion both by the Secretary  of  State
    and possibly by the judge.  It is not possible to know in my  judgement
    from reading the decision as a whole the extent to which,  if  at  all,
    the confusion over the names led the judge to come to the view that MMH
    had not been established to be the son of the Appellant; all  the  more
    so when paternity did not appear to have  been  put  in  issue  in  the
    refusal.  (Though the refusal of course  was  focussing  on  HMA).   In
    those circumstances, there is a material error of law and I  set  aside
    the decision.

 8. Having set aside the decision I have to decide  whether  to  remit  the
    case or remake it.  I was able  to  deal  with  matters  today  as  the
    Appellant was here together with his witness  in  accordance  with  the
    directions.  The Appellant recognised that  the  basis  of  the  appeal
    focussed on the wider application  of  Article  8  (human  rights  with
    respect to family and private life).  He accepted and understood why he
    did not meet the Immigration Rules and understood that  it  was,  as  I
    have already said, the wider application of Article 8 that fell  to  be
    considered.

 9. The Appellant told me that he had a parental relationship with his son,
    that he visited him at his home, that is to say his child's  home,  and
    the reason why  the  child  lived  with  his  mother  was  because  the
    Appellant had another eight children and that as MMH was the only child
    of his mother it was only fair that the  child  should  live  with  his
    mother.  But the Appellant would frequently see his son  and  he  takes
    him to sporting activities.  His son would sometimes call him  when  he
    wants something and the Appellant would  attend  parents'  evenings  at
    school.  Although the relationship has broken  down  with  the  child's
    mother, still the Appellant would  from  time  to  time  see  her  when
    collecting his son from his house.  The  sort  of  activities  that  he
    would take his son to would be football training, organised I was  told
    by a person within the Somali community.

10. I was told that the man who was going to give evidence in  due  course,
    and who did, was the Appellant's neighbour whom he has known for  three
    or four years.  However, I heard from that "neighbour", Kadar  Maxammad
    Clai who in fact lives in [                  ] but the  relationship  I
    was told between Mr Clai and the Appellant was that they  were  distant
    relations.   Mr  Clai  lives  some  twenty  minutes'  drive  from   the
    Appellant, hardly a neighbour.  The Appellant had told me that his  son
    did not stay overnight at his place.  Mr Clai told me that he did.

11. I have to decide this case by applying the civil standard  (balance  of
    probabilities), the burden of proof being on the Appellant to establish
    his case.  If the facts were established it is  for  the  Secretary  of
    State to justify an interference in any rights established.

12. I found the Appellant and his witness to be unreliable witnesses.   Not
    only was Mr Kadar clearly not the Appellant's  neighbour,  and  clearly
    there was a conflict over whether  the  son  stayed  overnight  at  his
    father's home, there was a significance absence of the sort of evidence
    that one might have expected in an appeal such as this.  There  was  no
    letter from the son.  There was no  letter  from  the  child's  school,
    notwithstanding the fact that the Appellant told me he went to parents'
    evenings.  Indeed, there were no sufficient documents from  the  school
    at all.  One might have expected a letter or some  correspondence  from
    the boy's mother if she thought that it was important for the Appellant
    to play a part in the boy's life.  It is not as if there was said to be
    no contact between the Appellant and the  mother.   The  evidence  with
    respect to the sort of activities which the Appellant took his  son  to
    was vague and there was no letter or any sufficient  evidence  provided
    from the person whom I was told provided the  training.   I  have  seen
    some photographs of the Appellant with a boy.  I cannot tell from those
    photographs whether that boy is in fact HMA or MMH.  I  note  that  the
    nephew HMA is 12, only three years older than the Appellant's son.

13. Although there is a presumption in Article 8 cases  of  a  family  life
    between a parent and child the evidence  here  is  so  discrepant,  the
    witnesses so unreliable, the evidence that I was expected to receive so
    lacking, that the Appellant does not establish his case  and  I  should
    say for the avoidance of doubt that I have considered the  evidence  of
    Mr Omar and I have read the letter but he did not attend to  questioned
    but frankly set against the other evidence that I have heard  I  attach
    little weight to it.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  In the re-making of the appeal the appeal  is  dismissed.
The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.

Signed                              Date: 9 January 2018






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker



