
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24785/2018(P)

                                                            HU/24786/2018(P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided Under Rule 34 (P)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 October 2020                   |On 02 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                 JANEIL [G]

                                 JANSEN [G]

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                       For the ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent



                            DECISION AND REASONS


         Background

      1. On 2 October 2020 I set aside the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge M A Khan promulgated on 3 December 2019 dismissing the  entry
         clearance appeals of these two brothers who sought  to  join  their
         mother  for  settlement  on  sole   responsibility   grounds.   The
         Tribunal's  finding  that  there  were  no  serious  or  compelling
         circumstances  which  would  make  their  exclusion  from  the   UK
         undesirable was upheld due to the lack of  any  challenge  to  that
         part of the decision. A copy of my decision is attached as Annex A.
         It provides full reasons for why I set aside Judge Khan's decision.



      2. In setting aside, the decision on sole responsibility  and  article
         8, I expressed the view that I was minded to proceed to re-make the
         decision on the papers as the evidence was largely unchallenged and
         it was sufficient  to enable a fresh decision to be  made.  I  also
         indicated that I was minded to allow  the  joint  appeals.  As  the
         parties would not, however, have had any opportunity  to  make  any
         submissions  on  the  merits  of  the  appeals  had   I   proceeded
         immediately to make such a decision, I offered them 14 days to  put
         forward any objections they might have to the  proposed  course  of
         action and to make any submissions on the appeals.

      3. My decision was promulgated on 8 October 2020 and the 14-day period
         expired on  22  October  2020.  A  response  from  the  appellants'
         representatives agreeing with my provisional view was  received  on
         16 October 2020. As of today, I am not aware of any response having
         been received from the respondent. Having satisfied myself that the
         determination and included directions had been properly  served  on
         the respondent on 8 October 2020, I  now  proceed  to  re-make  the
         decision.

         Findings and reasons

      4. I have considered all the evidence before me.  I  apply  the  civil
         standard of proof. The burden is on  the  appellants  to  make  out
         their case as at the present date.

      5. I am satisfied that the evidence shows that the sponsor  meets  the
         TD Yemen test; that is to say, that she has had "continuing control
         and  direction  over  the  child's  upbringing"  and/or  has   been
         responsible for the making of "all the important decisions  in  the
         child's life". It is accepted that the appellants have been  living
         with their maternal grandmother since the sponsor's departure  from
         the Philippines, other than her visit back. However, there has been
         no challenge to the evidence  that  it  was  always  the  sponsor's
         intention to send for her children as soon as she was able to do so
         and that the arrangement, in that sense, was viewed as a  temporary
         measure. Nor has there been any challenge to the  evidence  in  the
         statements prepared by the sponsor, her mother  and  the  sponsor's
         husband that the sponsor had always been aware that her mother  was
         ageing and that her ability to provide care  would  be  limited  in
         time due to that fact.

      6. The claim that the appellants' father had packed up  and  left  the
         family home several years ago was made by the sponsor,  her  mother
         and the appellants in their statements. The respondent's  criticism
         of this claim was limited to questioning why the  sponsor  had  not
         investigated the reasons for his departure. It  was  not  suggested
         that he had not left and nor was it maintained that the  appellants
         or their grandmother had lied about  this  in  their  evidence.  I,
         therefore, find that the appellants have not had any  contact  with
         their father since he left them in 2009 and that he has  not  since
         played any role in their lives.

      7. Ample evidence of correspondence between  the  appellants  and  the
         sponsor  has  been  adduced.  The   appellants'   bundle   contains
         photographs of the appellants and the sponsor, substantial evidence
         of WhatsApp/social media  communication  and  statements  from  the
         appellants  testifying  to  regular  contact.  The   sponsor   also
         testified that she contacted the appellants in some form  or  other
         on a daily basis and this  is  confirmed  by  her  husband  in  his
         statement. Further evidence of contact is contained in the December
         2018 bundle. None of this evidence has been challenged.

      8. There are also letters from the school and college attended by  the
         appellants which confirm that the sponsor is supporting  them.  The
         letter from Sorsogon National High School confirms that the sponsor
         is the main contact person in case of emergency and  other  matters
         that may arise and that she regularly monitors her  son's  progress
         in school.

      9. I have also seen evidence from the appellants' GP  confirming  that
         the sponsor is the main contact person for the appellants.

     10. It has not  been  disputed  that  the  appellants  are  financially
         supported by the sponsor.

     11. I have also seen  medical  evidence  relating  to  the  appellants'
         grandmother  confirming   numerous   medical   problems   including
         osteoarthritis, severe lumbar spondylosis  and  other  degenerative
         issues which have increased in severity with  age.  There  is  also
         confirmation that she had a total hip replacement. There  has  been
         no suggestion from the respondent that this evidence is unreliable.



     12. In my view, the  evidence  shows  that  despite  her  absence,  the
         sponsor has maintained regular contact with her children, that  she
         has retained control and direction for them and that she is the one
         who makes the important  decisions in their lives  as  the  various
         examples given of decision making in her statements show.

     13. Whilst the appellants have resided with  their  grandmother  it  is
         settled by case law that due to the geographical separation,  there
         will inevitably be others in the country of origin who are required
         to 'look after' the children and who will have some responsibility;
         'sole responsibility' cannot, therefore, sensibly be interpreted in
         an absolute or literal way.  It  follows  that  a  parent  who  has
         settled in the UK may retain sole responsibility for a  child  even
         where the day-to-day care  or  responsibility  for  that  child  is
         undertaken by a relative abroad. In Emmanuel v SSHD [1972]  Imm  AR
         69, it was held that financial support and the retention of a close
         interest in, and affection for, the child were  important  matters.
         The evidence in the  present  case  that  the  sponsor  financially
         supported the appellants and that  she  retained  interest  in  and
         affection for the appellants is indisputable.

     14. I am satisfied, for these reasons, that  the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration  Rules   have   been   met   with   respect   to   sole
         responsibility. That is a relevant consideration for the article  8
         assessment which I undertake following the five Razgar steps:

             Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
             authority with  the  exercise  of  the  applicant's  right  to
             respect for his private or (as the case may be) family life?

             If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
             gravity as potentially to engage the operation of article 8?

             If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

             If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society
             in the interests of national security, public  safety  or  the
             economic well-being of the  country,  for  the  prevention  of
             disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,  or
             for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others?

             If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
             public end sought to be achieved?

     15. Clearly there  is  family  life  between  the  appellants  and  the
         sponsor. This has continued throughout  the  period  she  has  been
         living in the UK and is  evidenced  by  substantial  correspondence
         between them and by way of their statements. The decision to refuse
         them permission  to  join  their  mother  does  potentially  engage
         article 8 but such interference is in accordance with the  law  and
         has a legitimate public aim. However, I  find  that  it  is  not  a
         proportionate interference for the following reasons.

     16. As a starting point the best interests of the appellants is to live
         with both or at least one of their parents. This has not  been  the
         case since 2009 when their father left them but their mother is now
         in a position to sponsor their applications for entry clearance and
         they have met the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.  In  the
         absence of any countervailing factors put forward, therefore, there
         does not seem to me to be any legitimate reason to  prohibit  their
         entry. The sponsor has lived here for many years  and  has  made  a
         life for herself here with her husband, a British national.  Whilst
         it may have been reasonable to expect her to return  to  live  with
         her children in the Philippines if she had been single, it would be
         unreasonable to expect her to do so as  a  married  woman  as  this
         would involve leaving behind her husband. His reasons for not being
         able to relocate to a country that is alien to him are set  out  in
         his witness statement and are unchallenged.   I find that it  would
         not be reasonable to expect  him  to  abandon  his  life  here  and
         accompany the appellant to the Philippines.




         Decision

     17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  was  set  aside  with  the
         exception of the preserved finding on the  'exclusion  undesirable'
         issue. I now re-make the decision and allow the appeals on  article
         8 grounds.

         Anonymity

     18. No order for anonymity has been sought at any stage and  I  see  no
         reason to make one.


         Signed


         R. Keki?
         Upper Tribunal Judge


         Date: 27 October 2020





Annex A

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/24785/2018(P)

                                                            HU/24786/2018(P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 October 2020                    |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                 JANEIL [G]

                                 JANSEN [G]

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                       For the ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent



Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     AJA Solicitors. No submissions received.

For the respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


         Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal to the appellants by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher  on  6
         April 2020 against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge M
         A Khan promulgated on  3  December  2019  following  a  hearing  at
         Harmondsworth on 14 November 2019.

      2. The appellants are nationals of the Philippines  born  respectively
         on 21 September 2000 and 19 December 2003. They appeal against  the
         decision of the respondent on  9  November  2019  to  refuse  their
         applications for entry clearance to join their mother, the sponsor,
         for settlement.

      3. The respondent refused the applications because it was not accepted
         that the sponsor  had  sole  responsibility  for  the  welfare  and
         upbringing of the appellants. The ECO noted that the appellants had
         been living with other relatives since the sponsor's departure  and
         that at best the evidence suggested a shared responsibility between
         the sponsor and other family members. Although it was claimed  that
         the appellants' grandmother was no longer able to care for them due
         to health conditions, no evidence of ill-health had  been  adduced.
         It was considered that the decision caused no further  interference
         with family life than  had  existed  since  the  sponsor  left  the
         Philippines and that it merely maintained the status  quo.  It  was
         not  accepted  that  there   were   any   serious   or   compelling
         circumstances surrounding the  application  which  would  make  the
         appellants' exclusion from the  UK  undesirable.  The  applications
         were also considered under article 8 on the basis that the decision
         could or would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences  for  the
         appellants and their family. Their best interests were  considered.
         However, it was found that there was no evidence of any exceptional
         circumstances and the applications were therefore refused.

      4.  Judge  Khan,  in  determining  the  appeals,  accepted  that   the
         appellants had been financially supported by the sponsor but  found
         that they lived with their grandmother who had  continued  to  care
         for them over the last ten years despite any  health  issues,  that
         the  evidence  of  communication  between  the  sponsor   and   the
         appellants was irregular and that the sponsor's evidence  over  the
         claim that the appellants had been abandoned by  their  father  was
         vague. He took account of TD Yemen [2006]  UKAIT  00049  but  found
         that the sole responsibility rules had not been met. He also  found
         that there was no breach of article 8.

      5. The appellants  successfully  sought  permission  to  appeal.  They
         argued: (i) that the judge had failed  to  adequately  assess  sole
         responsibility or adequately reason  the  final  conclusions;  (ii)
         that the fact that  day  to  day  responsibility  was  provided  by
         someone else did not mean  that  the  sponsor  did  not  have  sole
         responsibility as per TD Yemen;  (iii)  that  there  was  no  clear
         finding  as  to  what  role,  if  any,  the  judge  considered  the
         appellants' father played in their lives; (iv) that there  were  no
         clear findings of fact on whom it is said had direction and control
         of the appellants' lives;  and  (v)  that  the  judge  appeared  to
         conflate living in the care of an adult with sole responsibility.

         Covid-19 crisis: preliminary matters

      6. The matter would ordinarily have then been listed for a hearing but
         due to the Covid-19 pandemic and need to take  precautions  against
         its spread, this could not happen and instead directions were  sent
         to the parties on 9 July 2020.  They  were  asked  to  present  any
         objections to the matter being dealt with on the papers and to make
         any further submissions on the error of law  issue  within  certain
         time limits.

      7. The Tribunal has received written submissions from  the  respondent
         dated 22  July  2020.  No  response  has  been  received  from  the
         appellants'  representatives.  I  now  consider   whether   it   is
         appropriate to determine the matter on the papers.

      8. In doing  so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn  v  The
         Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance  Note  No  1
         2020: Arrangements during  the  Covid-19  pandemic  (PGN)  and  the
         Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I have regard to
         the overriding objective which is defined in rule 2 of the Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable the Upper
         Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To this end I  have
         considered that dealing with a case  fairly  and  justly  includes:
         dealing with it in ways that are proportionate to the importance of
         the case, the complexity of the issues, etc;  avoiding  unnecessary
         formality and seeking flexibility in the proceedings; ensuring,  so
         far as practicable, that the parties are able to participate  fully
         in the proceedings;  using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay, so far as compatible with
         proper consideration of the issues (Rule 2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).

      9. I have had regard to the respondent's submissions and  to  all  the
         evidence before me before deciding how to proceed. I note from  the
         respondent's submissions that she was informed by  the  appellants'
         representatives that they intended only to rely on the grounds  for
         permission to appeal and that no other submission would be made.  I
         am satisfied, from that indication and from the fact that the  file
         shows  that  the   directions   were   properly   served   on   the
         representatives and on the appellants  themselves  that  they  were
         aware of the opportunity  they  had  to  put  forward  any  further
         submissions. I take the view that a full account of the  facts  are
         set out in the papers, that  the  arguments  for  and  against  the
         appellants have been clearly set out and  that  the  issues  to  be
         decided are uncomplicated. There are no matters  arising  from  the
         papers which would require clarification and  so  an  oral  hearing
         would not be  needed  for  that  purpose.  I  have  regard  to  the
         importance of the matter to the  appellants  and  consider  that  a
         speedy determination of this matter  is  in  their  best  interests
         given the time that has already  lapsed  since  their  applications
         were made. I  am  satisfied  that  neither  party  has  raised  any
         objection to the matter being determined  on  the  papers  although
         they have had ample opportunity to do so. I am satisfied that I  am
         able to fairly and justly deal with this matter in that way and now
         proceed to do so.

         Submissions

     10.  Mr  Tan  in  his  submissions  for  the  respondent  opposes   the
         appellants' appeals. He submits that the grounds do  not  challenge
         the finding of the judge that there were no serious  or  compelling
         family or other considerations which  made  the  exclusion  of  the
         appellants from the UK undesirable. The sole issue under  challenge
         was that of sole responsibility and it is submitted that the  judge
         correctly directed himself to TD Yemen and the  guidance  contained
         therein. It is submitted that the findings at 24-31 of the  judge's
         determination must be read as  a  whole  since  they  set  out  the
         context in which the conclusions were reached. It is submitted that
         had the judge misdirected  himself  to  sole  responsibility  being
         simply a matter of living in the care of a particular adult,  given
         that it was not in dispute that the appellants had been living with
         their grandmother since the sponsor's departure,  that  would  have
         been the end of the matter.

     11. It is  submitted  that  instead,  the  judge  considered  and  made
         findings on further issues such as the fact that  the  sponsor  had
         left the Philippines in 2008 and had not returned  until  2017  and
         that even then that had not been for the sake of the appellants but
         for immigration reasons. The judge rejected the assertion that  the
         care of the grandmother provided to the appellants was a  temporary
         measure given that it had been in place for 10 years. He noted that
         there was limited evidence of contact between the sponsor  and  the
         appellants, that it was not continuous and that there were  lengthy
         gaps in  communication.  The  judge  considered  the  letters  from
         educational institutions but noted that there was nothing  detailed
         as to the extent of support provided by  the  sponsor.  Whilst  the
         judge accepted that the sponsor had been financially supporting the
         appellants,  financial  support  was  not  determinative  of   sole
         responsibility. The judge also considered the medical evidence  and
         found that despite some health issues, the appellants'  grandmother
         had continue to care for them with the assistance of  the  extended
         family.

     12. It is submitted that the grounds do not argue that the judge failed
         to consider certain aspects of the evidence but rather focus  on  a
         finding that the sponsor's  evidence  was  vague  and  unconvincing
         regarding the abandonment of the appellants by their father. It  is
         submitted that the grounds are misguided in arguing that the  judge
         should have made a finding on whether the father had sole or  joint
         responsibility because the judge was required  only  to  accept  or
         reject the claim of abandonment. It is submitted that it  was  open
         to the judge to find that the sponsor had failed to explain why she
         had made no enquiries as to why the father had left and why he  had
         ceased communication with the appellants.

     13. It is submitted that the judge had not conflated the test  of  sole
         responsibility as argued in the grounds. He had  accepted  this  as
         the starting point  but  beyond  the  accepted  evidence  that  the
         grandmother was responsible for the daily care of  the  appellants,
         the burden of proof was  on  the  sponsor  and  the  appellants  to
         demonstrate that  the  sponsor  held  sole  responsibility.  It  is
         submitted that the judge was entitled to conclude that the evidence
         was not indicative of the sponsor having control and direction  and
         making the important decisions in the lives of the  appellants.  It
         is submitted that the grounds are  a  mere  disagreement  with  the
         conclusions of the judge.

         Discussion and conclusions

     14. I have considered all the evidence, the determination, the  grounds
         for permission and the respondent's submissions. I  would  note  at
         this stage that the respondent has failed to fulfil her duty to the
         Tribunal and the appellants to provide an appeals bundle. The  only
         evidence of the applications and the documents submitted in support
         has been prepared by the sponsor and is contained in a bundle dated
         8 December 2018. That is a separate bundle  to  that  prepared  and
         submitted for the hearing. It will be clear from what I  say  below
         that the judge does  not  have  appeared  to  have  considered  the
         documents in the December 2018 bundle.

     15. I am satisfied  for  the  reasons  given  below  that  the  judge's
         determination is rendered unsustainable due to errors  of  law.  In
         that context, I am satisfied that  the  appellants  have  not  been
         prejudiced by the absence of submissions by  their  representatives
         to the Tribunal's directions although it would have been  courteous
         for a reply to have been sent.

     16. I note that as pointed out  by  Mr  Tan  the  appellants  have  not
         challenged  the  judge's  finding  that  here  are  no  serious  or
         compelling family or other conclusions which make  their  exclusion
         from the UK undesirable. Nor does it appear that the  appeals  were
         argued on that basis. That finding, therefore, stands.

     17. I consider first the findings of  the  judge  at  paragraphs  24-31
         which Mr Tan argued were sufficient to justify the conclusion  that
         the sole responsibility rules had not been met. It would have  been
         preferable had the judge commenced his findings with  consideration
         of TD and the very helpful guidance it provides rather than leaving
         that to the end as he did as that may have better focused his  mind
         to the relevant test and assisted him in his consideration  of  the
         issues he was required to determine. It is helpful here to set  out
         that guidance and the approach that should be taken when  assessing
         evidence on sole responsibility cases.

     18. At paragraph 52 of TD, the Upper Tribunal advised that questions of
         "sole  responsibility"  under  the  immigration  rules  should   be
         approached in the following way:

               i. Who has "responsibility"  for  a  child's  upbringing  and
                  whether that responsibility is "sole" is a factual  matter
                  to be decided upon all the evidence.

              ii. The term "responsibility" in the immigration rules  should
                  not to be understood as a theoretical or legal  obligation
                  but rather as a practical one which, in each  case,  looks
                  to who in fact is exercising responsibility for the child.
                    That responsibility may have been for a  short  duration
                  in that the present  arrangements  may  have  begun  quite
                  recently.

             iii.  "Responsibility"  for  a  child's   upbringing   may   be
                  undertaken by individuals other than a child's parents and
                  may be shared between  different  individuals:  which  may
                  particularly arise where the  child  remains  in  its  own
                  country whilst  the  only  parent  involved  in  its  life
                  travels to and lives in the UK.

              iv. Wherever the parents are, if both parents are involved  in
                  the upbringing of the child, it will be  exceptional  that
                  one of them will have sole responsibility.

               v. If it is said that both are not involved  in  the  child's
                  upbringing, one of the indicators for that  will  be  that
                  the other has abandoned or abdicated  his  responsibility.
                  In such cases, it may well be justified to find that  that
                  parent no longer has responsibility for the child.

              vi. However, the issue of sole responsibility is  not  just  a
                  matter between the parents.  So even if there is only  one
                  parent involved in the child's upbringing, that parent may
                  not have sole responsibility.

             vii.   In  the  circumstances  likely  to   arise,   day-to-day
                  responsibility  (or  decision-making)  for   the   child's
                  welfare may necessarily be shared  with  others  (such  as
                  relatives  or  friends)  because   of   the   geographical
                  separation between the parent and child.

            viii. That, however, does not prevent  the  parent  having  sole
                  responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.

              ix. The test  is,  not  whether  anyone  else  has  day-to-day
                  responsibility, but  whether  the  parent  has  continuing
                  control and direction of the child's upbringing  including
                  making all the important decisions in  the  child's  life.
                  If not, responsibility is shared and so not "sole".

     19. The judge did, at paragraph 30, set  out  the  test  identified  at
         52(ix) above but he had already made his findings before  that  and
         they do not, unfortunately, show that he  had  this  test  in  mind
         because  nowhere  does  he  make  any  findings  as  to  who    had
         "continuing control and direction over the child's  upbringing"  or
         who was responsible for the making of "all the important  decisions
         in the child's life".  That was the crucial test  that  he  had  to
         apply and his determination fails to demonstrate any  fact  finding
         on those questions.

     20. The judge's first finding  is  that  the  arrangement  between  the
         sponsor and her mother to care for the appellants was not temporary
         because the appellants had been living with their  grandmother  for
         the last ten years (at 24). He finds that it is  not  "credible  or
         consistent" that  this  could  have  been  considered  a  temporary
         measure. Whilst it is correct that the appellants have been  living
         with  their  grandmother  for  a  lengthy  period,   this   finding
         completely disregards the unchallenged evidence that it was  always
         the sponsor's intention to send for her children as soon as she was
         able to do so and that it was in that sense  that  the  arrangement
         was said to be temporary. Moreover, the evidence indicates that the
         sponsor had always been aware that her mother was ageing  and  that
         her ability to provide care would be limited in time  due  to  that
         fact. This evidence is contained in the statements prepared by  the
         sponsor, her mother and the sponsor's  husband.  It  has  not  been
         taken into account when the judge made his finding.  Nor  is  there
         any clarification as to where the inconsistency the judge refers to
         lies.

     21. The second finding is that the sponsor did not return to visit  her
         children whilst she was studying here (at 25). That is not so  much
         a finding as a setting out of the  sponsor's  evidence.  The  judge
         does not then clarify what the significance of this is  as  far  as
         the sole responsibility issue is concerned. If he means to say that
         an absence of visits  during  this  period  demonstrated  that  the
         sponsor was not solely responsible for the  appellants,  he  should
         have said so and explained why such a conclusion was reached.

     22. At paragraph 26 the judge made his third point. This was  that  the
         sponsor's evidence was vague  as  to  her  ex-husband  leaving  the
         family  home  and  relinquishing   any   responsibility   for   the
         appellants. The judge does not explain what  was  vague  about  the
         evidence. The sponsor was in the UK when this  event  occurred  and
         she related what she was told by her mother. The appellants confirm
         in their statements that their father just packed up and  left  and
         there has been no finding that they were  not  telling  the  truth.
         Again, it is unclear what the judge means to say when he makes this
         point. If he was suggesting that the  appellants'  father  had  not
         really left the home, he should have made a clear finding as to why
         he did not accept the unchallenged evidence of the  appellants  who
         confirmed what their mother had said.  The sponsor  was  not  asked
         why she had not made enquires of her ex-husband. Had  this  been  a
         concern, the judge could have raised the matter with the sponsor at
         the hearing.

     23. At 27 the judge finds there is  limited  evidence  of  contact  and
         lengthy gaps in communication. No further details  are  given.  The
         judge does not specify where the gaps  are  or  why  he  finds  the
         evidence of contact is limited.  The  appellants'  bundle  contains
         photographs of the appellants and the sponsor, substantial evidence
         of WhatsApp/social media  communication  and  statements  from  the
         appellants  testifying  to  regular  contact.  The   sponsor   also
         testified that she contacted the appellants in some form  or  other
         on a daily basis and this  is  confirmed  by  her  husband  in  his
         statement. Further evidence of contact is contained in the December
         2018 bundle. The judge does not refer to any of this evidence.  Nor
         does he acknowledge that none of this evidence was challenged.

     24. At paragraph 28, the judge finds that the letters from  the  school
         and college confirm that the sponsor is supporting  the  appellants
         but that they give no details of the nature of the support. That is
         incorrect. The letter from Sorsogon National High School (at AB:26)
         clearly confirms that the sponsor is the  main  contact  person  in
         case of emergency and other matters that may  arise  and  that  she
         regularly monitors her son's progress in school.

     25. The judge accepts that the appellants are financially supported  by
         the sponsor (at 28).

     26. At paragraph 29 the judge states that  the  only  medical  evidence
         relating to the grandmother is at AB:24 and dates from April  2018.
         That is not correct. There is additional evidence in  the  December
         2018 bundle of documents which the judge has not considered.  There
         is a medical certificate dated 27 November 2018 certifying that due
         to osteoarthritis, a total hip  replacement[1]  and  severe  lumbar
         spondylosis,  the  sponsor's  mother  cannot  take  care   of   the
         appellants.  Two  X-ray  results  of  28  November   2018   confirm
         degenerative changes and there  is  a  further  document  dated  26
         November 2018 which would appear to be a  prescription.  The  judge
         finds that despite her problems (which it can be seen have not been
         properly considered), the appellants' grandmother has continued  to
         care for them. No consideration has been given to the  severity  of
         the  grandmother's  condition  or  to  the  fact   that   she   has
         degenerative issues which have  increased  in  severity  with  age.
         Whilst the judge finds that other relatives have  helped,  he  does
         not clarify who these relatives are, what help has been provided or
         on what evidence that finding was based.

     27. The judge then cites TD and concludes that from the evidence it  is
         clear that  "the  appellants  have  lived  in  the  care  of  their
         grandmother and not the sponsor" (at 31). He finds, therefore, that
         the rules have not been met. Essentially on  that  basis,  he  then
         finds  that  for  the  purposes  of  article  8,   there   are   no
         "considerable or compelling and  compassionate  circumstances"  (at
         35),  that  the  appellants  have  "extended  family   members   in
         locality", have been studying and that it would  not  be  in  their
         best interests to "up route (sic) them from an environment to which
         they are use (sic) to"  (at  36).  Accordingly,  he  dismisses  the
         appeal.

     28. Despite Mr Tan's  able  submissions,  I  cannot  agree  that  these
         findings  come  anywhere  near  what  would  be  adequate  for   an
         acceptable consideration of sole responsibility  and  the  numerous
         typographical/grammatical errors raise concerns that the matter has
         not been given anxious scrutiny. There are no findings  on  whether
         the sponsor has  control  and  direction  for  the  appellants  and
         whether she makes the important decisions in their  lives  and,  if
         not, who does. There is no consideration of  the  various  examples
         given of decision making by the sponsor in her statements  (in  two
         bundles).  There  is  no  reference  to  the  evidence   from   the
         appellants' GP confirming that the  sponsor  is  the  main  contact
         person for the appellants. There  is  no  finding  on  whether  the
         sponsor and her husband were credible witnesses or on  whether  the
         appellants' evidence is accepted. The sponsor's  mother's  evidence
         has not been considered either. Even looking  at  all  the  judge's
         findings, his conclusions appear to be based on the fact  that  the
         appellants live with their grandmother and not the sponsor (at 31).
         There is no application of the guidance in TD and no  findings  are
         made on whether the crucial test identified by the  panel  in  that
         case has been met.  The findings are wholly  inadequate  given  the
         abundance of evidence and not what  an  appellant  is  entitled  to
         expect from the Tribunal.

     29. The appellants are right to complain that the judge  conflated  the
         issue of residence with sole responsibility. In  doing  so  he  has
         disregarded the fact, settled by decades of case law on the matter,
         that there will inevitably be others in the country of  origin  who
         de facto 'look after' the children.   Common  sense  dictates  that
         some responsibility must rest with the  carer  in  the  country  of
         origin; "sole responsibility" cannot, therefore, sensibly  be  read
         in an absolute or literal way. Thus, a parent who  has  settled  in
         the UK may retain sole responsibility for a child  even  where  the
         day-to-day care or responsibility for that child is undertaken by a
         relative abroad. In Emmanuel v SSHD [1972] Imm AR 69, it  was  held
         that financial support and the retention of a  close  interest  in,
         and affection for, the child  were  important  matters.  The  judge
         accepted that the sponsor financially supported the appellants and,
         although  he  did  not  accept  it,  the  evidence  points  to  the
         undisputed  retention  of  interest  in  and  affection   for   the
         appellants by the sponsor.

     30. Although not raised in the grounds, the judge's article 8  findings
         are similarly inadequate. There is no attempt to follow the  Razgar
         steps, no finding on whether  there  is  family  life  between  the
         appellants and the  sponsor  and  no  satisfactory  proportionality
         assessment. No reasons are given for why the judge considers it  is
         in the children's best interests to  keep  them  apart  from  their
         mother. No consideration is given  to  the  life  the  sponsor  has
         established here with her British husband and whether they would be
         able to relocate to the Philippines. These  are  all  matters  that
         were raised in the skeleton argument which does not appear to  have
         been considered either.

     31. The judge's  decision  is,  therefore,  set  aside  as  flawed  and
         unsustainable other than  the  fact  that  the  finding  under  the
         "exclusion undesirable" limb is maintained due  to  an  absence  of
         challenge.

     32. I have considered whether it is possible to re-make the decision on
         the basis of the available evidence  given  that  there  is  enough
         available to make a fresh decision, that much of  the  evidence  is
         unchallenged and that the facts are largely not  in  dispute.  Were
         this an oral hearing, I would have proceeded to do so. However,  as
         the parties will have no opportunity  to  make  any  submissions  I
         issue the directions below instead.




         Decision

     33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law  and
         it is set aside with the exception of the preserved  finding  above
         (at 31). The decision shall be re-made by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
         accordance with the directions below.

         Anonymity

     34. No order for anonymity has been sought at any stage and  I  see  no
         reason to make one.




         Directions

     35.  Given  the  unchallenged  nature  of  much  of   the   substantial
         documentary and oral evidence, and the fact that all  that  is  now
         required is the application of the law to the facts and evidence, I
         am minded to proceed to re-make this decision on the papers and  to
         allow the appeals.

     36. Should either party have any objections to that proposed course  of
         action they should forward those, with reasons,  by  email  to  the
         Upper Tribunal no later than 14 days after this  decision  is  sent
         out. Any agreement to my  provisional  view  should  also  be  sent
         within that period.

     37. Submissions filed in response to these directions  shall  be  filed
         and served as follows:

         (i)  On the Upper Tribunal, by or attached to an email  to  [email]
         using the Tribunal's reference number (found at the  top  of  these
         directions) as the subject line.

         (ii) On the Secretary of State, by or attached an email to [email];
         and

         (iii)     On  the  appellant,  in  the  absence  of  any   contrary
         instruction, by use of any address apparent  from  the  service  of
         this determination.




         Signed


         R. Keki?
         Upper Tribunal Judge


         Date: 2 October 2020


         -----------------------
[1] Not a hip removal as recorded by the judge



