
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/24342/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 August 2019                    |On 05 September 2019                 |


                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                             CHAVON TIMOTHY REID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr. N. Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal brought by the respondent. However, for convenience I
    will refer to the parties hereinafter as they appeared  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. The respondent appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Wilding ('the Judge'), issued  on  3  July  2019,  by  which  the
    appellant's appeal against a decision of the respondent to  refuse  him
    leave to remain in this country on human rights grounds and  to  deport
    him to Jamaica was allowed.

 3. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Buchanan granted permission to  appeal
    on all grounds.



Anonymity

 4. The Judge did not issue an anonymity order and no order was not  sought
    before me.



Background

 5. The appellant is a national of Jamaica and aged 28. He accompanied  his
    siblings to the United Kingdom in July  2000,  when  aged  9,  and  was
    granted 6 months leave to enter as a  visitor.  He  travelled  to  this
    country to meet relatives whilst his parents remained  in  Jamaica.  He
    was subsequently granted limited leave to remain from November 2004 and
    secured indefinite leave to remain in December 2006, when aged 15.

 6. He has several convictions commencing in October 2008 when he was  aged
    17. Save for the index offence, all were dealt  with  by  way  of  non-
    custodial sentences, including four convictions post-dating  the  index
    offence which were dealt with by way of fines.

 7. As to the index offence, he pleaded guilty to three counts  of  robbery
    at the Inner London Crown Court on 21 May 2012 and subsequently, on  27
    February 2013, he was sentenced by HHJ Darling to a custodial  sentence
    of 22 months. The sentencing judge noted that a knife was used  in  all
    three robberies, which were committed over a three-day  period  and  at
    night.

 8. Following  the  appellant's  conviction  for  the  index  offence,  the
    respondent  issued  a  deportation  order  on  14  October  2016   with
    accompanying reasons dated 17 October 2016.



Hearing before the FtT

 9. The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Taylor House on 5 June 2019
    and was allowed by way of a decision  dated  3  July  2019.  The  Judge
    observed that the sentence for the index offence was less than 4  years
    and he accepted that the appellant had been lawfully  present  in  this
    country for over half of his life. The Judge found that  the  appellant
    enjoyed the protection of Exception 1 established by section 117C(4) of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002  Act')  and
    paragraph 339A of the Immigration Rules.

10. The Judge observed at [26] of his decision:

         'Turning to  whether  the  appellant  is  socially  and  culturally
         integrated in the UK. He arrived here as an  8-year-old  (sic),  he
         attended school here. All his family are in the  UK.  He  has  done
         some work. He has undertaken a large number of  qualifications.  On
         the opposite side he has 10 convictions  for  16  offences  between
         2008 and 2016 and has an impending prosecution. Save for the  index
         offence his criminality is very  much  at  the  lower  end  of  the
         spectrum. The index offence was in 2012 and he was held  on  remand
         until trial. He was released upon sentencing given he  had  already
         served half of his sentence in May 2013. As a result, he  has  been
         out for over 6 years. It  is  noteworthy  that  this  is  the  only
         occasion he has received a sentence of imprisonment.  Additionally,
         his offences  subsequent  to  this  are  of  a  very  minor  level,
         resulting in fines and a restraining order.'

11. He found that the appellant was not currently in a  criminal  gang  nor
    had he ever been. The appellant  was  accepted  to  be  culturally  and
    socially integrated in this country.  As  for  the  existence  of  very
    significant obstacles to his integration  on  return  to  Jamaica,  the
    Judge noted the decision of the Court of Appeal in Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department v. Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813; [2016] 4  W.L.R.
    152 and reasoned at [37] - [40]:

         'The appellant came to the UK as an 8-year old (sic). He  has  been
         back to Jamaica once for his father's funeral in 2010.  He  has  no
         family that he knows of there from either parent. Whilst he  speaks
         English that is about all he has in terms of an ability to  get  by
         in Jamaica. He has never worked there. Never studied above  primary
         school. Never lived there on his own. I do not  consider  that  the
         appellant can properly be described as 'enough of  an  insider'  to
         understand how life  in  Jamaica  is  carried  on  with  sufficient
         ability and capacity to participate in it or be able to operate  on
         a day-to-day basis. He knows nothings of life there.

         I am not convinced that he would have the wherewithal to find a job
         or sustain himself when there. The lack of  awareness  of  Jamaican
         society and culture, with no past history there to  fall  back  on,
         and a lack of capacity to adapt and engage in society  there  leads
         me to conclude  that  the  appellant  will  have  very  significant
         obstacles to integration on return. His deportation there will,  in
         effect, be akin to exile given the lack of any familiarity,  links,
         contacts and ability to participate in society there.

         I have not taken this  decision  lightly.  I  have  considered  the
         significant  public  interest  in  the   deportation   of   foreign
         criminals. The appellant's criminal history is  not  insignificant,
         albeit it is at the lower  end.  If  there  was  a  requirement  to
         undertake a balancing exercise within the rules, then this decision
         may well have been different. However, nowhere in the  requirements
         of exception 1 of  the  2002  Act  or  in  paragraph  399A  of  the
         immigration rules is there a balancing exercise to  be  undertaken.
         The public interest is factored into  the  test  found  within  it.
         Albeit on a different provision I have considered the reasoning  of
         their Lordships in KO (Nigeria) in which  they  conclude  that  the
         question of unduly harsh does not carry with it an assessment which
         requires the public interest being factored into it. The same  must
         be said also for exception 1.

         I therefore conclude that the appellant  meets  the  provisions  of
         paragraph 399A of the immigration rules and s.117C(4) of  the  2002
         Act (as amended). The  appellant's  deportation  would  breach  his
         article 8 rights.'



Grounds of appeal

12. The respondent relies upon detailed grounds. As to section  117C(4)  of
    the 2002 Act, the respondent does not take issue with the finding as to
    lawful residence. However, complaints are made that the Judge erred  in
    law in considering whether the appellant  is  socially  and  culturally
    integrated in this country and that there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration in Jamaica.

13. In granting permission to appeal JFtT Buchanan observed:

         'The grounds of appeal [GOA] contend that the FTtJ  arguably  erred
         in law because (1) he did not give due  consideration  to  lack  of
         current  social  and  cultural  integration  and  (2)   there   are
         inadequate reasons given for concluding that there  would  be  very
         significant obstacles to integration.

         GOA1: The reference in GOA to the case of Binbuga arguably raises a
         requirement for this appellant to prove that he has regained social
         and  cultural  integration  following  upon  his  earlier  criminal
         conduct which led to the decision to deport. The observations  made
         by the FtTJ at [28] that 'criminality in of itself does not  render
         someone incapable of showing cultural and social integration'  does
         not specifically address the nature of  criminality  in  which  the
         appellant himself was concerned. He is noted to have 10 convictions
         for 16 offences between 2008 and 2016 and he has had minor offences
         post release which appear to relate to  drug  use.  The  conclusion
         that 'culturally and socially integrated' must be akin  to  whether
         an appellant has established a private life of  some  substance  in
         the UK is arguably a factor in 'the judge's failure to have  proper
         regard to  relevant  matters'  in  assessing  social  and  cultural
         integration as contended at GOA paragraph 7.'

14. No rule 24 response was filed by the appellant.



The hearing

15. The appellant attended the hearing unrepresented. He informed  me  that
    save for having received the notice of hearing, he lacked understanding
    as to the nature of the proceedings. He further informed me that he had
    not actually seen the decision and reasons of the  Judge  and  was  not
    aware that he had been successful on appeal, nor  that  the  respondent
    had been given permission to appeal the decision. He asked for time  to
    read the relevant paperwork and the matter was adjourned  to  later  in
    the morning so as to permit him time  to  read  relevant  papers.  Upon
    reading the papers, the appellant was content to proceed.

16. Mr. Bramble fairly observed as  to  ground  1  that  the  author,  when
    relying upon [57] - [58] of the judgment in  Binbuga  v.  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ  551  ought  properly  to
    have made reference to [60] so as to provide relevant  context  to  the
    Tribunal. Mr. Bramble continued  to  place  significant  reliance  upon
    ground 2, asserting that the Judge failed to sufficiently  engage  with
    the appellant's criminal actions.



Decision on error of law

17. Section 117C of the 2002 Act provides, inter alia:

         '(3)     In the case of a foreign criminal ('C') who has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four  years  or  more
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)      Exception 1 applies where -

             a)  C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,

             b)  C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

18. Paragraphs 398 and 399A of the Immigration Rules provide, inter alia:

         '398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
             contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the  Human
             Rights Convention, and

             ...

             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months; ...




         399A This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or  (c)  applies
             if -

             (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most
             of his life; and

             (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
             integration into the country to which it  is  proposed  he  is
             deported.'

19. I announced at the hearing that the respondent's appeal on ground 1 was
    dismissed, but a material error of law was established in  relation  to
    ground 2.

20. By way of ground  1,  the  respondent  complained  as  to  the  Judge's
    approach to the question of cultural and social integration.  Criticism
    is made as to the purported failure to give due  consideration  to  the
    appellant's  anti-social  behavior  and  lack  of  current  social  and
    cultural integration.

21. The Judge reasoned at [28] - [32]

         'As to the second point regarding his general  criminality  it  has
         not been explained to  me  why  or  indeed  how  the  appellant  is
         prohibited from showing cultural and social integration because  he
         has previous convictions. I accept that committing serious criminal
         offences which attract significant periods of imprisonment  do  not
         positively point towards social and cultural  integration,  however
         criminality in of itself  does  not  render  someone  incapable  of
         showing cultural and social integration.

         In this case there are positive factors going  towards  his  social
         and cultural integration. He has studied here,  including  doing  a
         series of courses in order to help him into employment. He has also
         found employment and was working for a period of time, however that
         was taken away from him when the respondent made  the  decision  to
         deport and he was thereafter no longer allowed to  work.  This  has
         been   somewhat    counterproductive.    The    respondent    quite
         understandably wants to remove  those  people  who  commit  serious
         crime and who have no right to be in the  UK.  This  appellant  had
         indefinite leave to remain, that leave continues to run up  to  the
         point that this appeal has concluded. By taking away his  right  to
         work the respondent has played a part in the vicious  circle  which
         the appellant finds  himself  in.  Despite  that  he  committed  no
         further  significant  offences  since  being  released.  His  minor
         offences post release all amount to issues surrounding his drug use
         which on his own evidence, which I accept, stems from  the  feeling
         of helplessness at being unable to work, contribute and play a part
         in his family home and wider society.

         His lawful status for the majority of his life is an  indicator  as
         to that integration. The fact he was schooled up to  senior  school
         level, and then has undertaken a series of  qualifications  goes  a
         long way to show  a  further  establishment  of  such  integration.
         Furthermore, the appellant has undertaken work here.

         Additionally, his family are all here. Whilst, as outlined above, I
         am not able to find he has a family life with them for the purposes
         of article 8, their presence here is a feature of  the  appellant's
         private life and goes to his social and cultural integration  given
         those ties here. I am also told they are all British, this was  not
         disputed, and given the appellant was refused nationality  in  2008
         on character grounds I accept that it is likely his family  members
         all have British nationality. This further goes towards the ties he
         has here and is of some, but not determinative, assistance  in  his
         own integration.

         Taking all of that into consideration I conclude that the appellant
         is culturally and socially integrated here.'

22. The respondent seeks by  way  of  her  grounds  to  establish  criminal
    behaviour as being enough in its own  right  to  establish  a  lack  of
    cultural and social integration, asserting  that  'at  [28]  the  Judge
    finds that the appellant's previous convictions do not  render  someone
    incapable of showing cultural  and  social  integration,  but  this  is
    contrary to the findings in Binbuga (at [57] - [58]).  The  grounds  of
    challenge do not accurately reflect the Court of Appeal's decision. The
    Court  of  Appeal  in  Binbuga  confirmed  that  social  and   cultural
    integration in this  country  connoted  integration  as  a  law-abiding
    citizen, the continuity of which might be broken by criminal  activity.
    I further observe that if the  respondent's  position  were  the  case,
    there would be no requirement for section 117C(4) of the 2002  Act  and
    paragraph 399A(b) of  the  Rules.  This  was  confirmed  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in in Tirabi (Deportation: "lawfully resident": s.5(1)) [2018]
    UKUT 00199 (IAC); [2018] Imm. A.R. 1180, at [15]:

         'Bearing in mind again that these  factors  are  being  taken  into
         account always in the context of the deportation of  a  person  who
         has committed an offence, it is inconceivable that  it  could  have
         been intended that, in any general  sense,  the  commission  of  an
         offence would demonstrate a lack of integration.'

23. The Judge was required to undertake a fact-sensitive consideration  and
    though some may view his finding as to cultural and social  integration
    generous, I  am  satisfied  that  it  was  a  decision  that  could  be
    reasonably made on the evidence provided. Whilst  the  Judge  may  have
    erred in transposing the appellant's subjective belief that he was  not
    entitled to work into a finding that the respondent had barred him from
    employment pending conclusion of his appeal, this finding of fact  does
    not  materially  undermine  the  careful  analysis  of  other  relevant
    factors. By way of her grounds, the respondent has strayed into seeking
    to rely upon factual  findings  made  in  other,  reported,  decisions,
    without appropriately observing that each decision is fact sensitive. I
    am satisfied that the Judge lawfully considered the test under  section
    117C(4)(b) of the 2002 Act and  paragraph  399A(b)  of  the  Rules  and
    provided cogent, sustainable reasons for  finding  that  the  appellant
    satisfied the requisite qualitative test and is socially and culturally
    integrated in this country: AM (Somalia) v. Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 774.

24. As to the Judge's consideration of  section  117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph
    399A(c), concerned with there being very significant obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration into Jamaica, the respondent complains by means
    of her grounds of appeal:

         'Insofar as the appellant facing 'very  significant  obstacles'  to
         integration if removed to Jamaica, the judge relies on paragraph 14
         of Secretary of State for the Home Department v. Kamara [2016] EWCA
         Civ 813, to find the appellant would not have the ability to get by
         in Jamaica. However,  this  has  been  done  without  reference  to
         Mwesezi v. Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2018]  EWCA
         Civ 1104 which explains that in the case of Kamara there were  very
         particular reasons why there would be very significant obstacles to
         integration in the proposed country of return - i.e. no ability  to
         communicate in day-to-day  life  and  in  the  presence  of  Ebola.
         Nothing like that can be said to  apply  to  [the  appellant],  who
         lived in Jamaica for the first 10 years of his life and  who  would
         have no problem with language.  He  has  transferrable  skills  and
         claims his family support him  financially  in  the  UK,  so  could
         continue to do so. The appellant comes from a Jamaican  family,  so
         contrary to the finding at [38], he would have  some  awareness  of
         its society and culture. While the judge has found  that  returning
         the appellant to  Jamaica  would  be  akin  to  exile,  Bossade  at
         paragraph 73-74 confirms  this  is  not  the  relevant  issue  when
         considering the terms of 339A(c) of the Rules.

         The respondent submits that nothing other than  the  usual  initial
         difficulties faced by a person moving to a new  country  have  been
         highlighted here, certainly nothing that can be said to  amount  to
         facing 'very significant obstacles' to re-integration.'

25. In Mwesezi, Sales LJ sought at [26] to explain the  factual  conclusion
    that he reached in Kamara but he did  not  resile  from  the  principle
    confirmed by that judgment, at [14],  namely  that  the  concept  of  a
    foreign criminal's 'integration'  into  the  country  to  which  it  is
    proposed that he be deported is a broad one and it is not  confined  to
    the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life while living  in  the
    other country.

26. I have sympathy for the Judge who sought to  address  this  issue  with
    very limited aid from the appellant,  who  was  unrepresented,  and  in
    circumstances where the appellant had asked his family  not  to  attend
    because he felt he was causing them problems. Care  was  taken  by  the
    Judge to address the requirement of section  117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph
    399A(c) on the evidence presented. However, I accept  the  respondent's
    contention that the Judge materially erred  at  [38]  when  failing  to
    weigh in his assessment the appellant's connection to Jamaican  culture
    whilst residing in this country. There was also  a  failure  to  engage
    with the appellant's return to Jamaica for his father's funeral. Whilst
    it could have been  open  to  the  Judge  to  reasonably  find  in  the
    appellant's favour upon considering these relevant factors,  it  cannot
    be said that such a decision would be the only one reasonably  open  to
    the Judge and so such failure was a material error  of  law,  infecting
    the assessment as to significant obstacles existing as  to  integration
    upon return to Jamaica.

27. In such circumstances, the respondent's appeal is successful on  ground
    2 alone.



Remittal to the First-tier Tribunal

28. At the hearing I directed that the matter be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal (IAC) sitting at Taylor House.

29. Mr. Bramble requested that the decision be remade by this Tribunal.  In
    considering whether to remake the decision or remit to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal I was mindful that under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the  Upper
    Tribunal Practice Statement of  25  September  2012  the  case  may  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is  satisfied
    that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case  to  be  put  to  and  considered  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal; or

    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2,  it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

30. I observe that the appellant was  not  represented  either  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal or this Tribunal. I  was  acutely  aware  that  the
    appellant had attended before me lacking a true understanding as to the
    nature of proceedings. He informed me that though he had previously not
    asked his family to attend the hearing before the FtT  because  he  was
    tired of hurting his family and creating problems for them, he did  not
    want to be deported to Jamaica and wished to  now  call  them  to  give
    evidence on his behalf. In such circumstances, because of the nature of
    judicial fact finding that is to be undertaken, I decided to remit this
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of decision

31. For all of these reasons, the decision discloses an error on a point of
    law, namely as to the application or otherwise of section 117C(4)(c) of
    the 2002 Act and paragraph 399A(c) of the Immigration Rules.

32. The Judge's decision promulgated on 3 July 2019 is set  aside  pursuant
    to section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007.
    All findings of fact are kept  save  for  those  made  in  relation  to
    whether there would be very significant obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    integration in Jamaica, the country to which it is proposed he is to be
    deported: section 117C(4)(c) and paragraph 339A(c).

33. This matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at  Taylor
    House to be heard before any judge other than JFtT Wilding.

34. No anonymity order is made


Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan                   Date: 2 September 2019
