
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  HU/25249/2016
                                                               HU/25248/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Birmingham    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 10th January 2019   On 12th February 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                            Mr. ZULIFIQUAR TALIB
                              Mrs NASIM AKHTER
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    Mr Z Jafferji, Counsel, instructed by SKR Legal
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellants have been given permission to appeal the decision of
       First-tier Tribunal Judge N Lodge who dismissed their appeal against
       the respondent's refusal to grant leave to remain on article 8
       grounds. To put the arguments advanced in context I set out the
       appellants immigration history.

    2. The 1st appellant was born on 10 July 1945 and is the husband of the
       2nd appellant, born on 1 January 1946. Both are nationals of
       Pakistan. They were admitted to the United Kingdom on the basis they
       were coming as visitors on 15 March 2003. They have remained since
       with their son, Mr Mohammed Imran Sohail and his family.

    3. Over the years they have made unsuccessful attempts to obtain
       permission to remain. Before their visit visa expired an in time
       application for indefinite leave to remain was made. The application
       was considered under paragraph 317.This concerned the requirements
       for indefinite leave to remain as the parent or other dependent
       relative of a person present and settled in the United Kingdom. At
       that stage they were under 65. To succeed they needed to show they
       were living in the most exceptional compassionate circumstances and
       there were no other close relatives in Pakistan who could provide
       financial support.

    4. Their appeal was heard by Mr P V Chamber, Adjudicator on  15  October
       2004.The appellants suggested they were  in  difficult  circumstances
       and reliant upon their son in  the  United  Kingdom.  They  had  been
       living for a long time in Saudi Arabia where the  1st  appellant  was
       employed. They said they  had  a  daughter  living  in  Pakistan  but
       suggested she  could  not  support  them  and  there  were  no  other
       relatives there who could. They also raised health issues.

    5. The judge heard evidence from the appellants. When  the  applications
       for the visit Visa were made it was stated that they were financially
       secure and independent. However, the claim subsequently made was that
       the substantial savings were necessary to discharge  debts.  The  1st
       appellant explained that in completing the application he  wanted  to
       give the impression he would not be a burden in the  United  Kingdom.
       He said he gave a totally false  impression  of  his  true  financial
       position which he described as due to a `misunderstanding'.

    6. The judge found they were not witnesses to the truth. The judge found
       they were not mainly financially dependent on their relatives here or
       that the most exceptional compassionate circumstances applied. The
       judge made the point that in applying to come as a visitor it was
       implied they would be able to return to their home country and
       sustain themselves. The judge did not accept the 1st appellant's
       claim of indebtedness and rejected his claim of a `misunderstanding'
       over his finances. The judge observed his position had shifted from
       being in the strong financial position when he made his visit Visa
       application to someone in poor financial circumstances. The judge did
       not accept his explanation of his changing fortunes. There was no
       medical evidence of disability.

    7. The judge did not accept they had no relatives in Pakistan who could
       assist. Again, the judge pointed out that in applying for a visit
       Visa there should have been a contemplation of return to their home
       country.

    8. Notwithstanding the dismissal of the appeal the appellant's remained
       in the country. In 11th June 2013 a further application for leave to
       remain was refused in July 2013.The decision was reconsidered in June
       2015 but not changed. They then appealed in July 2015 and were
       successful insofar as the matter was to be reconsidered. The
       respondent then reconsidered it and the refusal maintained. That
       decision taken on the 1 November 2016 was the subject matter of the
       proceedings before First-tier Tribunal Judge N Lodge.

    9. There was medical evidence that the 1st appellant suffered strokes in
       2013 and in 2016.These were described as posing a mild to moderate
       impairment. The couple also had various ailments associated with the
       natural ageing process

The First tier Tribunal

   10. Mr Jafferji appeared for the appellant as he does now. The 1st
       appellant gave evidence and confirmed he was in contact with his
       daughter in Pakistan. Again, he said it was not culturally acceptable
       for the appellant and his wife to live with her. He accepted he could
       maintain contact with his family here if returned to Pakistan. He
       also indicated he had a brother in Pakistan who lived in the former
       family home. The appellant said he had lived in Saudi Arabia from
       1975 for 28 years before retiring.

   11. The 2nd appellant also gave evidence and indicated she had a brother
       and sister in Pakistan. It transpired the couple had another son
       though they claimed not to know where he was.

   12. She said that she and her husband stayed at her brother's home when
       they would return to Pakistan from Saudi Arabia and alternated this
       with visits to her daughter's home.

   13. The judge also heard from the appellants son in the United Kingdom
       with whom they were living. He said he was employment, earning about
       �20,000 per year. Like his parents he claimed not to know where his
       brother was and suggested he might be in Dubai or Malaysia. He also
       had a sister living in the United Kingdom.

   14. Initially, the consideration focused upon whether paragraph 276
       ADE1(vi) was met. Regarding the medical evidence submitted the judge
       took the view that the 1st appellant was being conservatively treated
       and referred to him having some moderate impairment with regard to
       day-to-day activities and might require some supervision. The judge
       found that his wife could assist. It was not suggested the necessary
       medication was unavailable in Pakistan.

   15. The judge acknowledged that the appellant had been outside of
       Pakistan since 1975. However, the judge pointed out that whilst
       living in Saudi Arabia they returned to Pakistan for holidays to
       visit family members and did not find they had lost contact with the
       general cultural norms. The judge referred to evidence that the
       appellants had stayed at what was the former family home in Pakistan
       and found no evidence to indicate they could not return there.

   16. The judge referred to the earlier determination which had found they
       were not witnesses to the truth.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge did
       not accept they had no relatives in Pakistan who could assist and did
       not accept their claim did not know the whereabouts of their other
       son. The judge concluded he was in Pakistan and in a position to
       assist but they did not wish to reveal this. The judge also referred
       to them having a number of close relatives in Pakistan. The judge
       also rejected the claim that their son in the United Kingdom could
       not support them if they returned to Pakistan. The judge found it
       surprising the appellant would not have a pension from his former
       employment and pointed out the substantial capital sum he had when he
       arrived. Consequently, the judge did not find very significant
       obstacles to their integration into Pakistan.

   17. The judge then considered the position outside the rules. There then
       followed consideration of paragraph 395C. By this, when making a
       decision to remove a migrant from the UK regard was to be had to a
       non-exhaustive list of factors such as age, strength of connections,
       compassionate grounds and so forth. As the grant of permission points
       out this was repealed on 13 February 2012.Consequently, if there was
       an error it was in this being considered at all. However, as it did
       not positively affect the outcome it has made no material difference.

   18. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge carried out a proportionality
       assessment and accepts the appellant had established a private and
       possibly a family life whilst in the United Kingdom. The judge
       alludes, albeit without naming section 117 B, to the factors therein,
       including the fact the appellants do not speak English and would be a
       burden upon the State through health care and the benefit system. The
       judge commented that their immigration status has always been
       precarious. At paragraph 38 the judge said even if family life were
       established the decision was proportionate.

The Upper Tribunal.

   19. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
       judge did not provide adequate reasons for some factual findings.
       These included the finding that the appellants would be financially
       supported by family members or there were not dependent upon family
       members. It was also arguably an error of law not to have considered
       the decision of SSHD -v- Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 and that the
       concept of integration calls for broad evaluative judgement. Finally,
       it was arguable the judge did not refer to the best interests of
       children. In the application there was reference to the impact of the
       decision upon the appellants grandchildren in the United Kingdom.

   20. At hearing, Mr Jafferji highlighted the 1st appellant's medical's
       condition and suggested the judge had not adequately reason why he
       was not dependent upon his son in the United Kingdom. He argued that
       the judge had not dealt with the evidence of their son who said that
       he would not be financially able to support his parents if they were
       returned. There was reference to the cost of living in Pakistan. He
       submitted the judge had not engaged with this.

   21. He pointed out that the decision of Adjudicator Chamber was now 13
       years old and that the appellants had not been to Pakistan since
       1975. He submitted that the respondent had delayed in taking
       decisions in their cases and I was referred to correspondence in the
       appeal bundle. He referred to the decisions in EV Kosovo and that the
       former provisions of paragraph 395C fed into the delay.

   22. Finally, he argued the judge failed to consider the impact of the
       decision upon their children as well as their grandchildren. There
       had been a letter from the children in support of the appeal.

   23. The presenting officer contended that the judge had adequately
       considered whether the appellants could integrate into life in
       Pakistan, notwithstanding the absence of a reference to SSHD -v-
       Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813.He pointed out the judge had found they
       had family in Pakistan. There was no reason why their families here
       could not support them by remittances. The presenting officer said
       that the judge had not simply adopted the earlier decision but had
       looked at all the facts. This was against the background where the
       appellants had earlier not been found credible. He submitted the
       findings made were open to the judge.

Consideration

   24. I have set out in detail the history of the appeal as it gives an
       insight into the issues and evidence dealt with by First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Lodge. The 1st observation is that the appellants came
       here on a visit visas. It was patently obvious to them they had no
       permanent right to remain. At an early stage they sought to assert
       such a right, resulting in the appeal before Mr Chamber, Adjudicator,
       on 15 October 2004.The judge was faced with arguments advanced
       similar to the present, albeit 14 years earlier. The circumstances at
       the time of that appeal remain relevant. Naturally with the passage
       of time has been some change, most notably the fact the 1st appellant
       has had 2 strokes.

   25. The claim advance before Mr Chamber mirrored in many respects the
       claim advance before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge. In summary, the
       appellants were claiming a state of dependence upon their son here
       and the absence of support for them in Pakistan. Their account before
       Mr Chamber was not accepted, with the judge concluding they were not
       witnesses to the truth. The judge rejected their claim that the
       comfortable finances suggested in the visit Visa was not the true
       situation. The judge also rejected their evidence about a lack of
       family support in Pakistan.

   26. It has not been suggested in the present proceedings that First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Lodge should not have considered that earlier
       decision. The guidelines set out in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702;
       [2003] Imm AR 1 are always to be applied to the determination of a
       factual issue, the dispute as to which has already been the subject
       of judicial determination in an appeal against an earlier immigration
       decision involving the same parties.

   27. It is clear from the decision that the judge was open to the
       consideration of fresh evidence. It must be remembered it is for the
       appellants to establish their claim. In making findings the judge is
       entitled to make reasonable inferences. The judge is not expected to
       give reasons for reasons given. It was known the 1st appellant had
       worked for many years in Saudi Arabia and had been able to accumulate
       savings. The earlier judge had rejected his claim that in fact this
       was money owed. The difficult for the first appellant in claiming
       penury was the fact his visit Visa application he was someone of
       substance.

   28. The earlier decision indicated there were family members in Pakistan.
       It was common case that the appellant had a daughter living there.
       They have stayed with her in the past. It was open to the judge to
       reject the claim that she could not support them.

   29. There was also evidence from the appellants of another son, although
       his whereabouts were said to be unknown. Again, it was open to the
       judge to reject this assertion. In this context the earlier finding
       that they lacked credibility remain relevant. This was essentially
       the claim in the 1st appeal.

   30. The 1st appellant had indicated he has a brother living in the former
       family home. His wife had also referred to having a brother and
       sister. It was reasonable for the judge to see them as a potential
       sources of support. It was a matter for the judge to either accept or
       reject the appellant's claim they could not or would not assist.

   31. Similar considerations apply in respect of support from the United
       Kingdom. It was stated the 1st appellant when he arrived gave his son
       substantial funds with which he purchased his home. Aside from
       natural love and affection is reasonable to assume that his son,
       through a feeling of indebtedness, would continue to support his
       parents if they were returned to Pakistan as he has done so whilst
       were here.

   32. The judge had regard to the medical evidence. The judge concluded it
       did not suggest the appellant could not manage independently. This
       was a finding open to the judge. It was for the appellants to lay
       evidence to establish the contrary.

   33. The judge considered in detail the ability of the appellants to
       integrate back into life in Pakistan. It is important to note that
       they had spent their adult lives in Pakistan. The facts in Kamara are
       considerably different. It concerned an appellant from Sierra Leone
       who came to the United Kingdom at the age of 6. The appellants had
       grown up in Pakistan. They had lived for several decades in Saudi
       Arabia but they continued to return to Pakistan for visits. They
       speak Urdu. I can find no material error in the judge's conclusion
       about their ability to integrate.

   34. It was submitted the judge failed to consider the best interests of
       children. The appellant's son and daughter are adults. It was for the
       appellants to establish the existence of family life within the
       meaning of article 8. There has been extensive jurisprudence on this.
       There was no legal or factual presumption as to the existence or
       absence of family life for the purposes of Article 8 nor is there any
       requirement of exceptionality. It all depended on the facts. The love
       and affection between an adult and his parents or siblings would not
       of itself justify a finding of a family life .(see BRITCITS -v-SSHD
       [2017] EWCA Civ 368).As a general matter, the relationship between
       grandparent and grandchild, beneficial though it may be, is unlikely
       to carry material weight in terms of Article 8, unless the
       grandparent has stepped into the shoes of a parent (see Thakrar (Cart
       JR; article 8: value to community) [2018] UKUT 336.)

   35. It was argued that there was delay and the appellant had lost out on
       the benefit of paragraph 395C. Irrespective of the fact that
       provision has been deleted there is still an obligation on the
       respondent to act fairly and to consider any exceptional or
       compassionate circumstances. This has occurred. Consequently, they
       have not been disadvantaged. Furthermore, it was not established that
       the delay illustrated a dysfunctional system. The appellant's have
       overstayed for a considerable period. There have been significant
       periods when they did not contact the respondent. When they did
       engage the subsequent passage of time was attributable to their
       contesting the decisions by way of judicial review and appeals.
       Whilst the passage of time would have led to a strengthening of ties
       the appellants were always aware of the precarious immigration
       situation.

   36. The judge correctly referred to the public interest factors set out
       in section 117 B albeit there was no specific reference to the
       statute. It may well be that the appellant have some command of
       English the primary language is Urdu. There was no indication of
       integration into the local community presented. It was reasonable for
       the judge to conclude given their age and health conditions that they
       would be a burden upon the State.

   37. In conclusion, I find that the judge correctly analysed the issues
       arising and made appropriate findings based upon evidence and
       inferences which could be drawn. Having considered the grounds and
       the arguments advanced I find no material error of law established.
       Consequently, the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lodge
       dismissing the appeals shall stand.

Decision

No material error of law has been demonstrated. Consequently, the decision
of First-tier Tribunal judge Lodge dismissing the appeal shall stand.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.    Date: 10 February 2019

