
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
HU/25317/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |   Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4 September 2018                     |   On 1 October 2018                |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                ms Hira abid
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel instructed by Burney Legal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan who was born  in  August  1988.
    She first entered the United Kingdom in April 2011 with leave as a Tier
    4 Student.  Her leave was extended once but was then curtailed  to  end
    on 1 June 2014.  The  reason  for  that  curtailment  was  because  the
    college she was at had closed.  Just prior to when that leave  was  due
    to end on 30 May 2014 she applied for further leave under Tier 4,  that
    application being refused on 15 April  2015.   The  appellant  appealed
    against this decision and it appears that the appeal  was  subsequently
    dismissed.  However be that as it may on 6 September 2016  she  applied
    for leave to remain as the spouse of Mr Pervaiz,  who  is  a  Pakistani
    citizen who is in this country now with  indefinite  leave  to  remain.
    The appellant had married Mr Pervaiz in January 2016.

 2. That application was refused on  27  October  2016  and  the  appellant
    appealed against that decision.

 3. The appeal eventually came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Peter-John
    S. White sitting at Hatton Cross on 14 March 2018, but  in  a  Decision
    and Reasons promulgated on 17 April 2018 he dismissed the appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals to this Tribunal leave  having  been  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth on 2 July 2018.

 4. The reason why the application was refused was because it had  come  to
    light that in her previous  application  or  in  one  of  her  previous
    applications the appellant  had  submitted  a  false  English  language
    certificate  as  evidence  of  her  ability  to  speak   English.    An
    investigation of these certificates had been carried  out  following  a
    report by the BBC Panorama programme which had  found  that  there  had
    been widespread  abuse  of  the  system  and  that  many  thousands  of
    applicants  had  dishonestly  obtained  English  language  certificates
    through the use of a proxy.

 5. At the hearing before Judge White the  issue  of  whether  or  not  the
    appellant had used fraud was considered very carefully indeed and Judge
    White's finding that she had  is  entirely  sustainable.    Apart  from
    anything else, as Judge White notes at paragraph 25, in March 2013 when
    this test result was obtained this was only shortly after the appellant
    had previously failed to score high enough marks on a previous test  to
    achieve the standard necessary for the certificate and yet her score on
    the  speaking  test  was  a  perfect  200  out  of  200.     In   these
    circumstances, Judge White's conclusion that she had exercised fraud in
    obtaining the test result was an inevitable one.

 6. However matters had moved on because by the time of the hearing  before
    Judge White  the  appellant  had  given  birth  to  a  daughter  who  I
    understand is now 18 months old.  Because the daughter was born in this
    country to a settled migrant (her father) she  is  a  British  citizen.
    Accordingly any decision maker must have regard  to  what  is  set  out
    within Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 (inserted by Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 from  28  July
    2014 onwards) which provides as follows:

         "117B.   Article 8: public interest  considerations  applicable  in
         all cases...

                  (6)  In the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                      deportation, the public interest does not require the
                      person's removal where -

                      (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                           relationship with a qualifying child and

                      (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
                           to leave the United Kingdom."

 7. In this case, Judge White considered that this Section  did  not  apply
    because it was reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK with both
    her parents and return with them to Pakistan.   Quite  apart  from  the
    other matters to which I will refer below, the judge does not appear to
    have had any evidence before him to the  effect  that  the  appellant's
    husband would be prepared to return to Pakistan with the  rest  of  his
    family but in light of what is said below that is not of  any  material
    importance.

 8. The real difficulty with this decision is that it fails to have  regard
    to the guidance which has at all  material  times  been  given  by  the
    respondent (referred to for example in the decision of this Tribunal in
    SF and Others v SSHD (Guidance, post - 2014 Act)  Albania  [2017]  UKUT
    00120), which  is  that  save  in  cases  involving  criminality,  "the
    decision maker must not take a decision in relation to  the  parent  or
    primary carer of a British citizen  child  where  the  effect  of  that
    decision will  be  to  force  that  British  child  to  leave  the  EU,
    regardless of the age of that child."

 9. Certainly, insofar as Judge White considered it  reasonable  to  expect
    the British citizen child to leave the UK with both  her  parents  that
    would appear to fall foul of the guidance.

10. Moreover, the guidance also provides that it  will  not  be  reasonable
    ever to expect a British citizen child to leave the UK.

11. Mr Clarke on behalf of the respondent does not seek  to  persuade  this
    Tribunal that Judge White's decision did not contain the material error
    of law  referred  to  above.   The  highest  he  is  able  to  put  the
    respondent's case is that it might still be  proportionate  to  require
    the appellant herself to leave the country, leaving  her  child  behind
    with her husband, because (as he rightly says) this appellant has  only
    been permitted to remain in this  country  because  she  had  exercised
    fraud.  Without deceiving the relevant authority  into  believing  that
    her English was of a sufficiently high standard  far  earlier  than  it
    was, she would not have been allowed to remain.

12. Be that as it may, I am nonetheless bound when remaking the decision to
    have regard to Section 117B(6) the effect of which is that because  the
    appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  her
    daughter and it would not be reasonable to expect her daughter to leave
    the United Kingdom (because  she  is  a  British  citizen)  the  public
    interest does not require her removal, notwithstanding  that  in  other
    circumstances it would.

13. It follows that I must remake this decision  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal and I shall do so.

Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Peter-John  S.  White
as containing a material error of law, and remake the decision as follows:

The appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds, Article 8.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date:     20 September 2018
