
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/25987/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 April 2019                     |On 25 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                 bushra bibi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McGuire, Counsel instructed by McKenzie
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Mathews, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The  appellant,  who  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  has  been  granted
    permission to appeal the decision of Designated Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal Murray, who for reasons given in her decision  dated  13  June
    2018, dismissed the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds  against
    the Secretary of State's decision dated 26 October  2016  refusing  her
    human rights application based  on  her  relationship  to  her  partner
    Yaqoob Yousaf, a British citizen.  It was contended by the Secretary of
    State that, with reference to the provisions of Appendix FM (being  the
    immigration status requirements), the appellant would need to meet  the
    requirements  in  EX.1.  It  was  not  considered   that   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles to the family life continuing outside the  UK.
    As to the appellant's private life, it was considered that there  would
    not be very significant obstacles to her integration in Pakistan.

 2. The appellant had married Yaqoob Yousaf on 16 March 2007  in  Pakistan.
    She had been granted permission to visit the United  Kingdom  the  same
    year and thereafter she moved to Dubai with her spouse to live in 2008,
    where she applied for spouse visa.  That was refused, but  nevertheless
    she was granted a visit visa on which she arrived in the United Kingdom
    in 2008 and came and went for periods of time between then and 2015  as
    a visitor.  On 7 August 2015, the appellant  applied  to  remain  as  a
    partner which was refused with certification under section 94. Judicial
    review proceedings ensued. On 30 December 2015 the appellant  submitted
    the further  FLR(M)  application  that  had  led  to  the  respondent's
    refusal.

 3. Judge Murray dismissed the appeal.  In a detailed decision she recorded
    the evidence and accepted that the appellant was an overstayer  because
    of exceptional circumstances relating  to  her  health.   She  did  not
    accept that this has led to an inability for her  to  fly  to  Pakistan
    which had been a  factor  the  appellant  had  relied  on.   The  judge
    observed that the appellant's  husband  had  now  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for a number of years but that she had not  been  staying  with
    him permanently apart from the period since 2015.  She did  not  expect
    Mr Yousaf to give up his business in the United Kingdom and go to  live
    in Pakistan with the appellant as this was "unnecessary".

 4. The judge then proceeded to consider the  case  under  the  rules.   At
    paras [58] to [61] she set out  her  reasons  for  not  accepting  that
    either the provisions in Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE had been met:

         "58. I am going to consider the application under the Rules.  First
             of all I am looking at Appendix FM and note that the appellant
             is suitable.  When she made her most recent further  leave  to
             remain application she had 3C leave and Counsel's argument  is
             that she therefore was not applying as a visitor when she made
             this application but she did not fall into  a  category  which
             entitled her to be granted further  leave  to  remain  in  the
             United  Kingdom.   I  accept  that  she  meets  the  financial
             requirements based on the payslips and bank statements on file
             belonging to her husband and I have noted that she has sat  an
             English language test and she spoke English at the hearing.  I
             find it strange that she sat the ESOL exam in 2011 if she  had
             no intention of, in the future,  applying  for  leave  in  the
             United  Kingdom  as  something  other  than  a  visitor.   Her
             evidence is that her husband only  decided  in  2015  that  he
             wanted to stay in the United Kingdom.

         59.  I do not accept Counsel's argument relating to Appendix FM and
             find that she cannot succeed on this basis.   I  do  not  find
             that there are insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  with
             her partner continuing outside the UK.  He has a job here that
             he enjoys, is doing it well  and  is  helping  others  but  if
             necessary he could go to live and work in Pakistan.  He  is  a
             British citizen but this does  not  mean  that  the  appellant
             cannot return to Pakistan and make a spousal  application  and
             she can then come to the United Kingdom on a legal basis.  The
             appellant has been married for 11 years and between  2008  and
             2015 she was travelling between Pakistan and the UK and  spent
             many months away from the UK.

         60.  I accept that the appellant's husband is British and there are
             no credibility issues relating to his mother's  and  brother's
             health and disability.  If the appellant is not there however,
             her brother-in-law has carers and has overnight respite care a
             few days a week.  I accept that the appellant probably  has  a
             good relationship and a bond with her  mother-in-law  and  her
             brother-in-law, but there are other avenues of care  available
             and ongoing.  Her husband states that  he  is  in  the  United
             Kingdom to care for his mother and brother and he  will  still
             be  here  if  she  returns  to  Pakistan  to  make  a  spousal
             application.

         61.   Counsel  also  states  that  the  requirements  of  paragraph
             276ADE(1)(vi) are satisfied but I do not find there  are  very
             significant obstacles  to  the  appellant's  integration  into
             Pakistan if she returns to make an application  to  return  to
             the United Kingdom.  At present she receives  painkillers  and
             physiotherapy for her medical condition.  Her last review  and
             MRI scan was quite a number of months ago and there is nothing
             before me to indicate that the medical treatment in  Pakistan,
             such as  she  is  receiving  in  this  country,  will  not  be
             available or  will  be  inaccessible  in  Pakistan.   She  can
             continue with her physiotherapy exercises there  and  she  can
             take  painkillers  there.   Her  husband   can   support   her
             application to return to the United Kingdom.  I  do  not  find
             that paragraph 276ADE(1) is satisfied.  She lived  and  worked
             in Pakistan until 2007 and she has family there."

 5. The judge then turned to  Article  8  and  set  out  her  reasoning  as
    follows:

         "62. I have now to consider Article  8  outside  the  Rules.   This
             appellant has never been in the United Kingdom in any category
             other than precarious.  She has always come and  gone  between
             Pakistan and the United  Kingdom.   For  her  to  go  back  to
             Pakistan and make her application would  be  no  different  to
             what she has been doing in the past.  Based on her immigration
             history it would not be disproportionate for her to return  to
             the Pakistan and make her application as a spouse and return.

         63.  I accept  that  the  appellant  is  in  a  genuine  subsisting
             relationship with her husband.  I accept that he does not want
             to relocate in Pakistan as he is a  British  citizen  with  an
             established life in the United  Kingdom  and  has  an  elderly
             mother and disabled brother here.  Counsel  submits  that  the
             appellant meets the requirements or at least the spirit of the
             Rules.  I find that her claim does not satisfy the  Rules  and
             that is what is important.  Counsel refers  to  disruption  if
             she has to leave the United Kingdom to go to Pakistan but this
             is what she has been doing since 2008.  It is accepted by both
             parties that she has no  legal  right  to  be  in  the  United
             Kingdom and it is accepted by both parties that she has sought
             to regularize her stay but has not been able to.  I find  that
             when she recovered from her operation she should have returned
             to Pakistan and from there made the relevant application.

         64.  I do not find that this is an exceptional  case  or  that  the
             decision will have a devastating effect  on  her  relationship
             with her  husband  and  his  family.   When  Article  117B  is
             considered and when the appellant's rights are weighed against
             public interest, this is an appellant who should have returned
             to Pakistan and cannot meet the terms of the Rules.  This must
             go against her in any proportionality  assessment.   Her  stay
             has always been precarious, she has always been aware that she
             was not entitled to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  without
             obtaining  a  different  type  of  visa.   Again  when  public
             interest is considered the appellant has had medical treatment
             in the United Kingdom and there is no evidence  that  she  has
             paid for this treatment herself.  She may have  but  this  has
             not been shown to me.   She  seems  to  be  receiving  ongoing
             treatment from the National Health Service and this  is  being
             funded by the public purse."

 6. And finally concluded at [65]:

         "65. I find that the appellant  and  her  husband  are  intelligent
             people and are aware of what should be done and what is  right
             in this case.  I find that  her  claim  cannot  succeed  under
             Article 8 outside the Rules as public interest  succeeds  over
             her rights."

 7. The grounds of challenge are discursive and unnecessarily  so.   Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan has accurately summarised their  effect  in
    granting permission on a renewed application to the Upper  Tribunal  as
    follows:

         "1.  Paragraphs 40 to 51 contain a summary of the submissions  made
             by counsel for the appellant in support of the contention that
             it was disproportionate to require the appellant to return  to
             Pakistan to seek  entry  clearance.   These  submissions  seem
             largely correct as a factual summary  of  the  evidence.   She
             developed a spinal tumour which  prevented  her  returning  to
             Pakistan within the period  of  her  visit  visa.   The  judge
             accepted that this amounted to exceptional circumstances.

         2.   The judge found that the appellant  met  the  requirements  of
             Appendix FM save for insurmountable obstacles to  family  life
             continuing outside the United  Kingdom.   She  accepted  there
             were no credibility is[sues] in relation to the  evidence  her
             husband gave as to his mother and  his  brother's  health  and
             disability.  She found however that the appellant should  have
             returned to Pakistan and made the relevant application  there.
             The implication is that, had  she  done  so,  she  would  have
             succeeded.

         3.   It is arguable that the judge did not  properly  evaluate  the
             reduced strength of the public interest in  requiring  her  to
             leave the United Kingdom given the  exceptional  circumstances
             in her remaining as an overstayer  and  the  implication  that
             such an application would succeed."

 8. Mr McGuire acknowledged  the  lengthy  and  discursive  nature  of  the
    grounds and considered that the  grant  of  permission  by  UTJ  Jordan
    amounted to a restricted grant based on paragraph [3] of the  grant  of
    permission with reference to the proportionality exercise.  He did  not
    seek to argue other grounds although he thought that  consideration  of
    paragraph [3] might nevertheless require consideration of other aspects
    raised in the grounds.  He did not consider the challenge to be one  of
    irrationality but a misdirection by the judge resulting in an excessive
    weight having been given to the public interest with specific reference
    to paragraph [64] of her decision.

 9. The relevant ground of challenge therefore was in paragraph  [7]  which
    addresses the  Article  8  assessment  and  identifies  error  which  I
    summarise using the same paragraph lettering:

      a) The finding that this was not an exceptional case was  contradicted
         by the acceptance of the exceptional circumstances that had led  to
         the appellant being an overstayer.

      b) The reasoning regarding the frequency of the  appellant's  journeys
         was perverse given that she was an overstayer who had used the  NHS
         and was assisting with the care of her husband's elderly mother and
         disabled brother.

      c) The reference in [63] and [64] as to the Rules not being  satisfied
         was inconsistent with the judge's earlier observation that she  saw
         no reason why entry clearance would not be accepted.

      d) Repetition of  the  point  in  (c)  above  but  with  reference  to
         authorities including Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40.

      e) The issue of payment for medical treatment had been raised for  the
         first time without the opportunity of the appellant responding  and
         thus procedurally unfair.

      f) Inadequate account taken of the  contribution  by  the  appellant's
         husband with reference to UE (Nigeria) & Ors v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ
         975.

      g) The above errors materially impugn the judge's conclusion it  would
         not be disproportionate.

10. Mr McGuire submitted that in general, the appellant and witnesses  were
    found to be credible and the only reason  why  the  application  failed
    under the Rules was with reference  to  "very  significant  obstacles".
    The explanation by the appellant why she could not return was  relevant
    to  the  public  interest  and  he  argued  the  judge  had  taken   an
    inconsistent approach as to whether the appellant met the  requirements
    of the Rules.  He placed reliance on  Chikwamba  and  argued  that  too
    reduced the weight to be given to the public  interest  which  was  not
    static.  He nevertheless acknowledged that the test  of  insurmountable
    obstacles was a high one.

11. By way of response,  Mr  Matthews  submitted  that  it  was  clear  the
    starting point was the appellant's lack of success under the  Rules  by
    reference to EX.1.  With  the  judge  having  found  no  insurmountable
    obstacles this was a reflection of where the public interest stood.  As
    to the  specific  points  taken  in  ground  7,  as  to  (a)  there  no
    contradiction and as  to  (b)  the  judge  was  entitled  to  take  the
    appellant's travel history  into  account.   A  point  in  relation  to
    paragraph 320(7) had not been taken  by  the  Secretary  of  State  (in
    relation to medical reasons).  Mr Mathews continued with  reference  to
    (c) that the judge's observation that the appellant did not satisfy the
    Rules was different from her  earlier  conclusion  that  there  was  no
    reason why entry clearance would not be accepted.  As to (d),  sensible
    reasons had been given by the judge why the appellant should  apply  by
    reference to the outcome under the Rules  and  that  it  would  not  be
    disproportionate for the couple to live in Pakistan.   In  relation  to
    (e) no evidence had been offered to show that the cost of treatment had
    been paid by the appellant.

12. Mr McGuire acknowledged that there was no evidence  available  to  show
    that the appellant had paid for her NHS treatment but understood it had
    arisen out of an emergency for which treatment would be provided.

13. Both Mr McGuire and Mr Matthews accepted that in the event that I found
    error and set aside the decision, they would  rely  on  what  they  had
    already said in a re-making.  No new evidence had been lodged  nor  had
    application been made for it to be adduced.

14. I explained to the parties in the course of their  submissions  that  I
    would be having regard to the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  TZ
    (Pakistan) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1109 and referred in the  hearing  to
    paragraph [34] of the judgment of the Senior President of Tribunals:

         "34. That leaves the question of whether the tribunal  is  required
             to make a decision on Article 8 requirements within the  Rules
             i.e. whether there are insurmountable obstacles, before or  in
             order to make a decision about Article 8  outside  the  Rules.
             The policy of the Secretary of State as expressed in the Rules
             is not to be ignored when a decision about Article 8 is to  be
             made outside the Rules.  An evaluation of the question whether
             there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  is  a  relevant  factor
             because considerable weight is to be placed on  the  Secretary
             of  State's  policy  as  reflected  in  the   Rules   of   the
             circumstances in which a foreign national  partner  should  be
             granted leave to remain.   Accordingly,  the  tribunal  should
             undertake an evaluation of the insurmountable  obstacles  test
             within the Rules in order to inform an evaluation outside  the
             Rules because that  formulates  the  strength  of  the  public
             policy in immigration control 'in the case before  it',  which
             is what the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali (at [50]) held was  to
             be taken into account.  That has  the  benefit  that  where  a
             person satisfies the Rules, whether or not by reference to  an
             Article 8 informed requirement, then this will  be  positively
             determinative of that  person's  Article  8  appeal,  provided
             their case engages Article 8(1), for the very reason  that  it
             would then be disproportionate for that person to be removed.

         35.  I  suggested  at  [19]  that  there  exists  a  structure  for
             judgments in the FtT where Article 8  is  engaged.   That  was
             referred to by Lord Thomas in Hesham Ali at  [82  to  84]  and
             recommended by him.  I strongly  endorse  his  recommendation.
             Although there is no obligation  in  law  for  a  tribunal  to
             structure its decision-making in any particular way and it  is
             not an error of law to fail to do so, the use of  a  structure
             in the judgments in these appeals would almost certainly  have
             avoided the appeals, given that the ultimate conclusion of the
             tribunals was correct.  To paraphrase Lord Thomas:  after  the
             tribunal has found the facts,  the  tribunal  sets  out  those
             factors that weigh in favour of  immigration  control  -  'the
             cons' - against those factors that weigh in favour  of  family
             and private life - 'the pros' in the form of a  balance  sheet
             which it then uses to set out a reasoned conclusion within the
             framework of the test(s) being applied within or  outside  the
             Rules.  It goes  without  saying  that  the  factors  are  not
             equally weighted and that the tribunal must in  its  reasoning
             articulate the weight being attached to each factor."

15. In my judgment this is precisely the approach that was taken  by  Judge
    Murray.  I have set out her reasoning verbatim  which  shows  that  she
    left none of the evidence out in terms of her findings in  relation  to
    the Rules and reached findings on the  facts  rationally  open  to  her
    without error in concluding that the insurmountable obstacles test  had
    not been satisfied.  She then correctly proceeded to consider the  case
    by reference to Article 8.  The weight which she  gave  to  the  public
    interest was properly open to her and I do  not  find  her  conclusions
    were perverse (an aspect which has not been alleged) or that error  was
    made in her assessment of the facts by giving  excessive  weight  to  a
    particular factor or overlooking a piece of the evidence.  Specifically
    in respect of the contribution that the appellant's partner makes,  she
    concluded her decision with an observation at [66]:

         "66. I have noted the evidence of the 2 other witnesses who clearly
             admire what the sponsor does in the United  Kingdom  and  both
             have been helped by him but  their  evidence  does  little  to
             strengthen the appellant's claim."

16. In his response to Mr Matthews' submissions Mr McGuire  explained  that
    the more he considered this case the more fortified he was that it came
    within the scope of Chikwamba.  In my judgment  despite  the  eloquence
    with which the  submission  was  made,  it  is  not  sustainable.   The
    application of the Chikwamba principle was considered by the  Court  of
    Appeal in SSHD and R (on the application of Paramjit Kaur) [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 1423.  At [71ff] Holroyde LJ explained:

         "71. Mrs Kaur is seeking (in relation  to  Chikwamba)  to  argue  a
             point which could have been but was not raised below,  and  in
             relation to which the court below would have received evidence
             and  made  findings  of  fact.   In  such  circumstances,   in
             accordance with the principle  stated  in  that  passage,  she
             requires not only the extension of time which she has obtained
             but also permission to argue this fresh point.  It is relevant
             to consider what the position would be if the order below  had
             been expressed (as it might have  been)  in  different  terms,
             such that Mrs Kaur would have sought  a  formal  variation  of
             part of it if she succeeded on the new  Chikwamba  point.   In
             that situation, she would have been required to file an appeal
             notice in order to raise her new point, and this  court  would
             have been able to consider whether permission should be  given
             to argue that new  point.  It  would  to  my  mind  be  highly
             unsatisfactory if this court had no control over  the  raising
             and arguing of that new point simply because the form  of  the
             order made below permits Mrs Kaur to raise the point by way of
             a Respondent's Notice  rather  than  an  appeal  notice.   For
             reasons which will  become  apparent,  I  would  exercise  the
             court's discretion to refuse permission to  argue  this  fresh
             point."

17. At [43] to [45] Holroyde LJ observed:

         "43. It must however be noted that  the  facts  in  Chikwamba  were
             striking.  The claimant was a Zimbabwean  national.   In  June
             2002 her asylum claim and leave to enter  were  refused.   Her
             removal  was  however  suspended  because   of   deteriorating
             conditions in Zimbabwe.  She then married a Zimbabwean man who
             had earlier been granted asylum in this country, and in  April
             2004 a daughter was born to them. In November 2004 the bar  on
             forced removals to Zimbabwe was lifted.  The claimant appealed
             against the Secretary of State's refusal  of  her  claim  that
             removal to Zimbabwe  would  breach  her  Article  8  right  to
             respect for her family life.  The issue was whether she should
             be required to return to Zimbabwe in order to apply from there
             for permission to rejoin her husband.  It was accepted that he
             could not return to Zimbabwe.  It was found by the adjudicator
             that conditions in Zimbabwe would be "harsh and  unpalatable".
             The facts were  such  that  the  claimant  would  have  "every
             prospect of  succeeding"  if  she  made  an  application  from
             Zimbabwe  for  permission  to  re-enter  and  remain  in  this
             country.  However, if the claimant had to return  to  Zimbabwe
             her  child  would  either  have  to  face  those   unpalatable
             conditions for a time, or be separated from  her  mother.   In
             those circumstances, Lord Brown said at paragraph 46:

                  "is it  really  to  be  said  that  effective  immigration
                  control requires that the  claimant  and  her  child  must
                  first travel back (perhaps at the taxpayers'  expense)  to
                  Zimbabwe, a country to which the enforced return of failed
                  asylum seekers remained suspended for more than two  years
                  after the claimant's marriage  and  where  conditions  are
                  'harsh and unpalatable', and remain there for some  months
                  obtaining entry clearance, before finally she  can  return
                  (at her own expense) to the United Kingdom to  resume  her
                  family  life  which  meantime  will  have   been   gravely
                  disrupted?  Surely one has only to  ask  the  question  to
                  recognise the right answer."

         44.  I note that in Hayat v  SSHD  [2011]  UKUT  444  (IAC),  Upper
             Tribunal (Lord Menzies and UT Judge PR Lane, as he  then  was)
             said:

                  "23. The significance of Chikwamba, however,  is  to  make
                      plain that, where the only  matter  weighing  on  the
                      respondent's side of the balance is the public policy
                      of requiring a person to apply under the  rules  from
                      abroad, that legitimate  objective  will  usually  be
                      outweighed by factors resting on the appellant's side
                      of the balance.

                  24.  Viewed correctly, the Chikwamba principle  does  not,
                      accordingly,  automatically  trump  anything  on  the
                      State's side, such as  a  poor  immigration  history.
                      Conversely, the principle cannot be simply  "switched
                      off" on mechanistic grounds, such as because children
                      are not involved, or that (as here) the appellant  is
                      not seeking to remain with a spouse who is settled in
                      the United Kingdom."

                  With every respect to the Upper Tribunal, I do  not  think
                  that Lord Brown's words in Chikwamba justify the inclusion
                  of the word "usually" in paragraph 23 of their decision.

         45.  I have quoted in paragraph 26 above the passage in which  Lord
             Reed (at paragraph 51 of his judgment in Agyarko) referred  to
             Chikwamba.  It is relevant to note that he there spoke  of  an
             applicant who was "certain to be granted leave to enter" if an
             application were made from outside the UK, and  said  that  in
             such a case there might be no public interest in removing  the
             applicant.  That, in my view, is a clear indication  that  the
             Chikwamba principle will require a fact-specific assessment in
             each case, will only apply in a very clear case, and even then
             will not necessarily result in a grant of leave to remain."

18. It cannot be said that the appellant's case was a very clear  case  for
    the grant of entry clearance despite the judge observing at  [57]  that
    she could see no reason  why  the  explanation  by  the  appellant  for
    overstaying would not be accepted.

19. The decision in Kaur is also of assistance in understanding the meaning
    of "insurmountable obstacles".  At [23] Holroyde LJ explained and cited
    Agyarko:

         "23. Since the decision of the  Deputy  Judge  in  this  case,  the
             meaning of "insurmountable obstacles"  has  been  definitively
             stated by the Supreme Court in Agyarko.  Lord Reed, with  whom
             the other Justices of the Supreme Court  agreed,  referred  to
             Jeunesse v The Netherlands (2015) 60 EHRR 17, GC, saying:

                  "42.  In   Jeunesse,   the   Grand   Chamber   identified,
                      consistently with earlier judgments of the  court,  a
                      number  of  factors  to  be  taken  into  account  in
                      assessing the proportionality under Article 8 of  the
                      removal of non-settled migrants  from  a  contracting
                      state in which they have  family  members.   Relevant
                      factors were said to  include  the  extent  to  which
                      family life would effectively be ruptured, the extent
                      of the ties in the contracting state,  whether  there
                      were "insurmountable obstacles" in  the  way  of  the
                      family living in the country of origin  of  the  non-
                      national concerned, and whether there were factors of
                      immigration  control  (for  example,  a  history   of
                      breaches of immigration  law)  or  considerations  of
                      public order weighing in favour  of  exclusion:  para
                      107.

                  43.  It appears that the European court intends the  words
                      "insurmountable obstacles"  to  be  understood  in  a
                      practical  and  realistic  sense,  rather   than   as
                      referring solely to obstacles which make it literally
                      impossible for the family to  live  together  in  the
                      country of origin of the non-national concerned.   In
                      some cases, the  court  has  used  other  expressions
                      which   make   that   clearer   ...   'Insurmountable
                      obstacles' is, however, the  expression  employed  by
                      the Grand Chamber; and the court's application of  it
                      indicates that it is a stringent test.  In  Jeunesse,
                      for example, there were said to be no  insurmountable
                      obstacles  to  the  relocation  of  the   family   to
                      Suriname, although the children, the eldest  of  whom
                      was at secondary school, were Dutch nationals who had
                      lived  there  all  their  lives,  had  never  visited
                      Suriname, and would experience a degree  of  hardship
                      if forced to move, and the applicant's partner was in
                      full-time employment in the  Netherlands:  see  paras
                      117 and 119."

         24. Lord Reed went on to refer, at paragraph 44, to the fact  that
             the July 2012 version of the Rules (which  was  applicable  in
             that case, and is applicable  in  this)  did  not  define  the
             expression "insurmountable obstacles".  With effect from  July
             2014, however, Appendix FM was  amended  by  the  addition  of
             paragraph EX.2, which states -

                  "For the purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1(b)  'insurmountable
                  obstacles' means the very significant  difficulties  which
                  would be faced  by  the  applicant  or  their  partner  in
                  continuing their family life together outside the  UK  and
                  which could not be overcome or would entail  very  serious
                  hardship for the applicant or their partner."

         25. Lord Reed concluded that that definition was  consistent  with
             the meaning given to  the  phrase  by  the  decisions  of  the
             European Court of Human Rights.  He therefore  concluded  that
             the meaning of the phrase under the 2012 version of the  Rules
             was the same as it is now under paragraph EX.2. He continued:

                  "45   By  virtue  of  paragraph  EX.1(b),  "insurmountable
                      obstacles" are treated as a requirement for the grant
                      of leave under the  Rules  in  cases  to  which  that
                      paragraph  applies.   Accordingly,  interpreting  the
                      expression in the same sense  as  in  the  Strasbourg
                      case law, leave  to  remain  would  not  normally  be
                      granted in cases where  an  applicant  for  leave  to
                      remain under the partner  route  was  in  the  UK  in
                      breach of immigration laws, unless the  applicant  or
                      their partner would face very serious difficulties in
                      continuing their family life together outside the UK,
                      which could not be  overcome  or  would  entail  very
                      serious hardship.  Even  in  a  case  in  which  such
                      difficulties do not exist, however, leave  to  remain
                      can nevertheless be  granted  outside  the  Rules  in
                      'exceptional circumstances', in accordance  with  the
                      Instructions: that is to say,  'in  circumstances  in
                      which refusal would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh
                      consequences for the individual such that refusal  of
                      the application would not be proportionate'."

20. By way of conclusion I am  satisfied  that  Judge  Murray  reached  her
    conclusions on the obstacles to the  family  life  established  by  the
    appellant continuing outside the United Kingdom in the  real  world  of
    the possibility that she would apply  in  Pakistan  to  return  to  the
    United Kingdom.  With  specific  reference  to  paragraph  [7]  of  the
    grounds, I see no contradiction in the direction by the judge  at  [64]
    and the reference to exceptional circumstances in [55].  The test under
    Article 8 is not one of exceptionality and it is clear that  the  judge
    used the term to describe a situation out of the ordinary.   The  judge
    was entitled to take account of the history  of  journeys  between  the
    United Kingdom and Pakistan  by  the  appellant  and  gave  sustainable
    reasons why any deficiency in the care of her husband's elderly  mother
    and disabled brother would be filled.  It was rationally  open  to  the
    judge to express a positive view in relation to the eventual success of
    the application but it  was  not  for  her  to  decide  that  it  would
    definitely succeed.  As part of the proportionality exercise the  judge
    was entitled to refer to the cost of the NHS treatment being a  factor.
    I have quoted paragraph [66] above indicating that the judge also  took
    into account the positive contribution that the appellant's husband  is
    making.

21. I am not persuaded that Judge Murry erred on the basis of the ground of
    challenge argued before me.  This appeal is dismissed.


Signed   Date 18 April 2019

UTJ Dawson
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
