
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  HU/25245/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28 November 2019                |On 3 December 2019                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                               KARAMBIR SINGH
                          (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Trevelyan, of Counsel, instructed by D & A
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers  on  19  July  2019
         against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Young-Harry,
         promulgated on 17 April 2019 following a hearing at  Birmingham  on
         11 March 2019.

      2. The appellant is an Indian national born  on  4  January  1989.  He
         entered the UK as a student on 15 November 2010 with leave until 30
         November 2011. An application for further leave made on 2  November
         2011 was refused on 5 October 2011. The appellant then  overstayed.
         He did nothing to regularise his stay until 11 April 2018  when  he
         made a private and family life application. That was refused on  22
         November 2018.

      3. The appellant lodged an appeal which  came  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal at Birmingham on 11 March 2019. The judge  considered  the
         appellant's  relationship  with  a  non-resident  woman   and   her
         daughter, accepted that they had a private but not  a  family  life
         together, and concluded that the appellant  could  be  expected  to
         return to India and make an entry clearance application to  re-join
         them once her status was  resolved.  She  also  considered  that  a
         temporary separation would not adversely affect  the  child's  best
         interests. Accordingly, she dismissed the appeal.

      4. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  the  judge  had
         arguably not adequately assessed the best interests of  the  child.
         It was, however, pointed out that the grant of permission  was  not
         an indicator of success and the decision  then  proceeded  to  list
         several factors against the appellant.

      5. There has been no Rule 24 response from the Secretary of State.




         The Hearing

      6. Mr Trevelyan submitted that there were three flaws in  the  judge's
         determination. First, she failed to  consider  the  status  of  the
         appellant's partner's daughter as a British national and the impact
         his removal would have upon her. Secondly, she failed  to  consider
         the test set out in s.117B(6) as non-biological parents could still
         have a parental role in a child's upbringing and it  would  not  be
         reasonable for the child to have to leave  the  UK.  Further,  when
         considering the child's best interests  the  judge  relied  on  the
         adverse immigration history of the appellant  as  a  countervailing
         factor which was against the guidance in case  law.   Thirdly,  the
         judge when considering the issue of an entry clearance  application
         as a solution wrongly found that the  social  worker's  report  was
         silent on the matter of a temporary separation.  Moreover,  as  the
         sponsor had no settled status at the time, the option of making  an
         entry clearance application was not available to the appellant.

      7. Ms Cunha asked that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         be upheld and the appeal dismissed. She submitted  that  the  judge
         had found that a temporary separation would not disrupt family life
         and so the judge was right to say that the social  worker  had  not
         considered the issue of a temporary separation. Although the  child
         was not the appellant's  step-daughter,  her  best  interests  were
         considered at paragraphs 18-20 of the determination. The child  was
         not blamed for the appellant's overstaying; the judge  was  looking
         at all the factors and an adverse immigration history  was  one  of
         them. The appellant's status here was always precarious. There were
         no exceptional circumstances and the  judge  followed  the  correct
         approach.  The  judge  was  required  to  make  objective  findings
         following Lal [2019] EWCA Civ 1925 and it was not necessary to look
         at how long it would take to get entry clearance.

      8. Mr Trevelyan replied. He repeated his submission that the report of
         the social  worker  was  not  silent  on  the  issue  of  temporary
         separation and indeed the judge had  agreed  with  all  the  social
         worker's conclusions. This was not a case where the judge preferred
         some evidence to other evidence but where she had  disregarded  it.
         She  had  also  disregarded  s.117B(6).  The  test  had  not   been
         considered at all. On the matter of entry clearance, this  was  not
         even an option available to the appellant as at  the  date  of  the
         hearing the sponsor was waiting for her application for leave to be
         resolved.

      9. That completed submissions. At the conclusion  of  the  hearing,  I
         reserved my determination which I now give with reasons.




         Discussion and Conclusions

     10. I have considered all the evidence and the submissions made.

     11. The  judge  accepted  that  there  was  private  life  between  the
         appellant and his partner of just under three years and her  child.
         She accepted that they had genuine feelings for each other and that
         there was a bond between the appellant and the sponsor's child. She
         found,  however,  that  these  relationships  formed  part  of  the
         appellant's private and not family life, but no reasons  are  given
         for why no family life was found other than that the appellant  did
         not meet the partner requirements of the Immigration Rules.

     12. Despite this lack of reasoning, however, the judge found  that  the
         decision interfered with the appellant's article 8 rights  (at  11)
         and proceeded to undertake a balancing exercise  covering  all  the
         factors put forward (at 12-25). She took account of the guidance in
         Hesham Ali [2016] UKSC 60 (at 12) and considered  matters  for  and
         against the appellant, balancing his interests against that of  the
         public.  She found that the fact that the appellant could not  meet
         the requirements of the rules because he had  not  lived  with  his
         sponsor for more than two years at the relevant time,  and  because
         the sponsor did not have settled  status  and  was  not  a  British
         citizen or a refugee. She also had regard to  the  social  worker's
         report but considered that  it  was  silent  on  the  matter  of  a
         temporary separation. She considered that such a  separation  would
         not have the same impact on the child as the permanent or long-term
         separation envisaged  by  the  social  worker  and  that  her  best
         interests would be served by remaining in the UK with  her  mother.
         She considered that the appellant should not be able to  circumvent
         the rules because he had chosen to stay illegally in the UK.  These
         are all matters that count heavily against the appellant.

     13.  I  can  see  no  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's  assessment  of
         proportionality and indeed there are no matters that she failed  to
         consider. Although the grounds complain that  the  child's  British
         nationality was not considered  at  all,  that  is  misleading  and
         erroneous  as  the  judge  did  indeed  consider  that  she  was  a
         qualifying child (at 15). In the context of all these findings  and
         the full consideration of all matters  put  forward,  it  makes  no
         material difference that the judge did not find  there  was  family
         life between the parties. The same balancing  exercise  would  have
         been undertaken even if she had and indeed no  complaint  has  been
         raised about this.

     14. The grounds complain that the child's citizenship was "played down"
         but it is unclear what is meant by this. The judge was aware of the
         child's nationality and indeed even commented that  it  was  likely
         that the sponsor would obtain further leave on the basis  that  she
         had a qualifying child. It is maintained that the judge  failed  to
         consider the principles of ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4  but  no
         reliance was placed on that judgment by the appellant and it is not
         explained how that  would  have  made  any  difference.  That  case
         related to the removal of the mother of a child and  considered  in
         what circumstances it was permissible to remove or  deport  a  non-
         citizen parent where the effect will be  that  a  child  who  is  a
         citizen of the UK would also have to leave. It is also notable that
         the child was British not just by the "accident" of  birth  but  by
         descent from a British father and that the parents  had  separated,
         and the child lived with the mother who was her primary  carer.  In
         the present case there is no requirement that the child, who is not
         British by descent, would have to leave the UK as she would be able
         to stay on with her  mother.  Her  primary  carer  was  not  facing
         removal. The cases can be distinguished on these  facts.  Moreover,
         of course, the Supreme Court emphasised that nationality was not  a
         trump card.

     15. It is also argued that no consideration was given to the fact  that
         the sponsor  did  not  have  settled  status  and  that  the  entry
         clearance option was not available to him. That again is incorrect.
         The judge was aware of this (at 15, 19 and 20) and considered  that
         the separation would be temporary  as  the  mother  was  likely  to
         obtain further leave due to the status of her child.

     16. It was argued that the judge  erred  in  finding  that  the  social
         worker's report did not address the issue of temporary  separation.
         Whilst Mr Trevelyan drew  my  attention  to  one  sentence  on  the
         penultimate page of the report which he  claimed  did  address  the
         issue, I am unable to find  that  the  brief  extract  referred  to
         adequately, if at all, addresses the matter. It  was  open  to  the
         judge to find that family  life  would  not  be  disrupted  by  the
         appellant's temporary removal and in all  the  circumstances,  that
         was a conclusion she was entitled to reach.

     17. Finally, it is argued  in  the  grounds  that  the  judge  did  not
         consider the fact that the sponsor was only able  to  work  because
         the appellant provided child care and that the appellant's  removal
         would mean the family would be living in poverty. This  was  not  a
         claim made to the judge, however, and the social worker's report is
         also silent on this  matter.  Whilst  there  is  reference  to  the
         sponsor's work as a beauty therapist, it is also a  fact  that  the
         child attends school which would allow the sponsor to continue  her
         work even if she reduces  her  hours.   It  is  of  note  that  her
         evidence to the judge was that she had worked part time  and  cared
         for her child before she  met  the  appellant.  Alternatively,  she
         could seek support from the very many friends referred  to  in  the
         report who are said to be like family and with whom the  appellant,
         sponsor and her daughter spent most of their free  time  (at  p.8).
         This is in direct contradiction to the claim in  the  grounds  that
         there are no friends and family to turn to.

     18. The appellant has to take responsibility for the situation he finds
         himself in. He overstayed  his  visa  in  2011  and  remained  here
         illegally showing blatant disregard for the laws of  this  country.
         He commenced a relationship at a time when he and his sponsor  were
         well aware that he had no lawful status. The judge was entitled  to
         find that he was responsible  for  his  actions  and  that  it  was
         against the public interest to allow him  to  jump  the  queue  and
         remain even when he does not meet the requirements of the rules. It
         cannot be, as the grounds suggest, that the  appellant's  inability
         to meet the requirements of a partner due  to  his  sponsor's  non-
         resident status amounts to an exceptional factor which  warrants  a
         grant of leave.

     19. The judge properly considered all the factors put forward and  took
         full account of s.55 and the child's  best  interests.  Of  course,
         this is not a trump card and the judge's conclusions were  open  to
         her on the evidence.

     20. The decision shows no material errors of law and it is upheld.

     21. Fresh documentary evidence has been  submitted  to  show  that  the
         appellant has since married the sponsor and that she  has  obtained
         further leave. These are documents that were not before the  First-
         tier Tribunal and cannot be admitted at this stage to undermine her
         findings. The appellant may wish to make a fresh application to the
         respondent on the basis of the change in his circumstances.







         Decision

     22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  is  upheld  and  the
         appeal is dismissed.




         Anonymity

     23. No request for an anonymity order was made.




    Signed










         Upper Tribunal Judge


         Date: 28 November 2019
