
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/25357/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30 October 2019                  |On 08 November 2019                   |
|                                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                              Hamid Belmokhtar
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Bahja, Counsel, instructed by OTS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 6 December 2018
to refuse a human rights claim.

2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Dean ("the judge") dismissed the appeal in a
decision promulgated on 19 July 2019. The judge heard evidence from the
appellant and made findings relating to that evidence at [7-18] of the
decision.  Although it seems that the judge may have been making findings
in relation to the requirements contained in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii), no
specific reference was made to that paragraph. Nor were any clear reasons
given to show that the judge had concluded that the evidence was
insufficient to show that the appellant had been continuously resident in
the UK for a period of 22 years at the date of the hearing.  The judge made
no reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii), insufficient reasons were given
to explain the decision and/or his findings were unclear.

3.   The judge then went on, it seems, to make an assessment of Article 8
outside the Immigration Rules.  At [24] he noted that the appellant had
spent the first 27 years of his life in Algeria.  Mr Bahja rightly pointed
out that an inference could be drawn from that finding that, given the
appellant's age, the judge seemed to accept that he might have been living
in the UK for a period of 22 years.  The finding at [24] appears to
conflict with the earlier findings made by the judge about the reliability
of evidence produced by the appellant. In any event, I also note that in
[24] the judge incorrectly directed himself to the test of whether there
were 'insurmountable obstacles' to the appellant continuing his private
life in Algeria, which is not the relevant test in a case of this kind.

4.   At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal today, Ms Cunha accepted that
the judge did not made any clear findings in relation to paragraph
276ADE(1)(iii) and that there were some difficulties with his findings at
[24].  For this reason, she did not seek to defend the First-tier Tribunal
decision.  The parties agree that the decision involved the making of
errors of law for the reasons I have outlined.  There was also agreement
that, given the lack of clarity in the judge's findings, the decision would
need to be remade by way of a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

5.   For these reasons, I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal's decision
involved the making of errors of law.  The decision is set aside and will
be remitted for a fresh hearing.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law

The decision is set aside and will be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for a fresh hearing

Signed   [pic]                  Date 04 November 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
