

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number HU/25738/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House
      Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 11th April 2018
        On 27th April 2018



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                KISHORE THAPA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:               Mr S Jaisru (Counsel, instructed by Sam
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:            Ms A Everett (Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal, he applied for entry clearance as
   an adult dependent relative of his father, a former Gurkha soldier. The
   application was refused on the 27th of October 2016. The Appellant's
   appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Behan at Hatton Cross on
   the 9th of October 2017 and allowed for the reasons given in the decision
   promulgated on the 9th of November 2017. The Secretary of State's grounds
   of application for permission to appeal are dated the 6th of December
   2017, permission was granted on the 2nd of January 2018.

2. The background to the case is not run of the mill. The Appellant lived
   in the UK for 11 years to 2011. He did not live with his family who were
   still in Nepal with the Sponsor arriving in the UK in 2009. The Sponsor
   and then the Appellant returned to Nepal in 2011 before the Sponsor
   returned to the UK again. As the Judge noted in paragraph 26 there was no
   evidence from the Appellant at all.


3. In paragraph 28 the Judge found that there were more than the usual
   emotional ties between the Sponsor and the Appellant on the basis of a
   very high degree of financial dependency, the Appellant is single and
   shares accommodation with his parents when they are in Nepal. The
   Appellant did not appear to have an active social life and that would
   increase the importance of his relationship with his parents.

4. In paragraph 29 the Judge questioned the level of dependency claimed
   given that the Appellant studied in the UK and the Sponsors exercised
   their right to live in the UK. It had been submitted that would not be
   right to conclude that there could not have been unusually close
   emotional bonds if the Sponsors were prepared to leave the Appellant
   behind. The Judge found that the separation did not undermine the
   Sponsor's evidence as to the nature of the relationship.

5. The grounds set out the background to the case and argue that the
   Appellant had lived as an independent adult between the ages of 20 and
   30, the finding that article 8 was engaged was apparently on the basis of
   financial dependency. The finding of emotional dependency based on the
   Appellant's lack of money suggested he was not emotionally dependent
   between 20 and 30 but reverted to emotional dependency when he returned
   to Nepal and his parents moved to the UK. Emotional dependency was rooted
   in more than cash. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Grimmett on the basis that it was arguable it was an error to find that
   there were unusually close ties where the Appellant, who was 37, had
   lived apart from his parents for many years.


6. The Judge's findings are set out in paragraphs 24 to 35 of the decision.
   The Secretary of State's case was summarised in paragraph 24 including
   the submission that there was no evidence that the Appellant had tried to
   find work in Nepal. The Judge accepted the evidence that the Sponsor had
   always supported the Appellant financially and that the Appellant had
   been unemployed since his return to Nepal. There was no evidence from the
   Appellant at all. In paragraph 27 the Judge noted that the Sponsor could
   not give any examples of what decisions he still makes for the Appellant.


7. In paragraph 28 the Judge accepted that there was a high degree of
   financial dependency and the Appellant was single and shared a house with
   his parents when they were in Nepal which could be for over a year and a
   half at a time. The Appellant did not appear to have an active social
   life or to have been taken in by his siblings that would increase the
   importance of his relationship with his parents.


8. The Judge discussed whether, with the Appellant having studied in the UK
   for so many years and his parents coming to live in the UK whether there
   was the level of dependency claimed. The fact the Sponsor and his wife
   left the Appellant behind did not mean that such ties did not exist, it
   could mean a difficult decision had to be made. The Judge accepted the
   Sponsor's evidence that, for whatever reason, the Appellant had not
   progressed to a degree of independence that would come with earnings. In
   paragraph 30 the Judge was satisfied that ties over and above the normal
   ties had and still existed. The Judge accepted that for whatever reason
   the Appellant had not been able to progress to a degree of independence.


9. In paragraph 30 the Judge found that when the Sponsor came to settle in
   the UK there existed emotional and other ties over and above the normal
   ties between adult family members and that those ties still existed.


10. In paragraph 31 it was found that refusal of entry clearance was lawful
   being made for the purpose of safeguarding the economic well-being of the
   UK and to maintain immigration control. In paragraphs 32 to 35 the Judge
   discussed the proportionality of the exclusion of the Appellant and
   concluded that the only factor counting against the Appellant was the
   need to maintain immigration control.


11. In submissions the Home Office relied on the grounds of application and
   observed that the findings needed to be highly nuanced. Less evidence of
   dependency would be needed for a 9 year-old or an older child with
   special needs. In this case it was difficult to see the evidence that
   supported the findings. They had lived apart for many years, the main
   thrust was financial and the Appellant was unemployed, that was not
   synonymous with dependence, that his parents might be his first port of
   call did not equal dependence. Dependence needed more than a desire to be
   together and there was no evidence that the Appellant could not function
   adequately and there was no evidence from the Appellant himself. There
   was too much emphasis on the Appellant's unemployment and age, financial
   dependency did not require the protection of article 8. If there was an
   error the decision should be set aside and remade.


12. For the Appellant it was argued the findings were a lawful
   consideration of the facts. The family situation was considered by the
   Judge, especially the time in the UK and the Appellant's age and
   emotional dependence. The decision was a balanced assessment and reasons
   were given, the Home Office might not like it but the decision was lawful
   and not perverse. It was accepted that the Sponsor had funded the
   Appellant's education and visited the Appellant in Nepal. Paragraph 31
   was a clunky expression of the Razgar test.


13. There are a number of issues that arise from the decision in this
   appeal. The burden of proof rests on the Appellant but there was no
   evidence from the Appellant to give his account of his personal
   circumstances in Nepal or to explain how those circumstances had
   developed. That absence ought to have been a cause for concern and was a
   feature that meant that the evidence of the Sponsor was not given in
   context.


14. In paragraph 31 the Judge found that the decision was lawful and made
   for a legitimate purpose. There is no express reference to the
   Immigration Rules or to Annexe K and so by implication it appears that
   the Judge found that the Appellant did not meet the Immigration Rules or
   applicable guidance. In those circumstances even if article 8 was engaged
   evidence of compelling circumstances would be required to show that the
   refusal to grant leave to enter was disproportionate.


15. It is questionable that the financial dependency of the Appellant on
   the Sponsor, in the absence of evidence from the Appellant putting
   matters in context was sufficient for the Judge to find that there were
   more than the usual ties between adults thereby engaging article 8. That
   however is not the main difficulty that I find with the decision. There
   remained the need to find compelling circumstances to justify a grant of
   leave outside the rules.


16. Annexe K provides for the separation of a family unit in certain
   circumstances but not exceeding 2 years. The periods of separation in
   this case have been extensive and the Appellant lived in the UK for years
   in the absence of the Sponsor and his wife and more recently the
   situation has been reversed.


17. The finding in paragraph 35 that the only matter counting against the
   Appellant is the public interest in maintaining immigration control is in
   my view an error. There being no finding that the Appellant met the
   Immigration Rules or guidance the Judge was obliged to consider whether
   there were exceptional circumstances and failed to do so. Having
   considered the facts as presented I can see no basis for finding that
   such circumstances existed in this case and there was no evidential basis
   on which the Judge could have found that such circumstances existed that
   would justify a grant of leave under article 8 outside the Immigration
   Rules.


18. I note that the Sponsor and his wife have chosen to exercise their
   right to settle in the UK but that is a choice that they have made and
   they clearly retain links to Nepal as evidenced by their repeat visits.
   The exercise of that choice does not attract significant weight Rai. To
   some extent Ghurka cases are treated differently in part reflecting the
   longer period that family life is enjoyed by members of that society.
   Those cultural differences are reflected in the Immigration Rules and the
   guidance. The age of the Appellant, the lengthy period spent largely
   apart from his parents and the absence of evidence from the Appellant are
   such that I find that the circumstances are not sufficiently compelling
   to justify a grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules under article
   8.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal dismissing the appeal of Kishore
Thapa.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 25th April 2018

