
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/25170/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5 April 2018                         |On 23 April 2018                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                               JUMBER KHALADZE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISTANBUL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms I Mahmud, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing an appeal by the appellant against the respondent's decision
    made on 18 October 2016 refusing him entry clearance as a partner.

Background.

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Georgia born  on  5  October  1978.   He
    first arrived in the UK in 2005 with entry clearance as a  student  and
    his leave was extended in the same capacity until 2 June  2010.   After
    his leave expired he  remained  unlawfully  and  in  2011  he  began  a
    relationship with the sponsor, now his wife.  She  divorced  her  first
    husband on 21 October 2013. The appellant and sponsor  went  through  a
    marriage ceremony in the UK on 9 August  2014  but,  unbeknown  to  the
    sponsor, the appellant was still married to the wife he had  previously
    married in Georgia.  The appellant left the UK on 14 July 2015 to  make
    an application for entry clearance, which was refused on  30  September
    2015. In the course of the respondent considering this application  the
    appellant's previous marriage came to light.  The judge  accepted  that
    it was only then that the sponsor learnt of  the  appellant's  previous
    marriage.

 3.   The appellant obtained a divorce from his wife in Georgia on  21  June
    2016 and he and the sponsor married there on 10 August 2016.  He made a
    further application for entry clearance on  9  August  2016  which  was
    refused as the respondent was  not  satisfied  that  the  marriage  was
    genuine and subsisting or that the  appellant  was  able  to  meet  the
    financial and accommodation requirements of the Rules.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

4.    At the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  judge  accepted
    that the appellant and sponsor were validly married as from  10  August
    2016.  She also accepted that they had been  in  a  relationship  since
    2011 and, despite the mendacious behaviour of the  appellant  in  going
    through a ceremony of marriage when he was married to someone else, she
    found that they were in a genuine and subsisting relationship and  that
    they intended to live together in the UK [27].  However,  she  was  not
    satisfied that the financial or accommodation requirements of the Rules
    were met.

5.    The judge accepted that the sponsor was living  in  a  property  owned
    jointly by her and her former  husband.   Her  evidence  was  that  the
    arrangements on the property had not been changed since the divorce  as
    she and her former husband had agreed between them that they would sell
    it when the youngest child left home [31].  She said that she was  sure
    that her former husband  would  have  no  objection  to  the  appellant
    residing there but had not clarified this with him  and  there  was  no
    agreement in writing about the arrangement [32].  The judge also  noted
    that there was no clarification from the  mortgage  company  that  they
    agreed to another adult residing in the property.

6.    The judge noted that the sponsor's youngest daughter and  younger  son
    were living at the property [31] and that  her  adult  son  also  lived
    there.  He was seriously unwell, the judge accepting that  he  suffered
    from schizophrenia and that his mental health had deteriorated  between
    September 2016 and January 2017 [33].  She commented that there was  no
    evidence of the impact on his mental health if the appellant moved into
    the home.  The sponsor's statement had identified some difficulties  in
    the relationship between the appellant and her  family  but  there  had
    been no clarification of the impact of any continuing difficulty  [34].
    The judge said that  she  was  not  satisfied  that  the  accommodation
    arrangements were suitable [35].

7.    She then went on to consider the income requirements of the Rules  and
    for the reasons she gave in [36]-[40] she found that  the  sponsor  did
    not meet those requirements as at  the  date  of  decision.   She  also
    considered the position at the date of hearing but found that there was
    insufficient evidence to support the sponsor's claimed  earnings  which
    in any event was not evidenced by the documents required by the  Rules.



8.    The judge was urged to consider the matter outside the  Rules  on  the
    basis that the sponsor could not move to Georgia because of  her  son's
    fragile mental health and could not meet the requirements  of  Appendix
    FM-SE because of her agency employment [45]. However,  she  found  that
    there were significant breaches of the Rules and  that  there  were  no
    circumstances making it reasonable for the appellant to  avoid  meeting
    them [48].

The Grounds of Appeal.

9.    In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the judge erred in  law  in
    finding that the accommodation was not suitable; failed to  assess  the
    adequacy of  the  accommodation  in  accordance  with  para  9  of  the
    Maintenance and Accommodation Guidance  of  6  December  2013  and  the
    provisions of appendix FM; took irrelevant matters  into  account  when
    assessing whether the accommodation was adequate; failed to assess  the
    public interest under S117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act  2002  properly;  failed  to  consider  the  sponsor's  significant
    difficulties  in  relocating  to  Georgia  and   whether   there   were
    exceptional circumstances even  though  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant and the sponsor developed when  his  immigration  status  was
    precarious.

10.   Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal  on  the  basis
    that it was arguable  that  the  judge  had  focussed  on  whether  the
    accommodation was appropriate or suitable which was  arguably  not  the
    correct test (see E-ECP 3.4).

11.   Ms Mahmud adopted her grounds, arguing that the  judge  had  erred  in
    her  assessment  of  the   available   accommodation   by   considering
    suitability rather than adequacy and had taken irrelevant matters  into
    account when considering whether the sponsor's former  husband  or  the
    mortgage company would agree to the appellant living at  the  sponsor's
    home.  The judge had failed, so she argued, to follow the provisions of
    appendix FM when assessing whether the accommodation was  adequate  and
    had not focused on whether there would be overcrowding  as  defined  in
    the Rules.

12.   Mr Jarvis submitted that the judge had not erred  as  alleged  in  the
    grounds but, even if she had, it had no material bearing on the outcome
    of  the  appeal.   She  had  found  that  not  only  the  accommodation
    requirements but also the financial requirements of  appendix  FM  were
    not met at the date of decision.  When  assessing  the  position  under
    article 8, the judge had been entitled to take into  account  that  the
    provisions of the Rules were not met but she had not  treated  that  as
    determinative: she had taken all  relevant  factors  into  account  and
    reached a decision properly open to her.

Assessment of whether the Judge Erred in Law.

13.   This is an appeal on human rights grounds only under s.82(1)b  of  the
    Nationality immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The  appeal  can  only  be
    determined through the provisions of article 8 of the ECHR  and  cannot
    be used as a vehicle for a freestanding challenge to a  decision  under
    the Immigration Rules. It is only open to the appellant to raise such a
    challenge to a decision under the Rules  if  the  circumstances  engage
    article 8(2) and can properly be regarded as relevant to the  substance
    of the decision: see Charles (Human rights appeal: scope)  [2018]  UKUT
    89 at paras 68-71.

14.   The judge correctly identified at [3] that the appeal was  brought  on
    human rights grounds under s.82(1)b of the 2002 Act  and  proceeded  by
    considering firstly whether the appellant could meet  the  requirements
    of the Rules, finding at [44] that he could not and  secondly,  whether
    he could succeed outside the Rules under article 8.  If the  judge  was
    intending to treat the appeal as a freestanding appeal under the  Rules
    and then consider article 8, that approach would  be  contrary  to  the
    decision in Charles as this was an  article  8  appeal  only.  However,
    neither party sought to argue that judge had adopted the wrong approach
    and, in any event, even if  the  judge  did  not  follow  the  approach
    subsequently set out in  Charles,  that  would  have  had  no  material
    bearing on the outcome of the appeal as Mr Jarvis accepted that it  was
    open to the judge when assessing proportionality to consider issues  of
    accommodation and finance.

15.   The assessment of article 8 when an appellant is unable  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules has been considered by the Supreme  Court  in
    Hesham Ali v Secretary of State [2016] UKSC 60, and Agyarko v Secretary
    of State [2017] UKSC 11. These judgments make it clear that  a  failure
    to meet the requirements of the Rules does not mean that a claim  under
    article 8 cannot succeed but, when considering such claims, a court  or
    tribunal must take into account the respondent's policy as set  out  in
    the Rules and give it "considerable weight at a general level, as  well
    as considering all the factors relevant to  the  particular  case"  per
    Lord Reed at [47] of Agyarko and at [57], Lord  Reed,  when  discussing
    the use of the phrase "exceptional circumstances" used by the ECtHR  in
    Jeunesse (2015) 60  EHRR  17  in  the  context  of  the  assessment  of
    proportionality, said that:

         "the critical issue will generally be whether, giving due weight to
         the strength of the public interest in the removal of the person in
         the case before it, the article 8 claim is sufficiently  strong  to
         outweigh it.  In general, in cases concerned with precarious family
         life, a very strong or compelling claim is required to outweigh the
         public interest in immigration control."

16.   The judge considered the relationship between the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor and accepted that it was genuine and subsisting and it followed
    that family life existed  and  that  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance
    engaged article 8.  There was no issue about whether the  decision  was
    in accordance with the law or for a legitimate  aim.   The  sole  issue
    under article 8 was the proportionality of the decision. When the judge
    was assessing proportionality, she was entitled  to  consider  to  what
    extent the appellant failed to meet the requirements of the Rules.

17    The  judge  considered  what  accommodation  would  be  available  and
    whether it would be adequate.  She accepted that the sponsor was living
    in her former matrimonial home with her children and it was clear  from
    the office copy entries in evidence that the  home  was  in  the  joint
    names of the sponsor and her  former  husband  and  there  was  also  a
    mortgage recorded on the property.  In [31]-[32], the judge highlighted
    the fact that there was no agreement  in  writing  to  the  arrangement
    identified by the  sponsor  that  her  former  husband  would  have  no
    objection  to  the  appellant  residing  at   the   property   and   no
    clarification from the mortgage company that it agreed to another adult
    living there.

18.   The availability of the property is a prerequisite to considering  its
    suitability or adequacy.  No court order or written  agreement  between
    the parties was produced to confirm what arrangements had  been  agreed
    as to the occupation of the property.  The judge was entitled  to  take
    the view that the evidence failed to show that there was  no  objection
    to the appellant joining  the  sponsor  at  that  property.   In  these
    circumstances, there was no need for her to go further and consider the
    detailed provisions of the  Rules  and  guidance  about  assessing  the
    adequacy of accommodation.

19.   The judge was also entitled to take into account  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's adult son was living at the property and had been diagnosed
    with schizophrenia.  She was referred to a letter confirming that there
    had been a serious deterioration in his mental health between September
    2016 and January 2017 and she accepted the sponsor's evidence  that  he
    continued to display serious symptoms of paranoia.  She was entitled to
    comment that there was no evidence before her  of  the  impact  on  his
    mental health of the appellant moving into  the  home.   The  sponsor's
    statement had identified some difficulties in the relationship  between
    the appellant and her family but there  was  no  clarification  of  the
    impact of any continuing difficulty.  She was  entitled  to  take  into
    account that there was no evidence to satisfy  her  that  it  would  be
    appropriate in these circumstances for the appellant  to  live  at  the
    property.

20.   I am satisfied  that  when  considering  proportionality,  these  were
    issues the judge was entitled to take into account.  Even if she  erred
    in her assessment of the  adequacy  of  the  accommodation  within  the
    Rules, this has no material  bearing  on  the  outcome  of  the  appeal
    because she identified factors she was entitled to  take  into  account
    when assessing proportionality and, in any event, she went on  to  deal
    with the financial requirements of the Rules at [36]-[43], finding that
    they were not met at the date of decision or at  the  date  of  hearing
    [43]. There is no challenge in the grounds to the judge's  findings  on
    this issue and she was entitled to  take  the  inability  to  meet  the
    financial   requirements   into   account   in   her   assessment    of
    proportionality.

21.    The  grounds  seek   to   challenge   the   judge's   assessment   of
    proportionality arguing that she failed to assess the  public  interest
    under S117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 properly
    and failed to proceed on the basis that exceptional  circumstances  had
    to be considered even though the relationship between the appellant and
    the sponsor was developed when the appellant's immigration  status  was
    precarious.

22.   There is no substance  in  these  grounds.   The  judge  set  out  the
    relevant provisions of s.117B at [47].  She was clearly  aware  of  the
    circumstances of both the appellant and the sponsor.  She accepted that
    the appellant spoke  English.  The  fact  that  the  relationship   was
    established when the appellant's status was precarious was an important
    factor, reinforced by s.117B(4)b that little weight should be given  to
    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner established when he was
    in  the  UK  unlawfully,  as  the  appellant  had  been   since   2010.
    Accordingly, the judge was entitled to give weight to the fact that the
    relationship developed when the appellant had no leave to remain in the
    UK [48].

23.   Whilst the judge did not refer in terms to exceptional  circumstances,
    I am satisfied that her approach to proportionality was consistent with
    the guidance given by the Supreme Court,  requiring  the  appellant  to
    show a very strong  or  compelling  case.  I  am  satisfied  that  when
    considering proportionality, the judge took all relevant  matters  into
    account and reached a decision properly open to her.  She  was  clearly
    aware of the issues arising from the mental problems of  the  sponsor's
    son and there is no reason to believe they were left  out  of  account.
    She was entitled to give weight to the fact that there were significant
    failures to meet the Rules and to note that this was not a  case  where
    family life had been enjoyed in the UK for any length of time and would
    be disrupted. The appellant was not  living  in  harsh  or  unpalatable
    conditions in Georgia.  He had his own property there, living with  his
    parents and spending time working  in  his  father's  shop  [48].   Her
    findings and conclusions on proportionality make it clear that there no
    exceptional circumstances or any  very  strong  or  compelling  factors
    sufficient to outweigh the public interest in immigration control.

Decision.

24.   For these reasons, I am not satisfied that the judge erred in  law  in
    any way capable of affecting the outcome of  the  appeal.   It  follows
    that the appeal must be dismissed.


Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
                 Dated: 16 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
