
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: HU/26256/2016
                                                               HU/26259/2016
                                                               HU/26261/2016
                                                               HU/26264/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Heard on 22 January 2019             |On 12 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                          UZMA [R] - 1st Appellant
                        MUHAMMAD [Z] - 2nd Appellant
                             AR - 3rd Appellant
                             IR - 4th Appellant
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



The Appellants

 1. The Appellants are all citizens of Pakistan. The first Appellant who  I
    shall refer to as the Appellant was born on  1  January  1977.  She  is
    married to the 2nd Appellant who was born on 3 December 1978  and  they
    are the parents of the 3rd and  4th  Appellants  who  were  born  on  3
    October 2007 and 11 January 2010 respectively. They  appeal  against  a
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Telford sitting at  Hatton
    Cross on 8 March 2018 in which he  dismissed  the  Appellants'  appeals
    against decisions of the  Respondent  dated  21  November  2016.  Those
    decisions were to refuse the  Appellants'  applications  for  leave  to
    remain under Appendix FM, paragraph 276 ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and Article 8 (right to respect for private and  family  life)  of  the
    Human Rights Convention.

 2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 4 February 2008 with  entry
    clearance as a dependent to join her husband  the  2nd  Appellant.  The
    Appellant made 2 unsuccessful applications first as a dependent on  her
    husband's Tier 1 application on 10 July 2009 and secondly  for  an  EEA
    residence card on 3  July  2012.  A  further  application  for  an  EEA
    residence card made on 21 January 2014 was refused on 17 March 2014. On
    19 May 2016 the Appellant applied for leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on an FLR(FP) application form. It  was  the  refusal  of  this
    application which led to the present proceedings.

The Appellants' Case

 3. The Appellants' case at first instance was that it was unreasonable  to
    remove the children who had been in the United Kingdom for more than  7
    years and were in education. The adults had entered the United  Kingdom
    in order to remain temporarily only while  their  visa  for  study  was
    utilised. The Appellant joined her husband the 2nd  Appellant  in  2008
    accompanied by the 3rd Appellant. The Appellant expressed concerns that
    the 3rd Appellant would suffer upon return to  Pakistan  with  migraine
    problems because of the heat in that country. Sadly, the family lost  a
    child and removal, they argued, would affect their ability to visit the
    grave of their child every week.  They  did  not  have  many  links  to
    Pakistan and they relied on the report of an independent social  worker
    Mr Charles Musendo who had visited the family.

The Decision at First Instance

 4. At [10] of his determination the Judge set out what he understood to be
    the issues in the case. Could the Appellants satisfy the 10-year  route
    for private life based on the unreasonableness of  removing  qualifying
    children? Were the children's best interests only served  by  remaining
    in the United Kingdom? Was the decision  to  remove  proportionate  and
    properly  made?  Were  there  any  very  compelling  and  compassionate
    circumstances which could cause the appeal to be  allowed  outside  the
    rules?

 5. At [20] Judge Telford indicated he did not find the Appellants entirely
    credible. He found there had been a  great  deal  of  exaggeration  and
    hyperbole employed by both adult Appellants. The claim not to have many
    links to Pakistan was false. The family had relatives and many friends.
    They had a history of hard-working in  education  and  employment.  The
    adults had admitted that they  planned  to  remain  unlawfully  in  the
    United Kingdom in order to advance the  case  so  that  their  children
    could obtain the benefit of a United Kingdom education.

 6. The Judge was not impressed  with  the  report  of  the  social  worker
    analysing it at [23] to [28] noting that there were three visits in the
    space of six days totalling 7 � hours. This was too short a  time  span
    for the expert to present his findings  as  reliable  (see  [27]).  The
    Judge was also concerned about the nature of the questions put  to  the
    expert in instructions indicating some were not appropriate. It was not
    the expert's job to decide whether it was in the best interests of  the
    3rd and 4th Appellants to be removed from the United Kingdom. That  was
    a matter for the Judge.

 7. Analysing how the children would cope upon relocation he found that the
    parents could explain to  the  children  that  their  homeland  was  in
    Pakistan and the parents could conversed with  the  children  in  their
    mother tongue. The family were able  to  move  around  the  world  with
    relative ease and there would be no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
    family thriving in Pakistan (see [30]). Whilst it was very sad that the
    family had lost a child there  was  no  any  evidence  of  any  of  the
    Appellants suffering morbid grief or  any  psychiatric  report  dealing
    with a high level of psychological harm. Whilst  this  was  a  personal
    tragedy the children seemed able to work well in school. The Appellants
    could not meet the rules but when considering the  matter  outside  the
    rules the public interest  did  not  require  that  the  Appellants  be
    granted leave. He dismissed the appeals.

The Onward Appeal

 8. The Appellants appealed against this decision arguing  that  the  Judge
    had misunderstood what the issues were. The starting point where  there
    was a 7-year qualifying child case was the Court of Appeal decision  of
    MA Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ 705. It was not reasonable to  expect  that
    child to leave the country unless there were strong reasons why it  was
    appropriate to do so. In this case the length  of  residence  was  more
    extensive as the 3rd Appellant had lived in the United Kingdom for more
    than 10 years and the 4th Appellant was born in the United Kingdom  and
    had spent more than 8  years  here.  There  was  no  legitimate  public
    interest in removing the parents of a child who had spent more  than  7
    years in the United Kingdom if it was not  reasonable  to  expect  that
    child to be returned to Pakistan.

 9. The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Parkes on 8 August 2018.  In  refusing
    permission to appeal he wrote: "The grounds argue that  the  Judge  had
    not considered the  question  of  integration  and  had  not  addressed
    section 55 [of  the  Borders  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009]
    adequately. For example, it is argued that the children would  have  to
    pass tests in  Urdu  to  enter  a  school  in  Pakistan,  there  is  no
    evidential basis for that  assertion  and  it  is  not  clear  why  the
    children have not or could not  learn  what  is  their  parents'  first
    language to that  standard.  As  drafted  the  grounds  are  a  lengthy
    disagreement with the decision, long on assertions but without engaging
    with the decision that the Judge made. As drafted they do not  disclose
    any arguable errors".

10. The Appellant's renewed their application for permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal on similar grounds to the application  made  to  the
    First-tier. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchison granted permission to
    appeal on 30 November 2018 noting that although the Supreme  Court  had
    now given guidance on the correct approach in KO Nigeria [2018] UKSC 53
    was arguable that the Judge had failed to address the salient issues in
    the appeal including that the 2 minors were  qualifying  children.  The
    Judge arguably did not apply the correct tests  as  identified  in  the
    grounds  including  failing  to  adequately  identify  where  the  best
    interests of those children lay. The consideration at [12] and [31] was
    arguably approached from the wrong standpoint and inadequate. The Judge
    had not considered whether it was reasonable to expect the children  to
    leave the United Kingdom taking into account the length and quality  of
    their private lives here.

The Hearing Before Me

11. In consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before me  to
    determine in the first place whether there was a material error of  law
    in the decision at first instance. If there was the decision  would  be
    set aside and I would make directions for the rehearing of the  appeal.
    If there was no material error  of  law  then  the  decision  at  first
    instance would stand.

12. At the outset the presenting officer argued that the skeleton  argument
    now put forward by counsel (who had not appeared below) was seeking  to
    raise matters which were not argued in the grounds  of  onward  appeal.
    Counsel for the Appellant disputed this (see  paragraph  23  below  for
    example). She relied on her  skeleton  argument  which  began  with  an
    application for an anonymity order (which had not been  made  at  first
    instance).

13. The skeleton submitted that the two children were  qualifying  children
    and relied on the decision in MA Pakistan. It  was  a  factor  of  some
    weight leaning in favour of leave to  remain  being  granted  that  the
    children could satisfy the 7-year rule. The Judge had failed to make  a
    lawful public interest assessment under section 117B (6) the 2002  Act.
    It was relevant that all the Appellants could speak  English  and  were
    not financially dependent on the state. KO Nigeria had made clear  that
    the question was what was reasonable for the child. There  was  nothing
    in section 117B(6) to import a reference to the conduct of the  parent.
    To the extent that the  Judge  had  taken  into  account  wider  public
    interest  considerations  and/or  the  conduct  of  the  1st  and   2nd
    Appellants the determination was legally erroneous.

14. The 2nd ground argued that the Judge's conclusion that  all  Appellants
    would travel together to Pakistan might not be incorrect,  but  it  was
    demonstrative of a  legally  erroneous  starting  point.  [35]  of  the
    determination was difficult to understand.

15. The 3rd ground argued that the Judge had failed  to  make  an  adequate
    best interests' assessment. Those best interests  were  a  freestanding
    factor and should  properly  be  assessed  before  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise was carried out. Powerful reasons were  required  to
    support a decision which was made contrary to a child's best interests.
    Relevant evidence had not been considered by the Judge which included a
    letter from the Deputy Head Teacher at the children's  primary  school.
    There were other letters of support which noted the children  would  be
    deeply shaken and psychologically affected if they  had  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

16. Citing the factors listed in the case of  EV  Philippines  the  grounds
    argued the children had become distanced from Pakistan  since  the  3rd
    Appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom at age 4 months and the 4th
    Appellant had never been to  Pakistan.  There  were  letters  from  the
    children which the Judge failed to give due weight to.  The  Judge  had
    failed to provide any adequate reasons powerful or otherwise as to  why
    the best interests of the children did not lie in them remaining in the
    United Kingdom.

17. In oral submissions counsel  repeated  the  contents  of  her  skeleton
    argument. I queried with counsel what weight should be  placed  on  the
    observation in KO Nigeria that the natural  expectation  where  parents
    remained in the United Kingdom without leave would be that  they  would
    leave the United Kingdom and the children would be expected to go  with
    them. Counsel argued that this was to  take  the  observation  of  Lord
    Justice  Carnwath  out  of  context.  If  the  argument  about  natural
    expectation was correct it would lead to every child leaving the United
    Kingdom when their parents did not have leave to remain. KO  had  post-
    dated the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, but Judge Hutchinson had
    referred to it when granting permission to appeal.

18. Judge Telford had stated that all the Appellants would travel  together
    but in the case of  an  overstayer  they  would  always  be  travelling
    together. It was a misdirection by the Judge to say the  children  were
    not so integrated they could not travel to Pakistan.  Very  significant
    obstacles or  hardships  were  not  part  of  the  relevant  test  when
    assessing the impact on the children of removal.  Counsel  referred  to
    the letters in the Appellants' bundle which were  referred  to  in  the
    grounds. Whilst it was not argued that whatever the children  said  was
    determinative, the Judge should have taken the  letters  into  account.
    Whilst not every single piece of evidence had to  be  referred  to,  in
    this case none of that evidence was referred to. There was thus  not  a
    lawful assessment of the children's best interests.

19. I observed at this point that the Appellant had submitted  a  535  page
    bundle  for  the  hearing  at  first  instance  and  it  was   somewhat
    impractical for the Judge to be expected to refer  to  each  and  every
    document in that bundle in  his  determination.  Counsel  replied  that
    there was an index to the bundle which  could  reference  the  relevant
    documents.

20. For the Respondent it was argued there was no material  error  of  law,
    the Appellants were simply seeking to reargue the appeal.  The  parents
    had had no leave since 2009. They had arrived in the United Kingdom  on
    a temporary basis with the expectation that they would leave  but  they
    did not. What was being argued now in the onward appeal  was  not  what
    was argued before the First-tier Tribunal. What had  to  be  considered
    was a real-world scenario. The family would be removed as a  unit.  The
    Appellant argued that she wished to  have  a  good  education  for  the
    children, but the United Kingdom could not be expected to  educate  the
    world as had been pointed out in EV  Philippines.  The  Judge  had  not
    found the parents to be credible regarding  the  situation  that  would
    await them upon return to Pakistan.

21. The Judge had acknowledged the ages of  the  children  and  their  best
    interests. The argument put forward  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    whether the children would enjoy the level  of  education  in  Pakistan
    they could have in the United Kingdom. Relevant evidence regarding  the
    impact on the health of the children had not been put forward. At  [19]
    the Judge said even if a rules-based claim had been made on  the  basis
    of lawful residence in the United Kingdom the family  would  still  not
    have been able to succeed. That had not been challenged. There had been
    no criticism of how the Judge has assessed the expert's report.

22. It was not a material error if the Judge did  not  refer  to  each  and
    every piece of evidence. The submission being made by the Appellant was
    simply that the Judge should have given more  weight  to  some  of  the
    documents in the bundle than had been given.  At  [31]  the  Judge  had
    referred to section 55 of the 2009 Act and dealt with  best  interests.
    There was nothing  wrong  with  that  paragraph.  The  Judge  had  made
    findings which were open to him on the evidence.

23. In conclusion counsel argued that [2] of the determination referred  to
    paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi), insurmountable obstacles to return but that
    was not relevant in this case. In only applied to adults. There was  no
    reference to qualifying children in the determination. The skeleton had
    not referred to the expert's report because it limited itself  to  what
    was in the grounds which permission had been granted. In the event that
    the determination was set aside the case  should  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier to be heard again.

Findings

24. This is a reasons-based challenge to the Judge's determination that  it
    was reasonable to expect the 3rd and 4th Appellants to leave the United
    Kingdom with their parents. The core of the Appellant's argument is the
    Court of Appeal decision in MA Pakistan that absent criminality on  the
    part of the parents, powerful reasons are required before it  could  be
    reasonable to expect a qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom. In
    this case both children are qualifying children since  both  have  been
    here for more than 7 years although neither are British  citizens.  The
    Supreme Court gave guidance on the application  of  the  reasonableness
    test when considering the position of qualifying children in  the  case
    of KO. The Supreme Court emphasised the need for "a straightforward set
    of rules" and that the purpose of their approach in KO was  "to  narrow
    rather than to widen the residual area of discretionary judgment".

25. There were three appeals before the Supreme Court, one of which  NS  is
    particularly relevant to the issues raised in the instant appeal before
    me. It was not a deportation case and thus the public interest did  not
    require the adults' removal because  they  had  a  subsisting  parental
    relationship with the qualifying children (one of whom was more than 10
    years old as is one of the children in this case). The  Upper  Tribunal
    had recognised that the children would lose  much  if  they  and  their
    parents were removed and further the children had no knowledge of  life
    outside the United Kingdom. Their best interests were to remain in  the
    United  Kingdom.  Nevertheless,  the  Upper  Tribunal   considered   it
    outrageous for the parents to be permitted  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

26. At [51] of KO Lord Justice Carnwath (giving the judgment of  the  whole
    Court) did not consider that the Upper Tribunal's  disapproval  of  the
    parents' conduct was relevant to its conclusion under section 117B  (6)
    of the 2002 Act. The parents' conduct was only relevant to  the  extent
    that it meant that they had to  leave  the  country.  It  was  in  that
    context that it had to be considered whether it was reasonable for  the
    children to leave with them. The children's best interests  would  have
    been for the whole family to remain in the  United  Kingdom  but  in  a
    context where the parents had to leave, the natural  expectation  would
    be that the children would go with them. Importantly he  added:  "there
    was nothing in the evidence reviewed  by  the  Judge  to  suggest  that
    [removal] would be other than reasonable". As a result, the  appeal  of
    NS was dismissed.

27. In the light of the decision in KO it is  clear  that  the  appropriate
    test in this case is whether there is a natural  expectation  that  the
    3rd and 4th Appellants should go with their  parents  neither  of  whom
    have leave to remain. The  poor  immigration  history  of  the  adults,
    overstaying by several years, is only relevant to the  extent  that  it
    sets the scenario in which the reasonableness test is to  be  assessed.
    It is clear from a fair reading of the determination that the principal
    issues in  the  case  at  first  instance  were  the  reliance  by  the
    Appellants on the expert's  report  that  had  been  commissioned,  the
    concern at the effect on the health of the 3rd Appellant if he were  to
    return to Pakistan and whether there were significant links to Pakistan
    which would enable  the  parents  to  relocate  without  insurmountable
    obstacles and would enable the children to adapt to life there.

28. The Judge considered whether the 3rd and 4th  Appellants  would  suffer
    harm if the family relocated to Pakistan,  see  [13]  for  example.  He
    noted that there was no right to an absolute level of education in  the
    United Kingdom a point which had been made in EV Philippines. The  need
    for the children's education to continue in this country was considered
    but rejected by the Judge for the cogent reasons he gave. Whilst it  is
    correct he did not refer in terms to the  letters  of  support  in  the
    unwieldy bundle supplied by the Appellant's previous representatives at
    first instance, it cannot be said that the Judge  was  unaware  of  the
    points being made.

29. Although it was submitted to me that  powerful  reasons  were  required
    before it could be said to  be  reasonable  that  the  children  should
    travel to Pakistan, had the Judge decided the case  on  that  basis  it
    would have been a material error of law. This  is  because  KO  Nigeria
    rules out a balancing of the adults' poor immigration history  and  the
    best interests of the children. KO Nigeria adopts  a  simpler  approach
    which is to look at the real-world scenario.  The  Supreme  Court  were
    concerned in KO Nigeria that different decisions were  being  taken  by
    appellate Courts and Tribunals when assessing the reasonableness  test.
    There was a need for consistency.  The Judge heard this case on 8 March
    2018 before KO Nigeria was promulgated. It nevertheless applies because
    the common law applies retrospectively.

30. Neither of the adults had leave to remain  and  would  be  expected  to
    return. The Judge was well aware that the children had been resident in
    the United Kingdom for seven or more years  (and  thus  by  implication
    were qualifying children) making a number of references  to  that  very
    point at [4] and [10] for example. At [16] the  Judge  referred  to  it
    being reasonable for the family to return as a whole unit to  Pakistan.
    That  was  the  real-world  context  in   which   the   assessment   of
    reasonableness had to be carried out.

31. It was not necessary for the Judge to set out each and every  piece  of
    evidence although if there was correspondence which was  considered  to
    be of particular importance, it would have been of  assistance  if  the
    bundle had been made smaller and more emphasis on those  documents  had
    been made. It is not correct that the fact that  the  Appellants  speak
    English and are not financially dependent on the state are  factors  in
    their favour. The jurisprudence on the point is clear, they are factors
    against  Appellants  if  Appellants  do  not  speak  English   or   are
    financially dependent they are  not  a  positive  factor  if  they  are
    satisfied.

32. At [35] the Judge stated that the public  interest  required  that  the
    Appellants should not be granted leave. Whilst this might be questioned
    on a stylistic basis, the import of the paragraph is clear, there was a
    legitimate aim in the removal of the Appellants because the adults  had
    overstayed and that was relevant to the Razgar questions when assessing
    the proportionality of the claim outside the Rules.

33. The grounds argued that the psychological effect  on  the  children  of
    leaving the United Kingdom would  be  serious.  The  reference  to  the
    children being deeply shaken and psychologically affected was contained
    in the adults' witness statements. The Judge no doubt had this point in
    mind when at [20] he referred to "a  great  deal  of  exaggeration  and
    hyperbole employed by both the  1st  and  2nd  Appellants".  The  Judge
    rejected the claim that the Appellants should remain in order to grieve
    and there was no specific appeal against that finding.

34. A fair reading of the determination indicates that the Judge was  aware
    of the issues raised by the Appellants and dealt with them. The grounds
    of onward appeal in this case as amplified by the skeleton argument and
    counsel's  oral  submissions  amount  to  no  more   than   a   lengthy
    disagreement with the findings of the Judge which were open to  him  on
    the evidence. I do not find there was any material error of law in  the
    First-tier Tribunal determination and I dismiss the Appellant's  onward
    appeals.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellants' appeals

Appellants' appeals dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so  doing.
The application for an anonymity order was made on the basis  that  the  3rd
and 4th Appellants who are minors should have  their  identities  protected.
In my view this can be adequately achieved by referring to them by  initials
and by reference to them in the body of the determination  as  3rd  and  4th
Appellants.


Signed this 4th February 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeals and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 4 February 2019

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
