
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/26357/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th November 2018                         |On 27th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    H B D
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Malik, promulgated on 24th August 2017, following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester on  4th  August  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nigeria, and  was  born  on  23rd
    March 1998.   He  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, dated 27th June 2016, refusing his  application  to
    remain in the UK in order to continue medical treatment, from which  he
    has up to now privately paid.  He  had  been  here  together  with  the
    presence of his mother in the UK.  She had, by the time of this appeal,
    however, returned back to Nigeria.

The Judge's Determination

 3. The judge, in what is a comprehensive determination, observed  how  the
    Appellant had undergone a successful bone  marrow  transplant  in  this
    country, and had been receiving treatment, which was not  available  in
    Nigeria, but that given that the surgical treatment was  now  over,  he
    could be required to return back to Nigeria, as the Secretary of  State
    had decided.  It was true that the Appellant needed ongoing monitoring,
    but this was in the form of testosterone injections, and these would be
    available in Nigeria.  The judge acknowledged that  "the  treatment  in
    the UK outweighs the availability of treatment in Nigeria, but there is
    treatment", such that the Appellant  "could  continue  to  receive  his
    injections in Nigeria, more so as his treatment  in  the  UK  has  been
    privately  funded  thus  far  and  this  could  continue  in   Nigeria"
    (paragraph 30).  The appeal was dismissed both on  Article  8  grounds,
    and on Article 3 grounds, with due regard being given to  Section  117B
    considerations.

Grounds of Application

 4. The grounds of application state that the judge  erred  in  failing  to
    look at the appeal in  the  context  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Appellant's medical condition necessitated that he  obtained  emergency
    treatment during his visit to the UK.   That  treatment  and  follow-up
    care is still ongoing.  He has met the costs of the treatment  entirely
    from his own funds. This was not a typical Article 3 appeal  where  the
    NHS care was being used, or was intended to be used, for an  indefinite
    period  of  time,  at  public  expense.   Indeed,  the  Appellant   had
    previously been granted leave on account of the required treatment, and
    his ability to be able to pay for it.  That being  so  the  Immigration
    Rules here did not require the application of  a  high  threshold  test
    which Article 3 normally implies in a case  such  as  this.   Yet,  the
    judge had stated (at paragraph 35) that it was not the  case  that  the
    "Appellant could have had any expectation that they could remain in the
    UK indefinitely".  This  was  not  the  question.   The  Appellant  was
    seeking to remain for a limited period of time, on a basis of privately
    funded treatment, so long as this was necessary.

 5. Second, it was clear from the "FLR(O) form" that was completed  by  the
    Appellant, that he was seeking to extend his leave to  remain,  on  the
    basis that it had already been granted.  The Appellant  plainly  sought
    to extend his leave in the same category in which it had  already  been
    granted.  There was no specific tick box dealing with  the  Appellant's
    situation as such.  The fact that  the  Appellant,  together  with  his
    mother, sought leave to remain in the UK, was  nothing  to  the  point,
    because what the Secretary of State had to do was to apply the relevant
    Immigration Rule, whilst that had been identified. This was clear  from
    the case of CP (Section 86(3) and (5); wrong Immigration Rule) Dominica
    [2006] UKAIT 00040.

 6. Third, the judge had wrongly placed reliance  upon  COI  materials  (at
    paragraph 29), of her decision because this material had been  produced
    by the Respondent in error, and the documents were  largely  unsourced,
    and amounted to no more than a series of assertions by the  Respondent.
    The Respondent is obliged to serve evidence upon which she relies:  see
    UB (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 85.

Grant of Permission

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on  22nd  August
    2018 on the basis that it was arguable that the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider the application of the relevant Rule to the Appellant, namely,
    Appendix V, as a visitor undergoing private medical treatment.  It  was
    arguable that the basis of the Appellant's application was  a  relevant
    Immigration Rule, which had not been applied, in a way that  the  issue
    of proportionality fell to be determined in a particular way.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 13th November 2018, the Appellant  appeared
    in person and relied upon the grounds of application.  He said that  he
    had been in this country eight years.  It is true that he  had  a  bone
    marrow transplant.  However, his treatment was  still  ongoing.   There
    were complications.  The Respondent's  suggestion  that  the  Appellant
    could return to Nigeria, and then come back every three months to  have
    monitoring, was simply not a credible suggestion.  The  latest  medical
    evidence,  contained  in  the  supplementary  bundle,  suggested  that,
    because of the chemotherapy  treatment  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    subjected to, that upon return to Nigeria  there  was  a  risk  of  his
    having skin cancer.  Moreover, this additional  bundle  also  makes  it
    clear that the Appellant's condition could relapse  and  cause  further
    complications for him.  The Appellant  also  submitted  that  he  would
    place reliance on Article 8, only insofar as it  was  relevant  to  the
    extension of the current stay that he had already been  given,  because
    his situation was unchanged.

 9. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that the Appellant  would  fail  under
    Article 3 because this is a very high threshold.  What one was  looking
    at in such cases was a "deathbed scenario" and  this  was  not  such  a
    case.  The Appellant had undergone surgical treatment.  The surgery had
    been successful.  He needed monitoring but there was no reason why this
    could not be done in Nigeria.  The essence of the  follow-up  treatment
    was that he needed testosterone injections, but as the judge  had  made
    clear (at paragraph 30) these would be available in  Nigeria,  and  all
    the more  so,  because  the  Appellant  was  privately  funded  in  his
    treatment, which would be  equably  possible  for  him  to  procure  in
    Nigeria.  The Appellant was now in  a  long-term  recovery  phase.   It
    could not be suggested that he should remain here indefinitely.  If the
    judge had overlooked any of the evidence furnished  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, this was immaterial, because the failure was not such as  to
    put the Appellant at risk, given that treatment would be available  for
    recovery care in Nigeria.   Indeed,  in  August  2018  the  Appellant's
    mother had returned back to Nigeria.  This was why this was simply  the
    Appellant's appeal.  His mother and other  family  relatives  would  be
    there to assist him with any  help  or  care  he  needed.   Article  3,
    therefore, could not assist the Appellant.  As for Article 8, the judge
    had properly decided this matter (from paragraph 34 onwards) and  taken
    into  account  the  Section  117B  considerations  whereby  the  public
    interest was served by the maintenance of strict immigration control.

10. In reply, the Appellant, stated that he still needs a hip  replacement,
    and this is clear from the doctor's evidence.   The  latest  letter  of
    17th August 2017 makes it clear that he is at risk of skin cancer,  and
    this is not referred to by the judge.  The Appellant submitted that  in
    2015 he was granted discretionary leave to remain, because this was the
    particular route that his family had chosen for him to come to the  UK,
    and he had succeeded on that basis.  Leave to remain had been  granted.
    So long as  the  current  medical  treatment  was  continuing,  he  was
    entitled to have the same leave extended again.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law, such that I should set  aside
    the decision and remake the decision.  My reasons are as follows.

12. First, this is a case where the judge has not taken into account all of
    the evidence that was put on behalf of the Appellant in relation to his
    claim.  The evidence in the  bundle  from  Rochdale  Legal  Enterprise,
    dated  1st  August  2017,  included  documentation  from  the   Central
    Manchester University Hospitals, which very early makes it clear,  even
    on 14th March 2016, that "a return  to  Nigeria  could  jeopardise  the
    ground breaking and very  costly  medical  treatment  that  Hassan  has
    undergone".

13. It also goes on to say that,

         "The follow-up outlined above would not be accessible  in  Nigeria,
         particularly as a very prompt response by medical and nursing staff
         with  the  necessary  specialist   knowledge   of   post-transplant
         complications and treatment is not  available  in  his  home  city,
         Kano."

14. The judge does not take this evidence into account.  It is true that in
    a subsequent letter  of  27th  October,  there  is  reference  made  to
    testosterone treatment, and that this the judge has taken into account.
     The letter of 22nd June 2017 also makes it clear  that,  "it  is  more
    likely that he will need testosterone treatment  long  term",  and  the
    judge is correct (at paragraph 30) to say that testosterone  injections
    would now be available to the Appellant in Nigeria.




15. Nevertheless, there is no reference thereafter to what was said in  the
    letter of 23rd June 2017 which is that, "he is on ongoing follow-up and
    required to have continuing bone marrow transplant long-term  follow-up
    and endocrine and orthopaedic  follow-up.   He  is  likely  to  require
    orthopaedic surgical intervention".  This is not taken into account  by
    the judge.


16. It is also now, of course, the case that the Appellant points to a risk
    of skin cancer, on account of chemotherapy treatment that he  has  had,
    which needs to be taken into account.


17. Accordingly, in all these respects, it was important, not only that the
    evidence be fully taken into account (and here I say no more than  that
    the judge below should have taken into account all  the  evidence  that
    was available at that time before the Tribunal rather than  the  latest
    evidence  that  has  now  been  produced  before  me)  but  also   that
    consideration should have been given to Appendix V, in relation to  the
    very discreet area of  visitors  who  are  undergoing  private  medical
    treatment, because a different set of considerations  apply  here,  and
    not least in relation to the issue  of  proportionality,  and  such  an
    evaluation has simply not been undertaken.

18. There has been a delay in sending out this Determination to the parties
    concerned, because although it was dictated on the day of the Hearing,
    and typed up shortly thereafter, it appears to have been held up in the
    system, before promulgation.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) such that  I  should
    set aside the decision.  I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined by a judge other  than
    Judge Malik pursuant to  Practice  Statement  7.2(b)  of  the  Practice
    Directions.

20. An anonymity direction is made.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

21. This appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th February 2019
