
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: HU/26732/2016
                                                               HU/26730/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 December 2016                   |On 18 December 2018                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                   A and T
                            (Anonymity directed)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Azmi  (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills       (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The claimants have appealed, with the permission of  a  Judge  of  the
First-tier Tribunal, to the Upper Tribunal from a decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal  ("the  tribunal")  which  it  made  after  a   hearing   of
25 October 2017  and  which  it   communicated   to   the   parties   on
15 November 2017.  The tribunal decided to dismiss  the  appeals  of  each
claimant  from  decisions  of  the  entry  clearance   officer,   taken   on
14 November 2016, refusing to grant them entry clearance to come to the UK
with a view to settlement and to join their sponsor.

2.    The tribunal had made an anonymity direction. It did not say  why  but
I think it was probably because, at the time it heard the case, one  of  the
claimants was a  minor.  The  written  grounds  contain  a  rather  discrete
request for that to be continued but not for that reason. Nothing  was  said
about anonymity. I am not wholly convinced that such is  necessary  but,  in
the circumstances, I have decided to continue to  grant  anonymity  to  each
claimant.

3.    At the outset of the hearing, bearing in mind that the  claimants  are
represented by Coventry Law Centre  (I  think  sometimes  known  as  Central
England Law Centre) I disclosed that  I  had  previously  been  employed  by
Coventry Law Centre albeit not  for  many  years.  I  asked  whether  either
representative  had  concerns  about  me  dealing  with  the  case  in  such
circumstances (though I suppose my concern was largely directed  towards  Mr
Mills).  In  the  event,  both  confirmed  they  had  no   objections   and,
accordingly, matters proceeded.

4.    The two claimants are mother and son.  A is the mother  of  T.  A  was
born on 1 January 1957 (though the sponsor in a witness statement suggests
it is possible she was born on a date earlier than that) and T was  born  on
1 January 2000. They are both Sudanese nationals and the evidence indicates
that they live in a refugee camp in Sudan.  Their UK based sponsor,  Whom  I
shall call U in order  to  preserve  anonymity,  has  been  granted  refugee
status in the UK.  The evidence before the tribunal was to the  effect  that
he was undertaking part-time employment  (paragraph 13  of  the  tribunal's
written reasons) and that he  had  received  some  counselling  due  to  the
impact upon him of his being separated from  his  family  members  in  Sudan
(paragraph 8). A is the mother of U. T is U's younger brother.

5.    Entry clearance having been refused, the  claimants  appealed  to  the
tribunal.  There was a single oral hearing encompassing both appeals and  at
which both parties were represented.  The tribunal  received  oral  evidence
from the sponsor and from two additional witnesses.

6.    The tribunal, first of all, as was required of it, considered  whether
or not either of the claimants could bring themselves within  the  terms  of
the relevant Immigration Rules  which  the  tribunal  identified  as  being
paragraph 319V with respect to A and paragraph 319X with respect to T.  It
concluded that, with respect to each claimant, the  requirements  concerning
maintenance and accommodation were not met.  That  part  of  the  tribunal's
decision has not been the subject of any further  challenge.   The  tribunal
noted in its written reasons that the sponsor  had  lost  contact  with  the
claimants in 2010 but had regained  such  contact  in  April 2016,  that  A
suffers from diabetes and  back  pain,  that  U  regards  himself  as  being
responsible for the claimants and sends money to them, and that  T  was,  at
the time the tribunal heard the appeal, still a child.

7.    The tribunal asked itself what might be in the best interests  of  the
then child claimant T.  As to that, it said this:

    "The second Appellant is a child  and  I  take  account  of  his  bests
    interests as a primary consideration.  Both he and his  mother  are  in
    Darfur and I accept the evidence given that they are living in  refugee
    accommodation.  Although he is with  his  mother,  as  a  child  he  is
    struggling to cope with looking after his  mother  who  is  ill  whilst
    being in a place away from home.  The sponsor is his elder brother  and
    as a family unit, the second appellant's best interests would I find be
    best served by having both financial and emotional  support  that  only
    his brother could give at this time.  I find that given  the  unsettled
    situation  of  the  first   and   second   appellant,   their   current
    accommodation and  lack  of  funds  for  daily  living  that  the  best
    interests of the second appellant are to be with his brother and mother
    and given that the sponsor cannot return  to  Sudan  that  family  unit
    should be in the UK."


8.    Pausing there, although the closing sentence to that  paragraph  might
have been a little clumsily worded,  I  do  not  think  it  is  possible  to
interpret what was said as an indication  that  the  tribunal  was  actually
seeking to decide, at that point in its  written  reasons,  that  Article 8
required the family unit to be in the UK.  Rather, what was being  said  was
that it would be in the best interests of the then child  claimant  if  that
family unit were to be located together in the UK.  Nobody  sought  to  urge
upon me a different interpretation.

9.    The tribunal then explained that it regarded Article 8 as having been
engaged.  It moved on to its assessment of proportionality.  Pausing  again,
there has never been any suggestion to the effect  that  the  two  claimants
might be unable to negotiate their way through the first two stages  of  the
"Razgar" process or that the Secretary of State could not negotiate his  way
through the third and fourth  ones.   So,  the  matter  boiled  down  to  an
assessment as to proportionality.  As to that the tribunal said this:

    "18.   The maintenance of immigration control is a powerful factor that
    is in favour of the Respondent.  The Immigration Rules are not met  in
    this case and on the evidence before  me  neither  appellant  would  be
    independent   financially   and   would   rely   on    public    funds.
    Section 117B(iii) is  therefore  a  public  interest  factor  that  is
    relevant in this case.  Against that is the fact that it is in the best
    interests of the second appellant to be part of a family unit where  he
    is supported by his  older  brother  to  look  after  his  mother.   In
    addition, it was argued that the sponsor is emotionally very distressed
    and indeed suffering mentally by the whole situation and the fact  that
    his only family is in Darfur in these  circumstances.   Both  witnesses
    gave credible evidence about how the  sponsor  desperately  wanted  his
    family to join him  and  I  accept  their  testimony  as  well  as  the
    sponsor's in that regard.   I  do  not  find  that  he  has  failed  to
    integrate however, given how well he has done,  in  not  only  securing
    qualifications but also working  and  being  a  valued  member  of  the
    community.  On balance however,  I  find  that  the  factors  that  are
    against the appellants outweigh those that are in their  favour  and  I
    must dismiss the appeals under Article 8 outside of the Rules."


10.   It is really that paragraph which has been targeted in the context  of
the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In the  written  grounds  of  appeal  of
2 January 2018, it was contended, in summary, that the tribunal had failed
to have proper regard to what was said in AT and Another (Article 8 ECHR -
Child Refugee - family reunification) Eritrea [2016] UKUT 227  (IAC);  had
failed to provide an appropriately reasoned  and  detailed  assessment  with
respect to proportionality; had failed to follow the approach in R  (on  the
application of MM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2017] UKSC10; and had failed  to  take
account of the fact, when assessing the public interest in  the  maintenance
of immigration control, that the Immigration Rules made provision for cases
to be allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.

11.   Permission to appeal was granted and  the  granting  judge  relevantly
said this:

    "1.    The Appellants, mother and son, respectively born on  01/01/1957
         and 01/01/2000, nationals  of  Sudan,  applied  for  permission  to
         appeal,  out  of  time,   concerning   the   decision   of   First-
         tier Judge N Asjad  promulgated  on  15/11/2017  (the  Decision)
         dismissing their appeals on human rights grounds.


    2.     Permission to appeal is granted for the following reasons:


         (i)      there was found that the Appellants  had  failed  to  show
             they met the material provisions of the Immigration Rules 319V
             and  319X  with  reference  to  adequacy  of  maintenance  and
             accommodation all other parts having been met;


         (ii)     there was found to be family life between  the  Appellants
             and their sponsor son/brother, a refugee in the UK,  and  that
             the Respondent's decision had amounted to an interference with
             that family life, the centre  issue  appearing  to  have  been
             identified as one of proportionality;


         (iii)     there  was  further  found  that  given  the   Appellants
             situations inter alia  living  in  refugee  accommodation  in
             Darfur, the minority of the second  Appellant  and  the  first
             Appellant having health problems that 'the best  interests  of
             the second Appellant to be with his  brother  and  mother  and
             given that the Sponsor cannot return  to  Sudan,  that  family
             unit should be in the UK.  ...'   (para 16).   Additionally,
             there was reference to 'credible evidence' about  the  Sponsor
             'desperately'  wanting  his  family  to  join  him  an   being
             emotionally distressed by the separation (para 18);


         (iv)     notwithstanding foregoing  findings,  the  proportionality
             assessment was navigated in brief terms with  there  appearing
             the Appellants' failure to have met the Immigration Rules with
             reference to its financial provisions  a  determinant  in  the
             assessment, absent there appeared as  asserted  of  regard  to
             material authority before the Judge AT & An (Article 8) ECHR-
             Child Refugee-Family Reunification) Eritrea  [2016]  UKUT  227
             (IAC), and more generally, MM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 10,
             and that where families are separated in circumstances not  of
             their choosing the need for  full  assessment  and  particular
             regard to the question of harsh consequences, of  which  there
             appeared together a lacuna in  the  judicial  assessment,  and
             thereby in totality arguably an inadequacy of reasoning on the
             facts consistent with statute, principles  of  refugee  family
             reunification, and the applicable authorities."


12.   Permission  having  been  granted  there  was  a  hearing  before  the
Upper Tribunal (before me) so that it could be considered  whether  or  not
the tribunal had erred in law and,  if  so,  what  should  flow  from  that.
Representation  was  as  stated  above   and   I   am   grateful   to   each
representative.

13.   Mr Azmi argued that the positive findings (from  the  perspective  of
the two claimants) which had  been  noted  at  paragraph 16  had  not  been
properly   incorporated   into   the   proportionality   consideration    at
paragraph 18 of the written reasons.  The tribunal  had  failed  to  accord
sufficient weight to those factors, it had failed to properly  consider  the
fact that the family members were being forced to  live  apart  rather  than
doing so by choice, and had not attached sufficient weight to its view  that
it would be of the best interests of the then child claimant to live in  the
UK with his mother and his brother.  It was hard to understand from what  it
had said, argued Mr Azmi, what weight the  tribunal  had  attached  to  the
various specific relevant considerations.  It had, in  effect,  treated  the
position under the Immigration Rules as being determinative.  If a tribunal
does not  give  an  indication  of  the  weight  which  has  been  given  to
individual factors then its reasons will be inadequate.

14.   Mr Mills, for the Secretary of State,  noted  the  reference  to  the
decision in AT in the grounds and expressed the view that it was  surprising
that the tribunal had not mentioned  that  case  at  all.   But  there  were
differences between that and the instant case  in  that  AT  involved  a  UK
based sponsor who was still a child and was seeking to bring his parents  to
the UK.  So, the  factual  situation  obtaining  here  was  dissimilar.  The
tribunal had appreciated that this was  a  "forced  separation"  case.   The
weight the tribunal  chose  to  attach  to  competing  factors  was,  absent
perversity, a matter for it.  The requirements of the Immigration Rules had
not been met and that was significant  particularly  bearing  in  mind  that
there are public purse considerations.   Differently  constituted  tribunals
might have reached a different outcome  but  the  outcome  reached  by  this
tribunal was not irrational or perverse. All  of  the  relevant  issues  had
been considered.

15.   I have decided that  the  tribunal's  decision  did  not  involve  the
making of an error of law.  It follows that its decision must stand.

16.   I shall deal, first of all, with the points made on behalf of the  two
claimants by Mr Azmi.  It does seem to me that the tribunal took account of
all relevant matters.  Mr Azmi did not argue that the tribunal  had  failed
to actually consider any factors other than the "forced separation" one.  As
to that, the tribunal did appreciate that this was a case where  the  family
members  were  not  living  apart  from  each  other  by  choice.   That  is
recognised at the foot of paragraph 16 of its written reasons.  It did  not
expressly  repeat  that  when  conducting  its   proportionality   balancing
exercise at paragraph 18.  It would have been better had it done so.  But I
am not persuaded that, having identified that matter  at  paragraph 16,  it
would have then  lost  sight  of  it  when  conducting  its  proportionality
assessment.  It can be taken, therefore, that it did  bear  that  matter  in
mind.  It is true that the tribunal did consider that the best interests  of
the then child claimant would lie in living with a reunited  family  in  the
UK.  But the best interests of a non-British child are not,  of  themselves,
determinative.  Mr Azmi did not argue that they were.  The  best  interests
position was a matter to be properly taken into  account  but  the  tribunal
did that as is clear from what it  said  at  paragraph 18  of  its  written
reasons.  I do not accept that the tribunal  was  required  to  explain  the
particular amount of weight it  was  giving  to  every  particular  relevant
factor which it had identified.  I do accept it could  have  said  a  little
more than it did in its rather succinct paragraph 18.  But it is clear from
that paragraph that it identified the factors which  weighed  in  favour  of
the claimants and  those  which  weighed  against  the  claimants  and  then
reached an overall view as to which were  the  more  persuasive.   There  is
nothing unlawful about that approach and, indeed,  what  it  was  doing  was
carrying out the balancing exercise which was  required  of  it.   In  doing
that  it  did  not  treat  the  public  interest  considerations  under  the
Immigration Rules as being decisive of the Article 8 situation outside the
rules.  Had it done so it would not have had to say any more than  that  the
Rules were not met.

17.   As to any points in the written grounds which Mr Azmi  chose  not  to
develop, the tribunals written explanation for its ultimate  conclusion  was
brief but, in my judgment, it was, as a matter of  law,  adequate.   Perhaps
it was no more than that but adequacy is the standard  required.   The  case
was not factually on all fours with AT but, in any event, there  is  nothing
in what the tribunal had to say which demonstrates that it  did  not  follow
the approach taken in AT.  As  to  what  was  said  about  MM Lebanon,  the
tribunal did follow a two stage process by asking itself whether  there  was
compliance with the Immigration Rules and then conducting  a  merits  based
assessment  outside  the  rules.   It  was  performing  that   function   at
paragraph 18 of its written reasons.  The tribunal was entitled  to  attach
weight  to  the  failure  to  comply  with  relevant  requirements  of   the
Immigration Rules.

18.   I do accept that this  is  a  case  where  a  differently  constituted
tribunal might well have reached a different outcome on the  same  material.
As I commented at the hearing, this was perhaps a "tough"  outcome.   But  I
am not able to say that it was one which was perverse or which  no  properly
directed tribunal, acting rationally could  have  reached.   Accordingly,  I
find myself unable to interfere with the tribunal's decision.

19.   Perhaps there might be some hope, though,  for  the  sponsor  and  the
claimants.  It may be that, in due course, the claimant  will  find  himself
in a position to maintain and  accommodate  the  two  claimants  within  the
terms required by the Immigration Rules. If so, perhaps a fresh application
for entry clearance might be made.  I do not regard anything I have  decided
as precluding the possibility of a successful  entry  clearance  application
in the future either under the  Rules  or  under  the  terms  of  Article 8
outside the Rules.

20.   For the reasons set out above the appeal of the first  claimant  fails
and the appeal of the second claimant fails too.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
error of law.  Accordingly, that decision, with respect to  both  claimants,
shall stand.

I continue the grant of anonymity given to the two claimants by  the  First-
tier Tribunal. I do so under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008. Accordingly, no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
name or otherwise identify the claimants nor  any  family  member  of  those
claimants. Failure to comply may lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:     Date: 11 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

