
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/26716/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12  January 2018                          |On 18 January 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 GIDEON [O]
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:               Mr. T. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:                    Mr. D. Chirico of counsel,
instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL
1.   The Respondent, who was born  on  17  March  1992,  is  a  national  of
    Nigeria. It is the Respondent's case that he was brought to the  United
    Kingdom by his aunt in 2003. He was encountered by  the  police  on  10
    August 2010 and applied for asylum that same day. His  application  was
    refused on 26 October 2010 but he was granted  discretionary  leave  to
    remain until 25 October 2013. He has not had any  further  leave  since
    that date.

2.   Meanwhile, he had entered into  a  relationship  with  his  partner  in
    2007. She is a British citizen who  was  born  on  3  April  1991.  She
    already had a daughter, who had been born  on  14  February  2006.  She
    subsequently had three children with the Respondent. A daughter, S, who
    was born on [ ] 2009, another daughter, G, who was born on  [  ]  2010,
    and a son, J, who was born on [ ] 2014. All of the  children  are  also
    British citizens.

3.   The Respondent has a significant number of criminal  convictions  which
    date back to 3 March 2009. Many of them  relating  to  driving  without
    insurance or a driving licence or driving whilst disqualified. Five  of
    these convictions lead  to  sentences  of  imprisonment.  He  was  also
    sentenced to 30 months in a Young Offenders Institute for robbery on 11
    April 2012.

4.   On 22 February 2012 he had also been sentenced to 26  months  detention
    in a Young Offenders Institution for dangerous driving, driving  whilst
    disqualified and using a motor vehicle without insurance. He had two of
    his children in the car at the time of the offence.

5.   On 29 May 2015, a deportation order was made in relation to  him  as  a
    foreign national criminal. In response  the  Respondent  made  a  human
    rights claim but this was refused on 25 November 2016.  The  Respondent
    appealed and First-tier Tribunal Judge  Aujla  allowed  his  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds in a decision promulgated on 26 September 2017.

6.   The Appellant appealed against this decision  and  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parkes granted her permission to appeal on 9 October 2017.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING
7.   Both the Home Office Presenting Officer and counsel for the  Respondent
    made oral submissions and I have  referred  to  the  content  of  these
    submissions, where relevant, in my decision  below.   Counsel  for  the
    Respondent relied on his skeleton argument and also a Rule 24 Response.





ERROR OF LAW DECISION
8.   In his decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  reminded  himself  that
    the longest sentence received by the Respondent was one of three  years
    detention in a Young Offenders Institution. He then reminded himself of
    the requirements of section 117C of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 and paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules.

9.   Paragraph  399  of  the  Immigration  Rules  states  that  one  of  the
    exceptions to deportation for a person who has  been  sentenced  to  at
    least twelve months but  less  than  four  years  imprisonment  applies
    where:

     "(a) the  foreign  criminal  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is in  the  UK,
    and
         (i)  the child is a British citizen; or
         (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the  7
    years  immediately           preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
    decision; and in either case
              (a) it would be unduly harsh for the  child  to  live  in  the
    country in which the            person is to be deported; and
              (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom             without the person who is to be deported".

11.  Similarly, section 117C(5) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 says that the exception applies "where C has...a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship  with  a  qualifying  child,  and  the
    effect of C's deportation on the...child would be unduly harsh".

12.  The Respondent has three children or his own who are  British  citizens
    and also cares for his partner's British child and it was not  disputed
    that the Respondent has genuine and subsisting  parental  relationships
    with the children.

13.  In terms of whether it would be unduly harsh for the children  to  live
    in Nigeria with the Respondent, the First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded
    in paragraph 14 of his decision, that, on  the  basis  of  the  medical
    evidence  and  the  social  worker's  report,  "it  would  be   totally
    unreasonable and unduly harsh to expect the [Respondent's] partner  and
    the children to accompany him to Nigeria."

14.  It was not disputed that  his  daughter,  R,  had  a  serious  form  of
    epilepsy and had required a number of admissions  and  appointments  at
    hospital  and  was  not  responding  to   medication   and   treatment.
    Correspondence from the NHS also indicates that she has suffered from a
    deterioration  in  her  motor  and  language   skills.   It   was   the
    circumstances of this child  which  were  foremost  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's mind and the seriousness  of  her  condition  was  not
    challenged by the Respondent.

15.  The report prepared by Diane Jackson,  an  independent  social  worker,
    dated 20 April 2015, also indicated that when he was not in custody the
    Respondent played a significant role in his children's lives  and  gave
    his partner the support necessary to meet her caring  responsibilities.
    The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  also  accepted  that  the  Respondent's
    partner had to assist her own mother who  suffered  from  glaucoma  and
    diabetes and her grandmother who suffered from dementia.

16.  In the grounds of appeal the Appellant did not  challenge  any  of  the
    findings about the health and circumstances of the Respondent's  family
    members but submitted  that  the  one  error  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was his  failure  to  apply  the  test  approved  in  MM
    (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    450 where the Court of Appeal found that when  considering  whether  it
    was unduly harsh for a child to live in another country with a  foreign
    national criminal or, in the  alternative,  remain  here  without  him,
    regard had to be had to all the circumstances in  the  case,  including
    that person's immigration and criminal history".

17.  In particular, Lord Justice Laws stated that:
         "22  I turn to the interpretation of  the  phrase  "unduly  harsh".
             Plainly it means the same in section 117C(5) as in  Rule  399.
             "Unduly harsh" is an ordinary English expression. As so often,
             its meaning is coloured by its context.  Authority  is  hardly
             needed for such a proposition  but  is  anyway  provided,  for
             example by VIA  Rail  Canada  [2000]  193  DLR  (4th)  357  at
             paragraphs 35 to 37.
          1. The context in these cases invites emphasis  on  two  factors,
             (1) the public interest in the removal  of  foreign  criminals
             and (2)  the  need  for  a  proportionate  assessment  of  any
             interference with Article  8  rights.  In  my  judgment,  with
             respect, the approach of the Upper  Tribunal  in  MAB  ignores
             this combination of factors. The first  of  them,  the  public
             interest in the removal of  foreign  criminals,  is  expressly
             vouched by Parliament in section 117C(1). Section 117C(2) then
             provides (I repeat the provision for convenience):
                  "The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
                  criminal,  the  greater  is   the   public   interest   in
                  deportation of the criminal."
          1.  This  steers  the  tribunals  and   the   court   towards   a
             proportionate assessment of the criminal's deportation in  any
             given case. Accordingly the more pressing the public  interest
             in his removal, the harder it will be to show that the  effect
             on his child or  partner  will  be  unduly  harsh.  Any  other
             approach  in  my  judgment  dislocates  the   "unduly   harsh"
             provisions from their context. It would mean that the question
             of undue hardship would be decided wholly  without  regard  to
             the force  of  the  public  interest  in  deportation  in  the
             particular case.  But  in  that  case  the  term  "unduly"  is
             mistaken for "excessive" which imports a different idea.  What
             is due or undue depends on all the circumstances,  not  merely
             the impact on the child or partner in the given case.  In  the
             present context relevant circumstances certainly  include  the
             criminal's immigration and criminal history.
         25   ...
          1. For all these reasons in my judgment MAB was  wrongly  decided
             by the Tribunal. The  expression  "unduly  harsh"  in  section
             117C(5) and Rule 399(a) and (b) requires regard to be  had  to
             all the circumstances including the criminal's immigration and
             criminal history"
18.  The Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had  failed  to  take  into  account  all  the  relevant
    circumstances.

19.  However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge's reasoning was  not  restricted
    to paragraphs 42 to 46 of the decision  but  had  to  be  read  in  its
    entirety. For example, in paragraph 43 of the decision  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge reminded  himself  that  the  Respondent  had  committed
    serious offences in the United Kingdom and this  statement  had  to  be
    read in the context of  paragraphs 7 - 9  of his decision, which gave a
    detailed account of the Respondent's criminal history and the sentences
    he had received.  In paragraph  35  of  the  decision,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  also  stated  that  he  had  taken  into  account  the
    Respondent's criminal record and in paragraph 42 he reminded himself of
    the fact that the Respondent had  spent  time  in  custody.  Therefore,
    throughout the decision, he reminded him of the weight to the fact that
    the deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

20.  In paragraph 35 the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  also  reminded  himself
    that he had to take into account "the [Respondent's] residence  history
    in  the  United  Kingdom,  his  criminal  record   and   the   personal
    circumstances of his partner and the four children".  In paragraph  36,
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge reminded himself of the facts relating to
    section 117C(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,
    which states that "the more serious the offence committed by a  foreign
    criminal, the greater is the public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
    criminal". In particular, he noted that the longest sentence passed  on
    the Appellant was three years in a young offender's institution. In the
    following   paragraphs   he   weighed   this   against   the   family's
    circumstances.

21.  The Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had failed to note that the Respondent had  entered  the
    United Kingdom illegally and asserted that, if his lack of  immigration
    status  had  been  taken  into  account,  the  outcome  may  have  been
    different.

22.  However, in paragraph 2 of his decision the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    did note that it was the Respondent's case that he entered  the  United
    Kingdom with his aunt in 2002 but that the Appellant was  not  able  to
    verify any such entry. Therefore, he was aware that on his own  account
    the Respondent had made an  illegal  entry,  albeit  as  a  child.   In
    paragraph 3 the First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the Respondent had
    continued to live here without leave.  He repeated this latter fact  in
    paragraph 43 where he also noted that  the  Respondent  had  no  status
    until 26 October 2010  when  he  was  granted  discretionary  leave  to
    remain. As discretionary leave to remain is granted for a finite period
    of time and there is no mention of further such leave being granted, it
    can be inferred that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  aware  that  no
    further leave had been granted.

23.  The references to the Respondent's lack of immigration status  have  to
    be read in  the  context  of  the  proportionality  assessment  clearly
    conducted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge between paragraphs 35 and 46
    of his decision, which were predicated on the need to decide whether it
    would be unduly harsh for the Respondent's British children for him  to
    be deported from the United Kingdom.

24.  As a consequence, the  decision  reached  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was in accordance with MM (Uganda) & Anr v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 617 and First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Aujla did not err in law when considering whether it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to deport the Respondent.

DECISION

(1)  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

(2)  First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla's decision is upheld.


Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 16 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


