
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/26750/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 April 2018                              |On 23 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                YOUNES BAMIRI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Khan, instructed by Howells Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Younes Bamiri, was born on 11 February  1988
    and is a male citizen of Morocco.  He applied for  entry  clearance  to
    the United Kingdom to join his wife, [SW], a British citizen  (date  of
    birth: 14 May 1976).  I shall refer hereafter to [SW] as the "sponsor".
     The Entry  Clearance  Officer  (ECO)  refused  the  application  on  8
    November 2016.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Moxon) which, in a decision promulgated on  25  September  2017,
    allowed the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  The Secretary  of  State
    now appeals, with permission,  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  grounds
    challenge the judge's decision on the basis that he treated Section  55
    of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 as a "trump  card"
    elevating the consideration of the children's  "best  interests"  above
    that required as a "primary  consideration".   The  judge's  "balancing
    exercise" under Article 8 ECHR had not properly been  informed  by  the
    operation of Section 117B of the 2002 Act (as amended).  Secondly,  the
    Entry Clearance Officer submits that his/her decision  does  not  alter
    family life "as it currently exists".  His "status quo" argument relies
    on the fact that the sponsor can visit her husband in Morocco with  the
    couple's child.

 2. The judge  acknowledged  that  the  appellant  could  not  satisfy  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules  as  regards  financial  support.
    Neither he nor the sponsor are  earning  the  income  required  by  the
    Rules.

 3. A careful reading of the judge's decision  indicates  that  the  "trump
    card" argument appears to have arisen out of the way in  which  he  has
    structured his analysis.  At [25] the judge found as a fact that family
    life between the sponsor and the child and  the  appellant  could  only
    take place in the United  Kingdom.   The  sponsor  has  children  by  a
    previous relationship who, in turn, are the subject of a  Family  Court
    contact order in favour of their  father.   For  the  purposes  of  the
    analysis, it was impossible for the sponsor to live permanently outside
    the United Kingdom because, if she did so, she would be separated  from
    her children.  Having concluded that family life could  not  reasonably
    take place anywhere other than the United  Kingdom,  it  is  perhaps  a
    little surprising that the judge at [32] wrote that, "had the appellant
    and sponsor not had a child together I would have had little hesitation
    in dismissing the appeal".  That observation is perhaps problematic  in
    light of the fact that the judge had already found at [25]  that,  even
    if the couple did not have a  child,  they  could  not  continue  their
    genuine and subsisting relationship anywhere other than in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge's observations at [32] give rise,  at  least  prima
    facie, to the assumption that the existence of the child "trumped"  all
    other considerations.

 4. Having said that, I consider the judge's analysis to  be  thorough  and
    legally accurate.  The judge has made clear that he considered the best
    interests of the children as a primary consideration, not  a  paramount
    consideration; there is nothing in the analysis which should  lead  one
    to disbelieve him.  As the  judge  observed,  the  facts  were  not  in
    dispute.  The judge also applied the relevant parts of Section  117  of
    the 2002 Act, setting out his findings at [31].  It was reasonable  for
    the judge to observe  that,  although  the  couple  did  not  meet  the
    financial requirements of the Immigration Rules, the  presence  of  the
    appellant in the  United  Kingdom  will  allow  the  family  income  to
    increase; the sponsor will be able to work additional shifts should she
    have appropriate  childcare.   Upon  a  careful  consideration  of  the
    decision, I accept that the apparent inconsistency  between  paragraphs
    [25] and [32] which I have identified  above  does  not  undermine  the
    legality of the decision.  The judge, has, in effect,  found  that  the
    application of Section 117 would, in the absence of  the  existence  of
    the child, have probably led him to dismiss the appeal  notwithstanding
    the fact that family life could only be pursued in the United  Kingdom.
    The existence of a child has  tipped  the  balance  in  favour  of  the
    appellant; it has not acted as a "trump card"  obliterating  all  other
    negative considerations.  At the end of the day, the  outcome  achieved
    was available to the judge on the facts.  He has justified his decision
    by adequate and cogent reasoning.  The Entry Clearance Officer does not
    agree with the outcome but, with respect, that is  not  the  point.   I
    cannot find any error in the judge's decision either as pleaded in  the
    Grounds of Appeal or at all which should lead me to interfere with  his
    conclusion.  The appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 21 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

