
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/26105/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 October 2018                             |On 25 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                 Kenneth [N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Dieu, legal representative, Asher & Tomar
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   On 19 November 2017 the  respondent  refused  the  application  of  the
    appellant, a citizen of  Nigeria,  for  ILR  on  the  grounds  of  long
    residence.  The appellant's appeal was heard by  Judge  Walker  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal who,  in  a  decision  sent  on  31  October  2017,
    dismissed it.

2.   The appellant's grounds  of  appeal  are  not  numbered  but  have  two
    aspects.  It is first of all alleged that the judge failed to  consider
    the best interests of the appellant's children, in particular  that  of
    the elder daughter, who has lived in  the  UK  all  her  life  and  had
    developed and formed friendships and relationships  with  their  school
    and community.  It is secondly stated that the judge erred  in  failing
    to recognise that after a period of seven years "the  child  will  have
    put down roots and developed social, cultural and educational links  in
    the UK such that it  is  highly  likely  disruptive  if  the  child  is
    required to leave the UK" (quoting from MA (Pakistan) [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    706).

3.   The second point made in the grounds can immediately be discarded.   As
    Mr Dieu conceded, at the date of hearing (12 October 2017) and the date
    of promulgation (31 October 2017), the eldest child had only  been  in
    the UK for  six  years,  eleven  months).   She  was  not  therefore  a
    qualifying child for the  purposes  of  the  Immigration  Rules  or  of
    s.117(6) of the NIAA 2002  and  did  not  stand  to  benefit  from  the
    guidance given as regards qualifying children in  MA  (Pakistan).   (It
    appears the misrepresentation made in the grounds regarding this misled
    Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce into assuming they were qualifying  children
    at the date of promulgation and granting permission for that reason).

4.   I heard succinct submissions from both parties, the main thrust  of  Mr
    Dieu's submissions being that the judge had erred in failing  to  treat
    as a relevant consideration the length of time  the  appellant's  elder
    daughter had lived in the UK, contrary to the guidance given by Lewison
    LJ in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 who  listed   seven  factors
    that  decision  makers  must  take  into  account  when  applying   the
    proportionality test to cases in  which  children  are  concerned,  the
    first two which were:

         "(a) their age; and


          (b) the length of time that they have been here."

    Mr Howells contended that the judge's  decision  showed  he  had  taken
    these two as well as the other factors into account.

5.   Before considering this particular issue, I would first of all  observe
    that I see nothing to criticise in the judge's treatment of  the  other
    five factors listed in  EV  (Philippines)  (which  principally  concern
    educational, linguistic, medical or other difficulties in  adapting  to
    life in their country of origin).  At paragraphs 32-39  the  judge  set
    out sound reasons for considering that the appellant has retained  firm
    links with his country of origin; that being highly  educated  he  will
    not have difficulty in obtaining employment there; that he  could  help
    his children with their education; that his children had no significant
    health problems; that as the official language in Nigeria  is  English,
    his children will be able to negotiate the  language  in  Nigeria  (and
    could get a tutor if their parents  wanted  them  to  learn  the  local
    language as well); that  in  the  UK  the  children  are  at  the  very
    beginning of their education and will have no difficulty in picking  up
    their education in Nigeria; that the children need to remain with their
    parents and that:

         "As they would return to Nigeria as a family and to the roots  that
         the appellant retains there, the  children's  and  the  appellant's
         family life will not be disrupted to any great extent and certainly
         not to the extent that their removal  is  disproportionate  to  the
         legitimate aim of effective immigration control".

    To the extent that the grounds disagree with the judge's evaluation  of
    these various factors,  they  amount  to  mere  disagreement  with  the
    judge's findings.

6.   As regards factors (a) and (b), it is clear that the  judge  was  fully
    aware of the children's ages: see paragraph 3, for example.  It is true
    that nowhere does the judge expressly refer to the length of time  they
    have been in the UK, but it is clear that he was fully aware  of  that,
    as can be seen  from  the  details  he  recites  at  paragraph  3,  his
    reference in paragraph 28 to  their  being  born  in  the  UK  and  his
    statement at paragraph 37 that they were  "at  the  very  beginning  of
    their education".

7.   Mr Dieu makes a good point that as the elder daughter was  only  a  few
    days short of 7 years she was entitled to be considered as someone  who
    had "put down roots" virtually as strong of those of a child in the  UK
    for a period of seven years, but the law  (through  the  concept  of  a
    qualifying child) and the case law (through the guidance  given  in  MA
    (Pakistan)) in respect of qualifying  children,  draws  lines  and  the
    simple fact is that this appellant's children fall on the  wrong  side.
    If the judge's decision had manifested a disregard for  the  children's
    social, cultural  and  educational  links  in  the  UK,  I  might  have
    considered the matter differently, but his  proportionality  assessment
    took account of all relevant  factors  and  was  within  the  range  of
    reasonable responses.

8.   For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and his decision must stand.

9.   I would make the obvious observation that  the  eldest  child  has  now
    been in the UK over seven years, indeed nearly eight  years  now.   The
    appellant  will  doubtless  make  further  representations  asking  the
    respondent to consider his case applying the current  policy  regarding
    children who have resided in the UK over seven years.  It is not within
    my remit to second guess what the respondent's response  might  be;  my
    concern is only with the legal efficacy of the decision made  by  Judge
    Walker in October 2017.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 20 October 2018

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
