
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/26930/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 March 2019                               |On 25 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                   ben [d]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Sangera, counsel instructed by JM Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Ghana  born  on  6  December  1977.   He
    claimed to have entered the UK in 1996 and thereafter  overstayed.   On
    30 May 2013 he applied for leave to remain on the basis of his  private
    and family life in the UK.  This application was refused.   He  made  a
    further human rights claim in  November  2014  which  was  refused  and
    further submissions which were accepted as a fresh claim on  26  August
    2016.  This application was refused in a  decision  dated  29  November
    2016.  The appellant appealed in time, however his appeal did not  come
    before the First-tier Tribunal for hearing until 15  March  2018.   The
    appellant was unrepresented at that hearing.

 2. In a Decision and  Reasons  promulgated  on  3  April  2018  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Watson dismissed the appeal.  Permission to  appeal  was
    sought in time to the Upper Tribunal on  a  number  of  bases,  but  in
    particular on the basis that there were  ongoing  care  proceedings  in
    relation to the appellant's children.  The judge  had  failed  to  take
    into  account  the  most  up-to-date  evidence  in  relation  to  those
    proceedings, viz an e-mail sent to the Tribunal on 12 March 2018.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted in a Decision by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parker dated 9 May 2018 in respect of a further point  which  was
    that at [21] the judge appeared to be under  the  misapprehension  that
    the appellant had only one child, whereas in fact there  is  more  than
    one child.  The Secretary of State lodged a Rule 24 response  dated  10
    July 2018 opposing the appeal, albeit without sight of the file.

    Hearing

 4. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Sangera noted that permission to  appeal
    had been granted on limited grounds and that she would focus on [6] and
    [9] of the grounds of appeal.  In particular, the failure  to  consider
    the contents of the e-mail at [18] and the  failure  to  refer  to  the
    appellant's children, but only one child at [21].

 5. A copy of the e-mail was produced which  states  that  contact  by  the
    appellant with his children has been arranged twice  monthly  since  22
    November 2017 and that child B has not attended contact since  November
    2017 and does not show any  interest  in  attending  contact  with  the
    appellant.  However, the two younger children are  made  available  for
    contact as agreed.

 6. Whilst there was no witness statement from the  appellant,  Ms  Sangera
    submitted that her instructions were that he has  been  having  contact
    with the two younger children.  Having checked the  judge's  Record  of
    Proceedings this is not reflected in the judge's findings at  [19]  and
    [21].  There is no consideration of the children's best interests,  nor
    the judgment in Razgar [2004] UKHL 37.

 7. In her submissions, Ms Aboni stated that the judge had directed himself
    appropriately and had made findings open to him on the  evidence.   The
    appellant's evidence is recorded at [19].  Contact was once a fortnight
    with the younger children, however this was very short  as  the  mother
    brought them late or not at  all.   If  that  was  the  case  then  the
    appellant could not have seen them every fortnight and it was  open  to
    the judge to find the appellant had limited contact with  his  children
    since November 2017.  The appellant had not given evidence  as  to  his
    input into decisions with regard to their  upbringing  in  the  future.
    She submitted the appellant's case was purely self-serving.  There  was
    no error in the judge's conclusions regarding the  role  he  played  in
    their upbringing.  The judge had adequately considered Section  55  and
    the children's best interests, and it was open to  the  judge  to  find
    that the appellant had not shown he is  a  regular  father  figure  and
    whether the relationship could be maintained if he was not required  to
    leave  the  UK.   Ms  Aboni  submitted  that  contact  could  still  be
    facilitated from abroad and the judge found at [22] that the welfare of
    the children would  not  be  seriously  harmed  by  his  removal.   She
    submitted there was no error in the judge's decision.

 8. In reply Ms Sangera submitted there was clearly evidence  in  terms  of
    the contact proceedings that the appellant is involved, albeit this  is
    limited by the terms of the care order.   She  submitted  it  would  be
    wrong to draw adverse inferences  from  that,  particularly  given  the
    nature of his relationship with the children's mother,  which  is  poor
    since they are estranged, and it was not the appellant's choice to have
    limited contact.

 9. I reserved my decision which I now give with my reasons.

    Findings and Reasons

10.  It is clear that the decision of  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  Watson
    contains factual errors: at [21]  the  Judge  made  reference  to  "the
    child" when in fact the Appellant has three children and is in  contact
    with the younger two. Whilst this could conceivably be simply a  typing
    error, the rest of the sentence is illustrative in that the Judge held:
    "seeing the child on only  2  occasions  in  the  past  two  years  and
    sporadically before that does not constitute taking an active  role  in
    the child's upbringing." There is reference in [20] by the Judge  to  a
    letter  from  the  local  authority  dated  21.11.16.  However,   email
    correspondence  between  the  Appellant's  solicitors  and  the   Local
    Authority dated 12 March 2018 and sent to the Tribunal on 14 March 2018
    by both post and fax, confirmed that the terms of the  current  contact
    order was for the Appellant to  see  his  two  younger  children  twice
    monthly since 22 February 2017, which clearly  postdates  the  evidence
    relied upon by the Judge.

11. There was thus evidence of  ongoing  fortnightly  contact  between  the
    Appellant and two of his children, which  was  not  considered  by  the
    Judge. In these circumstances I find that  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Watson erred materially in law, as this evidence was clearly supportive
    of the Appellant's  contact  with  his  children  and  thus  materially
    impacted on the outcome of the appeal.

12. I remit the appeal  for  a  hearing  do  novo  before  the  First  tier
    Tribunal. I make the following directions:

    (i)  A  witness  statement  from  the  Appellant  should  be  provided,
         attesting as to contact with his children and the  nature  of  that
         contact;

    (ii) An update from the Local Authority should be obtained  as  to  the
         current Care Order and the level of contact between  the  Appellant
         and his children;

    (iii)    The evidence set out above should be served on the First  tier
         Tribunal and the Home Office 5 working days  before  the  re-listed
         appeal hearing.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted back  to  the  First
tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                              Date: 20.3.19

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


