
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/26102/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision and Reasons promulgated    |
|On 11 April 2018                       |On 17 April 2018                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     KBB
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mrs Petterson - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent: Ms E Mottershaw instructed by the Bradford Law Centre.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

      1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bircher  promulgated  on  28  February
         2017 following the Judge considering the merits of  the  appeal  on
         the papers at North Shields on 30 January 2017.

      2. KBB is a citizen of Guinea born on 12 April 1979  who  was  granted
         entry clearance as the spouse of a settled  person  valid  from  17
         October 2013 to 17 July 2016. An in-time  application  for  further
         leave to remain, on the basis of the relationship with her  British
         national partner, was lodged but refused by the Secretary of State.
         At [4] the Judge notes it was accepted by the  Secretary  of  State
         that the suitability requirements of Appendix FM were met  although
         it was not accepted the eligibility requirements had  been  met  on
         the basis KBB had failed  to  satisfy  paragraph  R-LTP.1.1.(c)(ii)
         because she had failed to meet the requirements  of  E-LTRP.4.1  of
         Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  This provision  requires  an
         applicant to provide evidence they are (a) a national of a majority
         English-speaking country listed in paragraph GEN.1.6; (b)  to  pass
         an English language test in speaking and listening at a minimal  of
         level AI of the Common European Framework of Reference for Language
         with a provider approved by the Secretary of  State;  (c)  have  an
         academic qualification recognised by UK NARIC to be  equivalent  to
         the standard of a Bachelors or Masters degree or  PhD  in  the  UK,
         which was taught in English; or (d) are  exempt  from  the  English
         language requirement of paragraph E-KLTRP.4.2; and  that  paragraph
         EX.1.applies.

      3. The Judge, having considered the evidence, concluded that  KBB  was
         exempt from the English language requirement and that she therefore
         met  the  suitability  and   eligibility   requirements   and   the
         immigration requirements as contained within Appendix FM [10 - 15].

      4. The Judge also had to consider whether the  appellant  fell  within
         paragraph EX and noted that in the refusal letter KBB's partner was
         said to have been granted exceptional leave to  remain  in  the  UK
         after claiming asylum on the basis of  a  fear  of  persecution  in
         Liberia [17], noted that the couple have a child as demonstrated by
         birth certificate showing on 20 November 2015 a baby boy  was  born
         [18], and found there was  little  evidence  before  the  Judge  to
         demonstrate what  support  if  any  the  appellant  would  have  if
         returned to Guinea and that the appellant had been  in  the  United
         Kingdom lawfully throughout  [18].  The  Judge  found  neither  the
         appellant nor her partner to be a drain on public  funds  and  that
         the requirements of Appendix FM were satisfied [19].

      5. The Secretary State applied for  permission  to  appeal  which  was
         granted by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 7  September
         2017, the operative part of the grant being in the following terms:

             "The reasons for refusal letter had  raised  various  matters,
             particularly concentrating on whether the Appellant had  shown
             she was properly exempt from the English Language Requirement.
             The Judge dealt with those matters with good reasons,  but  as
             this appears to be a hearing on the papers, the Judge was  not
             guided through EX 1 or EX 2 in any great detail. At  [18]  the
             Judge said he was lacking evidence  as  to  what  support  the
             Appellant would have if she was returned  to  Guinea.  It  was
             arguably an error of law to allow the appeal  if  evidence  of
             "insurmountable obstacles", or "very serious hardship" was not
             before him. I grant permission on all matters  raised  in  the
             grounds."





Error of law


      6. It was accepted by both advocates in  this  case  that  up  to  and
         including the findings at [15] the  Judge  had  done  nothing  that
         could be found to amount to  an  arguable  error  of  law.  It  was
         submitted that thereafter, where the Judge went on to  consider  EX
         (b), any alleged error arises.

      7. On behalf of the KBB it is argued that although  the  determination
         is not set out as preferred, a reading of the decision as  a  whole
         shows that the Judge did consider all aspects she was  required  to
         consider and has made appropriately  reasoned  findings  supporting
         the decision to allow the appeal.

      8. In relation to the English language issues; at [12 - 14] the  Judge
         considered E-LTRP.4.2 which provides:

             E-LTRP.4.2. The applicant is exempt from the English  language
             requirement in paragraph E-LTRP.4.1. or E-LTRP.4.1A. if at the
             date of application-


                  (a)  the applicant is aged 65 or over;


                  (b)  the applicant has a disability  (physical  or  mental
                  condition) which prevents the applicant from  meeting  the
                  requirement; or


                  (c)  there are exceptional circumstances which prevent the
                  applicant from being able to meet the requirement.


      9. The Judge found that at the date of application, 15 July 2016,  the
         appellant was suffering from a serious degenerative  eye  condition
         which resulted in her vision being so poor that it  was  classified
         as 'severely sight impaired'. The  Judge  noted  that  in  a  later
         report, following a consultation  on  19  September  2016,  it  was
         stated that the appellant had demonstrated improved eyesight  which
         was recognised two months after the application for leave had  been
         submitted.

     10. There is nothing arguably irrational in the Judge  concluding  that
         the evidence before her established an entitlement for KBB to  rely
         upon the fact she had a disability which prevented her from meeting
         the requirements of this provision at the relevant date.

     11. The Judge was required to consider whether EX applied but found  it
         did not.  The findings in relating to the appellants disability and
         medical condition  were  equally  applicable  to  this  assessment.
         Although it is accepted by the Judge that the Secretary are  Stated
         raised the issue of return to Guinea in the refusal  notice  it  is
         not made out that KBB would have appropriate support  or  that  her
         partner, a national of Liberia, and now British citizen,  would  be
         permitted to join her. The assertion in the refusal that as KBB  is
         over 18 years of age and at an employable age and had  provided  no
         compelling evidence to suggest she would not  be  able  to  support
         herself or partner through employment in  Guinea,  appears  not  to
         recognise the extent of KBB's retinopathy  or  maculopathy  at  the
         relevant date, the date of application. It is not made out  that  a
         person who at the relevant date had vision that was so poor that it
         could be classified as severely sight impaired will be able to find
         such employment or be able to provide support as  asserted  by  the
         decision-maker.

     12. As stated, had the Judge set out a detailed analysis of this aspect
         in a separate paragraph, even if at risk of repeating what she  had
         said earlier at [10 - 12] it is unlikely permission to appeal would
         have been granted. There  is  however  no  authority  stating  that
         unless a judge sets out an appeal in a certain way an error of  law
         occurs. Following a detailed reading of the decision and discussion
         between the advocates and the Tribunal it is clear that  the  Judge
         has addressed the relevant aspects.

     13. Considering the decision as the whole, I make  a  finding  of  fact
         that the Judge has not erred in law in a  manner  material  to  the
         decision to allow the appeal, on the basis of the  evidence  before
         the Judge and need to consider the  requirements  of  the  relevant
         provisions at the appropriate date.

Decision


     14. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
         decision. The determination shall stand.

    Anonymity.

     15. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
         the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

         I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 11 April 2018

