

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: HU/27410/2016
                                                               HU/24723/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                       |Decision and Reasons promulgated   |
|On 9 January 2019                       |On 18 January 2019                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              AMTUL SALAM KHAN
                             KHAULA RIZWAN KHAN

                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Donkersley - Solicitor with the Sheffield
Citizens Advice.
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz - Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


    1. The appellants  appeal  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
       Tribunal  Judge  T.R.  Smith,  who  dismissed  their  appeals.    The
       appellants are citizens of Pakistan, a mother and daughter. An  Entry
       Clearance Officer (ECO)  refused  their  applications  to  enter  the
       United Kingdom to settle with their sponsor,  the  first  appellant's
       husband and father of  the  second  appellant,  who  is  present  and
       settled in the United Kingdom.



Background


    2. The Judge notes the position of  the  family  unit.  At  [16]  it  is
       recorded it was conceded the second appellant could not  satisfy  the
       requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  either  at  the  date   of
       application or the date of the hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal
       as she is over 18. This is a human rights appeal in which  the  Judge
       was required to consider whether the  appellants  could  satisfy  the
       requirements of the Rules as part of the assessment of the article  8
       ECHR claim.
    3. The Judge sets out primary findings of fact from [23] of the decision
       under challenge.
    4. The Judge sets out a number of concerns  arising  from  the  evidence
       including the sponsor providing no evidence to support the contention
       that contact between  the  sponsor  and  appellant's  using  WhatsApp
       occurred,  despite  such  evidence  being  said  to   be   reasonably
       obtainable [49], that no evidence was  placed  before  the  Judge  of
       birthday cards, greeting cards, letters of affection or presents from
       the appellants to the sponsor or vice versa which  the  Judge  claims
       would have been expected [52],  and  that  no  photographs  from  the
       appellants were produced  which  the  Judge  stated  one  would  have
       expected to have been sent by the sponsor [53].  The  Judge  at  [60]
       records there was no  evidence  of  any  form  of  financial  support
       between the sponsor and appellants being sent over the years and  the
       Judge did not find  it  credible  that  the  appellants  were  wholly
       dependent upon money from the first appellant's, the sponsors  eldest
       son, who was working as a missionary as claimed by the sponsor  [61].
       Further adverse findings are set out from [63] leading to a rejection
       of the claims under the immigration rules for both parties. The Judge
       considered thereafter article 8 ECHR. The primary finding being  that
       the appellants had not established that family life  existed  between
       them and  the  UK-based  sponsor.  The  Judge,  in  the  alternative,
       considers the position from [103] concluding  that  the  decision  is
       proportionate.
    5. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
       another judge of the First-Tier Tribunal. The grant of permission  is
       in the following terms:

           "1.    The  Appellants  seek  permission,  in  time,  to  appeal
                against the decision of First-Tier Tribunal T R  Smith  (the
                Judge), posted on 18 June  2018,  dismissing  their  appeals
                under Article 8 ECHR against the refusal by  the  Respondent
                to grant them further leave to enter the UK as the spouse (A
                1) and daughter (A 2) of Mr Khan, the Sponsor.


           2. There is arguable merit in Ground 1 because  the  Appellant's
                son was born on 8 October 1990 (see  para  [27])  and  would
                therefore have been 28 years of age  and  2008.  The  Judges
                factual finding at [61] is therefore  arguably  flawed,  and
                arguably undermines in part the adverse credibility findings
                made against the Sponsor. It is arguable  that  this  flawed
                factual finding (i) affected the assessment of the  rest  of
                the Sponsors oral evidence, where it  could  not  reasonably
                have been supported by independent evidence; (ii) is capable
                of  materially  affecting  the  outcome   of   the   appeal.
                Permission is granted on all grounds."


Error of law


    6. Ground 1 referred to in the grant of  permission  asserts  the  Judge
       made a basic error of arithmetic and, as a result, incorrectly  found
       the credibility of the sponsor to be affected. The appellant  asserts
       the sponsor gave evidence in his witness statement, evidence in chief
       and in cross examination that the  relationship  between  the  family
       members was continuing with there being no evidence the  relationship
       had ended; but that as a result of the circumstances  of  the  family
       there had been limited contact. The Judge at [61] made the  following
       finding:

           "61.   I did not find  it  credible  that  the  Appellants  were
                wholly dependent upon money from  the  eldest  son  who  was
                working as a missionary as claimed by the  Sponsor.  He  was
                only born in 1990 so it is unlikely that he would receive an
                income before the age of 18 which would have been  in  2018.
                Even if it was earlier, for example 2016,  this  still  does
                not explain what the Appellants  have  survived  upon.  This
                leads me to the conclusion that  the  Appellants  have  some
                assets or other sources  of  income.  I  did  not  find  the
                Sponsors open and honest on this point. In my judgement this
                damages the Sponsor's credibility."

    7. A person born in 1990 will have reached the age of  18  in  2008  not
       2018, undermining the basis of  the  Judge's  conclusions  as  it  is
       implausible that a person born  in  1990  could  have  supported  his
       mother and sister from the date claimed. There  was  no  evidence  to
       support the speculation regarding the existence of a secret income or
       to support the conclusion that the Sponsor  had  not  been  open  and
       honest on this point. I find as a result of the unexplained error  of
       mathematics the appellant has established arguable legal error.
    8. Whether that error is material depends upon  an  examination  of  the
       second issue the Judge relied upon when finding the sponsor  was  not
       credible. This appears at [65] where the Judge writes:

           "65.    Whilst I have noted the Sponsor claimed that Danish  and
                his wife shared the family home, but did not get on with the
                Appellants, I did not accept his evidence is credible.  This
                is inconsistent with his evidence that Danish is  supporting
                the family.  It is inconsistent  with  the  First  Appellant
                agreeing to her son  and  daughter-in-law  moving  into  the
                matrimonial home. This is a further point that goes  to  the
                Sponsor's credibility."

    9. The appellants assert this issue was not put to the  sponsor  by  the
       Judge. The Judge did hear evidence to the effect that it was only the
       second appellant and her sister-in-law who did not get  on,  not  her
       brother and sister-in-law. It is  not  made  out  there  is  material
       inconsistency between the claim the family in Pakistan are  supported
       within the family structure, even if some individuals do not get  on.
       The appellant makes out  that  there  was  insufficient  evidence  to
       support the finding made by the Judge at [65]  which  appears  to  be
       based upon a misunderstanding  of  the  evidence  and  an  irrational
       assessment of the relationships within this family unit.
   10. I find arguable legal error in both issues relied upon by  the  Judge
       to justify the adverse  credibility  findings.  I  find  such  errors
       material to the conclusion the appellant and sponsor are not credible
       witnesses.
   11. The second ground refers to  the  finding  at  [52]  of  the  Judge's
       expectation of certain documents set out being available; pleaded  on
       the basis the Judge did not  state  why  he  rejected  the  sponsor's
       explanation for why there were no such documents set out at [40]  and
       [42] of the sponsors witness statement, or what weight the Judge gave
       to the proof of telephone and email contact that had  been  provided.
       The grounds assert the Judge did not ask the sponsor  at  the  appeal
       hearing why there was no financial support and no finding are made as
       to what the Judge made of the evidence of the sponsor of his  periods
       of destitution in the UK from 2010 as an overstay when he slept in  a
       shed or a garage and that he had subsequently, and for a long period,
       suffered from depression.  From 2015 the  sponsor  was  reliant  upon
       State Benefits, had been unable to retain his belongings safely,  and
       was not in a financial position to support the appellants. It is  not
       made out from the evidence, and the Judge makes no reference to it in
       the findings, that the appellants and sponsor had never claimed  that
       the sponsor had supported them.
   12. A point raised in submissions was that the Judge does not set out why
       he thought that members of this  family,  with  their  religious  and
       cultural heritage, would give presents of a  particular  type.  There
       was no reference to any evidence regarding the "cultural  norms"  the
       Judge seems to rely upon which may be more appropriate to UK  society
       rather than society within Pakistan. A number of  communities  within
       the world do not even celebrate an individual's birthday.
   13. The Judge at [68] declares it to be curious that the first  appellant
       obtained a visa to go on pilgrimages on at least 5 occasions, but  no
       attempt was made by the appellants or sponsor to meet  in  a  neutral
       country; without giving due consideration or specifying  what  weight
       was  given  to  the  fact  the  sponsor  was  destitute  and   lacked
       immigration status between 2009 - 2015 meaning he  could  not  travel
       out of the United Kingdom. In  2013  the  sponsor  suffered  a  heart
       attack for which medical evidence was provided.  In 2015 the  sponsor
       was in receipt of State Benefits preparing  for  the  family  reunion
       application.
   14. I find the Judge has erred in law to the extent  that  it  cannot  be
       found that the dismissal of the appeal for the reasons set out in the
       decision  under  challenge  are  sustainable.  I  therefore  set  the
       decision aside.
   15. It was accepted by the advocates that the  Upper  Tribunal  is  in  a
       position to proceed to remake the decision on the day.  I  grant  the
       appellants application pursuant to Rule  15  (2A)  of  the  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules to enable the  submission  of  the  additional
       evidence contained in the appellants supplementary bundle.
   16. I do not find on the basis of  the  material  available  that  it  is
       appropriate to make an adverse credibility finding against either the
       appellant or sponsor in this appeal. It is perfectly credible for the
       appellants in Pakistan to be reliant  upon  the  male  family  member
       referred to in the grounds and to have done so for some time in light
       of the sponsor's situation.
   17. In relation to the first appellant, Mrs Amtul Khan, the  ECO  refused
       the application pursuant to paragraph 352A the Immigration  Rules  on
       the basis he or she was not satisfied that the level of contact shown
       by the submitted evidence was sufficient to indicate that the marital
       relationship with the sponsor is genuine or ongoing and that  it  was
       not made out that the appellant and sponsor intend to live in the  UK
       permanently or that their marriages subsisting.
   18. The evidence now available shows that there  has  been  frequent  and
       regular contact maintained in the difficult situation set out in  the
       evidence faced by this family unit. It is not disputed that the first
       appellant and sponsor are husband and wife. It is not  disputed  that
       they have maintained contact by whatever means are available to them.
       It is not made out that they are not credible. It is not disputed the
       sponsor has a depressive disorder which has made it difficult for him
       to order his life.
   19.  In  Goudey  (subsisting  marriage  -  evidence)  Sudan  [2012]  UKUT
       00041(IAC) the Tribunal held  that  (i)  GA  ("Subsisting"  marriage)
       Ghana * [2006] UKAIT 00046  means that the  matrimonial  relationship
       must continue at the relevant time rather than just the formality  of
       a marriage, but it does not require   the  production  of  particular
       evidence of  mutual devotion before entry clearance can  be  granted;
       (ii) Evidence of telephone cards is capable of being corroborative of
       the contention of the parties that  they  communicate  by  telephone,
       even if such data cannot confirm the particular  number  the  sponsor
       was calling in the country in question. It is not a requirement  that
       the parties also write or text each other; (iii)    Where  there  are
       no countervailing factors generating suspicion as to  the  intentions
       of the parties, such evidence may  be  sufficient  to  discharge  the
       burden of proof on the claimant.
   20. In Naz (subsisting marriage - standard of proof) Pakistan [2012] UKUT
       00040(IAC) the Tribunal held  that  (i)  It  is  for  a  claimant  to
       establish that the requirements of the Immigration Rules are  met  or
       that  an  immigration  decision  would  be   an   interference   with
       established family life. In both cases,  the  relevant  standard  for
       establishing the facts is the balance  of  probabilities;  (ii)  Post
       decision visits by a sponsor to his spouse are admissible in evidence
       in appeals to show that the marriage is subsisting:  DR  (ECO:  post-
       decision evidence) Morocco * [2005] UKIAT 00038 applied.
   21. There is clear evidence that  this  is  a  subsisting  marriage  with
       contact being maintained between the relevant parties. In the absence
       of adverse  credibility  findings  no  countervailing  factors  arise
       generating suspicion as to the intention of the parties. I find  when
       considering the evidence in the round that the  first  appellant  has
       made out her case that she is able to satisfy the requirements of the
       relevant rule and allow the appeal on human  rights  grounds  on  the
       basis  that  any  interference  with  an  established   family   life
       recognised by the finding under the Rules would not be  proportionate
       to the legitimate aim relied upon by the respondent.
   22. In relation to the second appellant, it is  accepted  this  appellant
       cannot satisfy the requirements of the Rules. The ECO also considered
       the matter pursuant to article 8 ECHR, but the second  appellant  was
       unable to succeed given concerns raised in the refusal regarding  the
       relationship between the second appellant and the sponsor; leading to
       a finding that article 8 (1) was not applicable.  The  ECO  considers
       the matter in the alternative, if family-life had  been  established,
       concluding that the decision was proportionate.
   23. The second appellant  lives  with  her  mother  in  Pakistan  and  is
       dependent upon family members there. It is accepted there is  regular
       contact between the second appellant and her father, her  sponsor  in
       the United Kingdom. It is found there is no evidence  of  the  second
       appellant having formed an independent life outside the family  unit.
       Even though the second appellant is now an adult it is made out  that
       family life recognised by article 8 exists on the basis the requisite
       degree of dependency over and above the normal ties  that  may  exist
       between an adult child and her parents has been made out.
   24. The Judge the First-tier Tribunal found there was no cogent  evidence
       of dependency but this finding itself is flawed as  there  was  clear
       evidence of the same in the evidence. The conclusion that the contact
       between the sponsor and second appellant  was  the  normal  ties  and
       affection between a parent an adult child, even if true  in  relation
       to  the  sponsor,  fails  to  consider  the  strong  relationship  of
       dependency between the first and second appellants. The statement  in
       the First-tier Tribunal decision that the  second  appellants  family
       life is centred around  her  mother  and  her  brother  is  factually
       correct.
   25.  The  issue  in  relation  to  the  second  appellant  will  be   the
       proportionality of the respondent's decision in light of the findings
       that have been made in the first appellant's favour.  The  effect  of
       that decision  is  that  if  the  second  appellants  application  is
       refused, whilst she will remain within  her  brother's  household  in
       Pakistan, family life recognised by article 8 that she has  with  her
       mother will be severed when her  mother  joins  the  sponsor  in  the
       United Kingdom. I do not find it made out that the  purpose  of  this
       application is other than family reunion and  to  enable  the  family
       unit to be rebuilt and continue together as normal families do.
   26. It must also be borne in mind that the second appellant is  a  single
       woman on her own from a religious minority, the Ahmadi,  with  little
       access to financial  resources  other  than  those  provided  by  her
       brother  in  a  precarious  situation,  the  evidence   raising   the
       possibility that her brother might be required to  move  due  to  his
       religious calling as a missionary. If this occurred it would  not  be
       culturally acceptable for the  second  appellant  to  live  with  the
       sponsor's brother, the only available option.
   27. Considering the evidence in the round and  taking  into  account  all
       relevant legal provisions, I find the respondent has not  established
       to the required standard that the  decision  to  exclude  the  second
       appellant from the United Kingdom is proportionate to the  legitimate
       aim relied upon by the ECO.


Decision

   28. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside
       the decision of the original Judge. I remake the decision as follows.
       This appeal is allowed on human rights grounds in  relation  to  both
       the first and second appellants.

  Anonymity.


   29. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.


       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 9 January 2019












