
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/00223/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th September 2014                          |On 26th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              MR ALMAS MATUBBER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Powell, promulgated on 28th April 2014, following  a  hearing  at
    Newport on 22nd April 2014.  In the determination, the judge  dismissed
    the appeal of Almas Matubber.  The Appellant subsequently applied  for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, who was born on  18th
    April 1987.   He  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 5th December 2013 refusing to grant him  leave
    to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim was that he met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    245ZX of HC 395.  In the alternative, he had private life rights in the
    UK.  It is important to note that it is only possible  to  surmise  the
    Grounds of Appeal because as the judge pointed  out,  "the  Appellant's
    Grounds of Appeal do  not  seem  to  relate  to  this  appeal  and  are
    otherwise generic in content" (para 19).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had regard to the fact that this was  a  "paper  hearing"  in
    that the Appellant had not elected to have an oral hearing  before  the
    judge.  The judge noted that, "the Appellant has  failed  to  prosecute
    his appeal.  I do not  know  the  basis  on  which  he  challenges  the
    Respondent's decision" (para 20).  In any event, insofar as  the  judge
    was able to discern any relevant fact at all,  he  concluded  that  the
    Appellant submitted a CAS assigned by Northam College but that "Northam
    College is not listed as a Tier 4 Sponsor" (para 17).  The  judge  then
    appears to have fallen into error by concluding that "the Appellant was
    given a further 60 days to obtain a new Sponsor and submit a fresh CAS.
     He did not do so" (para 18).   This  error  appears  to  have  been  a
    continuation of an error in the original refusal  decision  which  also
    appears to have assumed that a period of  60  days  was  given  to  the
    Appellant.  It does seem that none was.  In any event, the  judge  then
    went on in paragraph 19 to observe that no sensible  grounds  had  been
    submitted in the paper application before the judge.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the Appellant was entitled to  60
    days to vary his application after his Sponsor college was removed from
    the list of designated colleges  by  the  government.   The  Respondent
    failed to follow policy and made an unfair  decision  which  the  judge
    failed to assess.  Moreover, the judge failed to assess the Appellant's
    Article 8 rights.

 6. When the matter first came before a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  on  a
    permission application, this was refused on 20th May 2014 on the  basis
    that,  although  the  judge  appears  to  have  fallen  into  error  in
    concluding that 60 days had been given to the Appellant to find  a  new
    Sponsor after Northam  College  was  removed  from  the  register,  the
    Appellant failed to provide evidence to the  judge  about  his  appeal.
    This was the case both under the Immigration Rules and under Article 8.
     It was true that a  period  of  60  days  had  been  given  after  the
    Appellant's original college, Quinton College, was removed.  But no  60
    day period was given with respect to Northam College.

 7. On the renewal application, permission to appeal  was  granted  by  the
    Upper Tribunal on 10th July 2014.  It was  held  that  given  that  the
    Appellant had not been given a 60 day period, and it had  wrongly  been
    suggested that he had been, permission should be granted.

 8. On 23rd July 2014, a Rule 24 response was entered to  the  effect  that
    the Appellant had already been given 60 days in a letter dated 8th July
    2013 after Quinton College was removed from the register.   Given  that
    he had already been the beneficiary of a 60 day period,  there  was  no
    entitlement to provide him with further time to find another college.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 19th September 2014, the Appellant  himself
    was in attendance and he stated that he was entitled to a 60 day period
    to find another Sponsor college.

10. For his part, Mr  Richards,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, stated that there is no entitlement  to  a  60  day
    period.  He drew my attention to the case of Patel (Tier 4 - No "60 Day
    Extension") India [2011] UKUT 00187.  The 60 day period referred to was
    a restriction rather than a definite extension of time.  The  Appellant
    already had 60 days after Quinton College was taken off  the  register.
    But in any event, the Appellant could not succeed in any  case  because
    he had failed to provide Grounds of Appeal that made any sense and  had
    failed to prosecute his appeal.  The judge  could  hardly  have  fallen
    into error if important facts were not placed before him.

11. In reply, the Appellant simply stated that he was entitled to 60 days.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  does  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA [2007]) such that I should set aside the decision and re-make  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

13. First, the judge cannot be said to have made an error of law if  it  is
    alleged that he made wrongful findings of fact,  and  the  right  facts
    were not put before him.  Indeed, the wrong facts were put before  him,
    in the form of Grounds of Appeal that related to a completely different
    matter, thereby arguably leading the judge astray.   Insofar  as  there
    were any grounds, they were not  only  irrelevant,  but  generic.   The
    judge referred to this as a matter of fact.  Furthermore, the Appellant
    chose not to attend and to explain his position so as to put the  facts
    before the judge himself.  Therefore, it can hardly be  said  that  any
    error by the judge was a "material" error.

14. Second, it is worth pointing out that the Tribunal  decision  in  Patel
    (Tier 4 - No "60 day Extension") India  [2011]  UKUT  00187,  makes  it
    clear that

         "Where a Sponsor's Tier 4 licence is  withdrawn,  the  UKBA  policy
         guidance as at November 2009 (at page 52) operates to restrict  the
         remaining leave granted to 60 days where a student  has  more  than
         six months of the original leave remaining.  It has  no  effect  on
         periods of less than six months."

15. If the Appellant was right in his contention, then it would be open  to
    him to join colleges, one after  the  other,  each  successive  one  of
    which, was then removed from the register, thereby entitling him to one
    60 day period after another, so as to eke out his presence in the UK.

16. This is plainly not the policy that the government has promulgated.  In
    any event, this is irrelevant if the Appellant himself  did  not  place
    proper grounds before the judge as I  have  indicated  at  the  outset.
    There is no material error of law whatsoever.

Decision

17. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

18. No anonymity order is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th September 2014


