

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00957/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8 February 2016                            |On 26 July 2016              |
|And 23 June 2016                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          FOZIYA MOH'D TI SAMHOURI
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas and Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office
Presenting
      Officers) (February and June 2016 respectively)
For the Respondent:     Mr M Sallah (Slough Immigration Aid Unit) (February
2016)
      No appearance (June 2016)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of Foziya Moh'D T I Sambouri, a citizen of  Jordan
       born 11 December 1942, against the decision of 26 September  2014  to
       refuse her application for leave to remain.


    2. The basis for her application was explained in  a  statement  by  her
       daughter, Houda Nabil Haddara, born 3 March 1974 in  Tripoli,  Libya,
       and a British citizen permanently resident in the United Kingdom with
       her husband and three children, as well as her  mother;  her  husband
       Amer Issa Abdul Raouf  Kawa  had  been  wholly  responsible  for  her
       mother's financial needs since she had arrived here: his  work  as  a
       mechanical engineer provided him with ample means to provide for her.
       She looked after her mother, cooking for her,  washing  her  clothes,
       taking her to the  GP,  giving  her  medication  and  monitoring  her
       health. She had been becoming increasingly forgetful and dizzy  since
       living here, and was having  tests;  it  was  heartbreaking  for  Mrs
       Haddara to witness her mother's vulnerability, and comforting to hope
       that she would be able to spend her last years in the  bosom  of  her
       family as her dependency upon them increased.


    3. Mrs Sambouri had arrived on 8 February 2014 as a visitor  with  leave
       until 29 July 2014. She had previously been resident in Libya,  where
       she had lived since 1972  and  where  she  worked,  married  and  had
       children. Whilst she was a national of Jordan, she had lost all  ties
       with the country, which was now  merely  somewhere  she  occasionally
       took holidays. She had two daughters, Mrs Haddara (the  Sponsor)  and
       Rahab. Rahab and her family had relocated to Tunisia because  of  the
       unrest in Libya where they lacked permanent  residence  and  so  were
       unable to sponsor or care for Mrs Sambouri, who  had  stayed  behind.
       She had relied on the support of a  kindly  neighbour  to  help  look
       after herself. However in May 2014, following her arrival here  as  a
       visitor, the neighbour emailed to say  that  things  had  become  too
       difficult for her to continue to stay in the locality so she would no
       longer be able to check up on her.


    4. Mrs Haddara and her family could not relocate to Jordan or Libya,  as
       the former was foreign to them and  they  would  be  unable  to  seek
       employment or make a life for themselves there,  whereas  the  latter
       was a war zone, to which the FCO advised  against  travelling.  Their
       established home in the United Kingdom and her  husband's  employment
       here were vital to  secure  the  welfare  of  their  British  citizen
       children who were in school and nursey here.


    5. The application was supported by material including a report  by  Mrs
       Sambouri's GP who set out that she suffered from diabetes  which  was
       poorly  controlled,   and   was   having   blood   tests   for   mild
       thrombocytopenia; she suffered from  lower  back  pain  due  to  disc
       degeneration and spinal stenosis, and had poor vision associated with
       her diabetes. It would be difficult for her  to  manage  on  her  own
       given her complete dependency on her daughter for her care, transport
       and medication needs.


    6. The application was refused because the Appellant had long  lived  in
       Libya, including for a period  of  many  years  since  her  husband's
       death, and thus could be expected to integrate there, or  in  Jordan.
       The fact that healthcare might not be as good in those  countries  as
       in the United Kingdom was not itself  a  decisive  consideration  and
       given that medical treatment would be available abroad this  did  not
       render the case exceptional, there being no breach of Articles 3 or 8
       of the Human Rights Convention given the high threshold involved in a
       health case.


    7. The First-tier Tribunal noted that it was agreed by the parties  that
       the case could succeed only  outside  the  Rules.  It  accepted  that
       family life was established given the clear  elements  of  dependency
       exceeding the norm between the Appellant and her daughter and son-in-
       law, and that it was of an intensity to engage  Article  8  interests
       following removal to Jordan, the only country realistically  in  play
       given she was a citizen there and that her  residence  in  Libya  had
       expired.


    8.  The  Tribunal  went  on   to   make   a   detailed   assessment   of
       proportionality, finding that she could not meet the requirements  of
       the dependent relative route under Appendix FM given she had  applied
       from within the United Kingdom,  though  it  was  accepted  that  the
       evidence that her circumstances had changed following her arrival was
       credible, so there was no attempt to subvert the Rules  here.  Noting
       the  statutory  criteria  under  section  117B  of  the   Nationality
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002: although she did not speak  English,
       she would live wholly in the family unit,  and  she  was  financially
       independent - these factors  were  noted  as  not  actively  counting
       against her rather than being affirmatively in her favour. Her status
       did not fall to  be  considered  as  precarious  as  she  was  not  a
       qualifying partner as statutorily defined.


    9. She had no surviving relatives in Jordan and had  had  no  meaningful
       ties there for many years; her only visits had been to see  her  late
       brother, a Canadian citizen, who used to holiday there. Her  age  and
       poor health meant that the medical treatment would be  costly  abroad
       and at a level which the family here could  not  afford  to  meet  by
       remittances. It was not foreseeable that she could cope  alone  there
       and the First-tier Tribunal concluded (having noted that its role was
       a hard-edged legal evaluation rather than an  exercise  in  sympathy)
       that  it  "failed  to  see  how  the  UK  could  conscientiously  and
       consistently with its Article 8 obligations  send  this  elderly  and
       frail lady to such an uncertain fate".


   10. The Secretary of State appealed on the grounds  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had not measured the  application  against  the  Immigration
       Rules before embarking on an assessment outside them with  sufficient
       care, particularly having regard to the need to assess the case using
       the Appendix FM route as a benchmark,  and  in  particular  had  thus
       failed to take account of her treatment being at public expense which
       was relevant because of the policy to protect public funds  enshrined
       in the dependent relative route at E-ECDR.3.2,  and  failed  to  take
       account of her having entered the country as a visitor.


   11. At the hearing regarding error of law before me, Mr  Kotas  developed
       those grounds of appeal on the Secretary of State's behalf, stressing
       the incompatibility of the decision with SS Congo, in particular  the
       requirement that critical policies enshrined in the  Rules,  such  as
       the prohibition on accessing publicly funded medical treatment  where
       one  was  a  dependent  relative.  Mr  Sallah  conceded   that   this
       consideration had not been given adequate attention,  and  that  this
       was a material error of law, and argued  that  a  re-hearing  in  the
       First-tier Tribunal would be appropriate.


Findings and reasons - Error of law hearing

   12. As it was put in SS (Congo)  &  Ors  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387,  "it  is
       accurate to say that the general  position  ...  is  that  compelling
       circumstances would need to be identified  to  support  a  claim  for
       grant of LTR outside the new Rules". At [48] the Court goes on:


           "What does matter, however -  whether  one  is  dealing  with  a
           section of the Rules which constitutes a "complete code" (as  in
           MF (Nigeria)) or with a section of the  Rules  which  is  not  a
           "complete code" (as in Nagre and the present appeals)  -  is  to
           identify, for the purposes of  application  of  Article  8,  the
           degree of weight to be attached  to  the  expression  of  public
           policy in the substantive part of the Rules  in  the  particular
           context in question (which will not always be  the  same:  hence
           the guidance we seek to give in this judgment), as well  as  the
           other factors relevant to the Article 8  balancing  exercise  in
           the particular case (which, again, may well vary from context to
           context and from case to case)."


   13. There are two Rules which potentially bear on  applications  of  this
       nature: Rule 276ADE which, for an adult over the age of  25  who  has
       not lived in this country for more than 20 years, focusses  upon  the
       prospect of integration abroad,  and  the  dependent  relative  Rules
       under Appendix FM. I do think that the  latter  can  be  said  to  be
       irrelevant merely because an application  it  made  from  within  the
       United Kingdom, because it carefully  expresses  the  imperatives  of
       public policy towards applications of  this  nature  as  endorsed  by
       Parliament.


   14. The admission of under  the  Adult  Dependant  Relative  route  under
       Appendix FM is provided for in these terms.


         "Section EC-DR: Entry clearance as an adult dependent relative
         EC-DR.1.1. The requirements to be met for  entry  clearance  as  an
         adult dependent relative are that-
         (a) the applicant must be outside the UK;
         (b) the applicant must have made  a  valid  application  for  entry
         clearance as an adult dependent relative;
         (c) the applicant must not  fall  for  refusal  under  any  of  the
         grounds in Section S-EC: Suitability for entry clearance; and
         (d) the applicant must meet all of the requirements of  Section  E-
         ECDR:
         Eligibility for entry clearance as an adult dependent relative.
         Section  E-ECDR:  Eligibility  for  entry  clearance  as  an  adult
         dependent relative
         E-ECDR.1.1.  To  meet  the  eligibility  requirements   for   entry
         clearance as an adult dependent relative all of the requirements in
         paragraphs E-ECDR.2.1. to 3.2. must be met.
         Relationship requirements
         E-ECDR.2.1. The applicant must be the-
         (a) parent aged 18 years or over;
         E-ECDR.2.2. If the applicant is the sponsor's parent or grandparent
         they must not be in a subsisting relationship with a partner unless
         that partner is also the sponsor's parent  or  grandparent  and  is
         applying for entry clearance at the same time as the applicant.
         E-ECDR.2.4. The applicant or, if the applicant  and  their  partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must as a result of age, illness or  disability  require  long-term
         personal care to perform everyday tasks.
         E-ECDR.2.5. The applicant or, if the applicant  and  their  partner
         are the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner,
         must be unable, even with the practical and financial help  of  the
         sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country  where
         they are living, because-
         (a) it is not available and there is no person in that country  who
         can reasonably provide it; or
         (b) it is not affordable. ...
         Financial requirements
         E-ECDR.3.1. The applicant must provide evidence that  they  can  be
         adequately maintained, accommodated and cared for in the UK by  the
         sponsor without recourse to public funds.
         E-ECDR.3.2. If the applicant's sponsor  is  a  British  Citizen  or
         settled in the UK, the applicant must provide an undertaking signed
         by the sponsor confirming that the applicant will have no  recourse
         to public funds, and that the sponsor will be responsible for their
         maintenance, accommodation and care, for a period of 5  years  from
         the date the applicant enters the UK if they are granted indefinite
         leave to enter.
         Appendix FM-SE - Family members - specified evidence
         Adult dependent relatives
         34. Evidence that, as a result of age, illness or  disability,  the
         applicant requires long-term personal care should take the form of:
         (a) Medical  evidence  that  the  applicant's  physical  or  mental
         condition means that they cannot perform everyday tasks; and
         (b) This must be from a doctor or other health professional.
         35. Evidence that the applicant is unable, even with the  practical
         and financial help of the sponsor in the UK, to obtain the required
         level of care in the country where they are living should be from:
         (a) a central or local health authority;
         (b) a local authority; or
         (c) a doctor or other health professional. "


   15. The policy imperatives there disclosed are firstly, the  general  bar
       to an in-country application by an adult parent.  A  credible  reason
       for making an application whilst a visitor might present a compelling
       reason for departing from this requirement: as shown  by  Chen  (IJR)
       [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC), a strong evidence-backed case may  demonstrate
       good reason for departing for the general requirement of prior  entry
       clearance, having regard to the  principle  identified  in  Chikwamba
       [2008] UKHL 40. Secondly there is a very high  substantive  threshold
       set, which requires that no care be available,  even  with  practical
       and financial help from the family here. Thirdly there  are  specific
       evidential requirements including the opinion of a  doctor  or  other
       health professional as to their ability to perform everyday tasks.  I
       do not consider that the fact that an "in-country" application  might
       constitute a  compelling  reason  for  considering  that  the  public
       interest in enforcing the entry clearance  route  might  be  overcome
       necessarily abrogates the need for the other policy objectives of the
       Rule to be foregone.


   16. Although the decision at first instance was in general  thorough  and
       well-reasoned, there were nevertheless two  material  errors  of  law
       here.


   17. Firstly the public policy enshrined in the  Rule  set  out  above  to
       protect public funds from bearing  the  costs  of  medical  treatment
       (which patently goes beyond the question of whether an individual can
       be maintained and accommodated) was given  no  attention  whatsoever.
       Thus the  balancing  exercise  was  conducted  without  regard  to  a
       relevant consideration.


   18. Secondly it was wrong to state that the Respondent's position was not
       precarious: whilst it is true that it was not statutorily  deemed  as
       such by  section  117B,  nevertheless  the  position  struck  by  the
       Strasbourg Court  is  that  in  general  non-settled  residence  (and
       certainly residence for a period as temporary as that found here)  is
       considered precarious, see for example Sales  LJ  in  Agyarko  [2015]
       EWCA Civ 440 at [28]: "since her family  life  was  established  with
       knowledge that she had no right to be in the United Kingdom  and  was
       therefore precarious in the relevant sense, it is only if her case is
       exceptional for some reason that she will  be  able  to  establish  a
       violation of Article 8: see  Nagre,  paras.  [39]-[41];  SS  (Congo),
       para. [29]; and Jeunesse  v  Netherlands,  paras.  [108],  [114]  and
       [122]."


   19. I accordingly found that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       contained a material error of law.  As only limited fact-finding  was
       anticipated  as  necessary  to  finally  determine  the   appeal,   I
       considered it appropriate for the matter to be retained by the  Upper
       Tribunal, and made appropriate directions.


Findings and reasons - Continuation hearing


   20. Shortly before the hearing date for the resumed  hearing,  the  Upper
       Tribunal received an invitation from the Respondent (Ms Samhouri)  to
       determine the appeal in the light of a letter in which they indicated
       they no longer wished to pursue the matter.  The  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 state at Rule 17:


           "(1) Subject to paragraph (2), a party may give  notice  of  the
           withdrawal of its case, or any part of it-
           (a) by sending or delivering to the  Upper  Tribunal  a  written
           notice of withdrawal;
           (2) Notice of withdrawal will not take effect unless  the  Upper
           Tribunal consents to the withdrawal except  in  relation  to  an
           application for permission to appeal."


   21. It is tolerably clear from their letter that  those  representing  Ms
       Samhouri seek to withdraw their "case", as the Rule puts  it.  As  Mr
       Bramble  for  the  Secretary  of  State  agreed  that  this  was   an
       appropriate course of action, and there is no  reason  based  on  the
       interests of justice suggesting the contrary, I accordingly give  the
       Upper Tribunal's leave for this notice of withdrawal to take effect.


   22. The consequence of this, Ms Samhouri  being  the  Respondent  to  the
       appeal but an error of law having been  identified  at  the  previous
       hearing which resulted in the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  being
       set aside, is that she upon this re-hearing put no  substantive  case
       against the refusal letter of the Secretary of State.  I  accordingly
       find that the appeal of the Secretary of State succeeds in the  Upper
       Tribunal,  and  the  appeal  of  Ms  Samhouri  against  the  original
       immigration decision is dismissed.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.
The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.

Signed:                                            Date: 21 July 2016


[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
