
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00726/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th July 2014                                |On 21st July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                         christopher william eriata
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Ikie of Ikie Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Borsada (the judge) promulgated on 14th April 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Nigeria born 4th February  1970  who
    applied for a residence card as confirmation of a right  to  reside  in
    the United Kingdom.  The application was made on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant is the extended family member of an EEA national, that  being
    his cousin Augustine Edobor, an Italian national to whom I shall  refer
    as the Sponsor.

 3. The application was refused on  4th  December  2013.   In  summary  the
    Respondent did not accept that the Appellant and Sponsor are related as
    claimed, and did not accept  the  Sponsor  is  a  qualified  person  as
    defined by regulation 6 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the 2006 regulations), and did not  accept  that  the
    Appellant had been dependent upon the Sponsor either in Nigeria  or  in
    the United Kingdom.

 4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  his  appeal  was
    heard by the judge on  4th  April  2014.   The  Appellant  was  legally
    represented, and the  judge  heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor.  The judge concluded that it had been proved that the  Sponsor
    is a qualified person, but did not find that the Sponsor and  Appellant
    had given credible evidence, and therefore did  not  accept  that  they
    were related as claimed.  In addition the judge did not accept that  it
    had been proved that the  Appellant  was  dependent  upon  the  Sponsor
    either in Nigeria or in the United Kingdom.  The appeal  was  dismissed
    with reference to the 2006 regulations,  and  also  with  reference  to
    Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on  Human  Rights  (the  1950
    Convention).

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary the Appellant relied upon four grounds which are  summarised
    below;

      i) It was contended that the judge had erred in law by applying double
         standards in his decision making.  The judge  had  found  that  the
         Sponsor was a qualified person based upon  the  objective  evidence
         before  him  and  therefore  should  have  accepted  the  objective
         evidence that was before him in relation  to  dependency,  and  the
         relationship between the Sponsor and Appellant.

     ii) It was submitted that the issue of credibility should not be  fatal
         to the appeal.  If objective evidence was to be disregarded it  was
         contended that the judge had to show that the documents are  either
         "bogus or fake".  The judge had not done so in this case.

    iii) It was contended that the judge should  have  accepted  the  family
         tree which had been prepared to show the Appellant and Sponsor  are
         first cousins, and should have accepted  birth  certificates  which
         shows that the mothers of the Appellant and Sponsor have  the  same
         surname.

     iv) It  was  contended  that  the  Appellant  had  not  understood  the
         questions properly because of his poor understanding of the English
         language "or was completely overwhelmed by the court  environment".
         It was contended that  the  discrepancy  between  the  Sponsor  and
         Appellant as to their relationship was insufficient for  the  judge
         to find them incredible witnesses, and  the  judge's  decision  was
         therefore perverse.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Levin who found it arguable that the judge had given inadequate reasons
    for his findings.

 7. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending that the judge had directed himself appropriately,  and
    was entitled to have serious concerns at the  discrepancy  revealed  in
    the evidence.

 8. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal  to  decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me Mr Ikie relied and expanded upon  the  grounds
    contained within the application for permission  to  appeal.   Mr  Ikie
    submitted that the judge should not accept some objective evidence  and
    not other objective evidence which supported the Appellant's case.

10. I was asked to conclude that the  judge  had  not  attached  sufficient
    weight to birth certificates proving the  relationship,  and  a  letter
    from a  local  authority  in  Nigeria  proving  that  the  Sponsor  and
    Appellant had lived in the same household.

11. In relation to the contention of perversity, I asked Mr Ikie to explain
    how it was contended that the judge had acted perversely.  Mr  Ikie  by
    way of response indicated  that  his  case  was  the  judge  had  acted
    unreasonably rather than perversely.

The Respondent's Submissions

12. Mr Whitwell relied upon the Rule 24 response  and  submitted  that  the
    weight to be attached to evidence was a matter for the judge who  heard
    that evidence.

13. I was asked to note that there had been no request for  an  interpreter
    for  the  Appellant,  and  no  indication  given  that  he  was  having
    difficulties with the language, until submissions  were  made  on  that
    point.

14. Mr Whitwell submitted that the grounds amounted to a disagreement  with
    the decision made by the First-tier Tribunal, and did not  disclose  an
    error of law.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. I do not find any merit  in  the  suggestion  that  because  the  judge
    accepted documentary evidence which indicated that  the  Sponsor  is  a
    qualified person, then  he  was  also  obliged  to  accept  documentary
    evidence as to relationship and dependency.  The judge was entitled  to
    attach what weight he thought appropriate to documentary evidence.   It
    cannot be said that because there is documentary evidence  proving  one
    aspect of a case, that all documentary evidence must be accepted.

16. In relation to documentation I reject the submission that it is for the
    judge to show that documents are "either bogus or fake" as is suggested
    in the second ground of appeal.  If there is an allegation made that  a
    document  is  false,  then  evidence  must  be  given  to  prove   that
    allegation, and if it is the Respondent contending that a  document  is
    false, the burden  of  proof  is  on  the  Respondent.   This  was  not
    suggested by the Respondent in this appeal.  If there is no  allegation
    of forgery, then the principles in Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT  00439
    apply, and it is for an individual who produces a document to show that
    it can be relied upon.  The decision maker should  consider  whether  a
    document is one on which  reliance  should  properly  be  placed  after
    looking at all the evidence in the round.  I do not find that the judge
    has erred on this issue.  I note that the family tree referred to,  was
    not independently produced.  The judge considered the evidence  in  the
    round and applied the correct standard of proof.   The  judge  found  a
    major discrepancy between the evidence provided by the Sponsor and  the
    Appellant.  The Appellant said that his mother and the Sponsor's mother
    shared the same grandfather which meant  they  were  cousins,  but  the
    Sponsor said that their mothers were sisters.

17. This is a significant discrepancy and the judge was entitled to  attach
    weight  to  it.   The  judge  considered  in  paragraph  8  whether   a
    satisfactory explanation for the discrepancy had been  given.   He  was
    entitled to conclude that it  had  not  as  the  only  explanation  put
    forward was that the Appellant had insufficient command of  English  to
    understand the questions.  The judge was entitled to  note  that  there
    had been no request for an interpreter, and there had been no complaint
    during evidence that the Appellant had not  understood  the  questions.
    This issue had only been raised in submissions.  The judge had listened
    to the evidence of both the Appellant and Sponsor, and was therefore in
    the position to make a judgment as to whether or not the Appellant  had
    understood the questions asked of him by both representatives.

18. It is clear that the judge considered  the  documentary  evidence  that
    related both to relationship and dependency, as he refers not  only  to
    the family tree, but to the  birth  certificates,  and  evidence  of  a
    tenancy agreement which had been submitted to prove  that  the  parties
    had previously lived together in Nigeria.

19. Taking the determination as a whole, I conclude that the judge did  not
    fail to take into account any material matters, and considered all  the
    evidence put before him.  Mr Ikie did not pursue  the  allegation  that
    the decision was perverse, and therefore the error of law  said  to  be
    inadequacy of reasoning.

20. I have taken into  account  the  guidance  in  Shizad  (sufficiency  of
    reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC) and set out  below  the  first
    paragraph of the head note to that decision;

    (1)  Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of  the
         conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal is  determined,
         those reasons need not be extensive if  the  decision  as  a  whole
         makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge.

21. The judge has satisfactorily explained why he made his findings, and  I
    conclude  that  the  grounds  contained  within  the  application   for
    permission to appeal express a  disagreement  with  his  decision,  but
    disclose no error of law.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no error of law.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no  request  for  anonymity  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  makes  no  anonymity
direction.






Signed                              Date: 14th July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date: 14th July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


