
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/00832/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |          Decision & Reason        |
|                                   |Promulgated                        |
|On 26 March 2018                 |               On 11 April 2018      |
|2018                             |                                     |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                MUHAMMAD ASIM
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr G Lee (Counsel) instructed by Britain
solicitors
For the Respondent:           Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Juss  promulgated  on  26  July  2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's  refusal  to  issue  an  EEA
permanent residence card.


Background


3. The Appellant was born on 12 October 1982 and is a national of  Pakistan.
On  27  January  2016  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the   Appellant's
application for confirmation of a permanent right to reside on the UK  under
the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Juss ("the Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 23 January 2018  Judge  Kelly
gave permission to appeal stating

      It is arguable that the Tribunal erred by (a)  applying  a  "shifting"
      burden with regard to proving that the appellant's marriage was one of
      convenience (the Judge refers to  the  respondent  having  "raised  an
      issue" that had " not been met by the appellant"; s/he also refers  to
      IS Serbia [2008] UKAIT 31, the reasoning of  which  was  described  as
      "seriously confused" by the Court of Appeal in Rosa [2016] EWCA 14  at
      paragraph 29, (b) confusing the concepts of a "sham" marriage with one
      that was not "genuine and subsisting", (c) failing to have  regard  to
      material evidence submitted on behalf of the appellant, and (d) basing
      its findings upon discrepant replies given  to  the  respondent  in  a
      supposed interview with the appellant and his partner,  the  existence
      of which is not  apparent  from  either  the  respondent's  bundle  of
      documents or the reasons for refusal letter. Permission to  appeal  is
      accordingly granted on all grounds.

The Hearing

5. (a) Mr Lee, for the appellant, moved the grounds of appeal.  He  told  me
that there are three material  errors  of  law  in  the  decision,  but  his
submissions would focus principally on [9] of  the  decision.  In  the  last
sentence of [9] the Judge places emphasis  on  an  interview  in  which,  he
says, the appellant and his wife demonstrated that  they  lacked  the  basic
knowledge of details about each other. Mr Lee told me that the problem  with
that finding is that there is no such interview. He told  me  that  that  is
not just an error, but it is a material error because the  Judge  identifies
the erroneous finding about the contents of  an  interview  (which  did  not
take place) as most important.

(b) Mr Lee told me  that  the  decision  does  not  contain  any  meaningful
reference to the evidence produced for the appellant. His third (and  final)
point was that although the Judge says the burden of  proof  shifts  to  the
appellant,  he  does  not  explain  which  part  of  the  evidence  for  the
respondent he accepted so that the burden does shift to the appellant.

(c)  Mr Lee's principal point was that the final  sentence  of  [9]  of  the
decision  is  an  error  of  such  significance   that   the   decision   is
fundamentally flawed.  He  told  me  that  the  decision  is  undermined  by
material errors of law. He urged me to set the decision aside and  to  remit
this case to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

6. (a) For the respondent, Mr Bramble told  me  that  he  had  examined  the
respondent's  file  and  checked  computer   records   maintained   by   the
respondent. His investigations told him that  the  appellant  has  not  been
called to a marriage interview so that he concedes that the  final  sentence
of [9] is an error, but he told me that the error is not material.

(b) Mr Bramble took me to the respondent's reasons for  refusal  letter.  He
told me that that letter set  out  in  detail  the  factors  which  led  the
respondent  to  the  decision,  dated  27  January  2016,  to   refuse   the
appellant's application. He told me that the Judge deals with those  reasons
in detail in the first part of [9] of the decision.  He  told  me  that  the
final sentence of [9] is nothing more than a typographical  error.  He  told
me that at  [8]  of  the  decision  the  Judge  clearly  says  that  he  has
considered all of the evidence placed before him.

(c) Mr Bramble asked me to dismiss this appeal and  allow  the  decision  to
stand.

Analysis

7. In the final sentence of [9] of the decision,  the  Judge  refers  to  an
interview which, parties' agents agree, did not take place. The  Judge  says
that in that interview the appellant and sponsor  failed  to  demonstrate  a
basic knowledge of one another. That is quite clearly an error.  What  makes
it a material error is that in the first  two  words  of  the  sentence  the
Judge identifies the interview (which  did  not  take  place)  as  the  most
important factor in  his  decision.  The  Judge  decries  a  lack  of  basic
knowledge, yet parties agents agreed that the interview did not  take  place
so that the lack of basic knowledge which forms the fulcrum for the  Judge's
decision does not exist.

8. In E and R (2004) EWCA Civ 49 the Court of Appeal said  that  "a  mistake
of fact giving rise to unfairness is a separate  head  of  challenge  in  an
appeal on a point of law, at least in those  statutory  contexts  where  the
parties share an interest in co-operating to  achieve  the  correct  result.
Asylum law is undoubtedly such an area." The Court of  Appeal  set  out  the
ordinary requirements for a finding of unfairness as follows:
      i) There must have been a mistake as to an existing fact  including  a
      mistake as to the availability of evidence on a particular fact;
      ii)  The fact or evidence must have been  established,  in  the  sense
      that it was uncontentious and objectively verifiable;
      iii) The appellant (or his advisors) must not  have  been  responsible
      for the mistake; and
       iv)  The  mistake  must  have  played  a  material  (not  necessarily
      decisive) part in the Adjudicator's reasoning.

9. The Judge's decision quite clearly proceeds on a significant  mistake  of
fact. The Judge identifies that error of fact as the most important part  of
his decision. The  removal  of  the  most  important  part  of  the  Judge's
decision manifestly removes the very foundation of the decision.  The  error
is therefore a material error of law

10. The Judge's decision is brief.  At  [8]  the  Judge  says  that  he  has
considered all of the documents  placed  before  him,  but  nowhere  in  the
decision is there any analysis of the evidence led for  the  appellant.  The
appellant  lodged  a  bundle  containing  104  pages  which   included   the
appellant's witness statement, the EEA national's  witness  statement,  HMRC
records and bank statements.

11. I have to find that the decision is tainted by material  errors  of  law
because of inadequacy in reasoning and fact-finding.    In MK (duty to  give
reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was  held  that  (i)  It  was
axiomatic  that  a  determination  disclosed  clearly  the  reasons  for   a
tribunal's  decision.  (ii)  If  a  tribunal  found  oral  evidence  to   be
implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document to be  worth  no  weight
whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the  determination  and  for  such
findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness  was
not believed or that a document was  afforded  no  weight  was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

12. At [11] of the decision the Judge relies on the case  of  IS  (marriages
of convenience)  Serbia  [2008]  UKAIT  31.  The  Judge  should  have  taken
guidance from Rosa  [2016] EWCA 14 and Sadovska v SSHD [2017] UKSC 54.

13. As the decision is tainted by material errors  of  law  I  must  set  it
aside. I am asked to remit this case to the First -tier. I consider  whether
or not I can substitute my own decision,  but  find  that  I  cannot  do  so
because of the extent of the fact-finding exercise necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

14. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

16. I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Birmingham  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Juss.



Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

18. I set aside the Judge's  decision  promulgated  on  26  July  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 3 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
