
  [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00422/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 June 2014                               |On 4 July 2014               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
                          Ulisses borges guimarAes
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    The Appellant in person.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant in this appeal  was  the  Respondent  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing, which was decided on the papers  on  14  March  2014.
    However, for ease  of  reference,  the  Appellant  and  Respondent  are
    hereafter referred to as they  were  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Therefore Mr  Guimaraes  is  referred  to  as  the  Appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State is referred to as the Respondent.


 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Brazil. On 14 August 2013 he applied
    for a residence card as confirmation of his right to reside in  the  UK
    as the spouse  of  an  EEA  national,  Maria  De  Fatima  Viera  Moneno
    Guimaraes, a  Portuguese  national  (the  Sponsor),  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the UK. On 19 December 2013 his application  was  refused  on
    the basis that he had provided insufficient evidence to establish  that
    his Sponsor was exercising Treaty rights as defined by Regulation 6  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006, as  amended.
    This is because a telephone enquiry was made  with  Pals  CS  Ltd,  the
    company named as the employer of the Sponsor on 19 December 2013 and it
    was confirmed that she was no longer employed by the  company.  As  his
    Sponsor  was  no  longer  exercising  Treaty  rights,  the  Appellant's
    application was refused.


 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey (the  Judge)  allowed  the  Appellant's
    appeal on the basis of payslips provided by the Appellant from Pals  CS
    Ltd up to the period 11 September 2013 and for Rise  Business  Services
    for the period 28 August 2013 to 22 September 2013,  finding  that  the
    Sponsor 'has at all material times been working and,  then,  exercising
    Treaty rights' [6].


 4. The Respondent, in the grounds of application, submits that the Judge:


              a. Materially misdirected herself in law in  law  pursuant  to
                 Boodhoo and another (EEA Regs;  relevant  evidence)  [2013]
                 UKUT 00346 (IAC) because the facts must  be  considered  at
                 the date of hearing rather than the date  of  decision  and
                 the Judge had referred to the date of decision as being the
                 relevant date; and


              b. Failed to give adequate reasons for her  finding  that  the
                 Sponsor has been exercising Treaty  rights  despite  noting
                 the lack of evidence as to the employment of the Sponsor at
                 the date of decision; and, having noted inconsistencies  in
                 the evidence as to when the Sponsor started  work  at  Rise
                 Business  Services  Ltd   but   did   not   resolve   those
                 inconsistencies.

 5. Permission was granted on both grounds.



    The Hearing


 6. Mr Kandola essentially relied on the grounds of application, submitting
    that at [6] the Judge referred to copy bank statements not extending to
    the date of decision, and the payslips for the period 18 November  2012
    to 15 December 2013 not establishing that the Appellant's EEA  national
    Sponsor was working to the date of decision. However, the Judge went on
    to find that the Sponsor was working and  therefore  exercising  treaty
    rights 'at all material times'. He submitted  that  she  had  therefore
    failed to consider the facts at the date of  hearing  rather  than  the
    date of decision.


 7. He also submitted that the Judge  had  noted  the  discrepancy  in  the
    evidence of the Appellant that his wife left Pals CS  Ltd  and  started
    work for Rise Business Services in October but  the  letter  from  Rise
    Business Services confirmed that  she  had  started  working  there  in
    September not October and this discrepancy had not been resolved.


 8. I drew Mr Kandola's attention to [6], in which the Judge stated:


          "...The payslips for Pals CS Ltd extend to the  pay  date  of  11
             September 2013. The first payslip for Rise  Business  Services
             Ltd relates to  the  payment  period  from  28  August  to  22
             September 2013 but I note that that net pay is about  half  of
             that which is revealed in  subsequent  wage  slips  from  that
             company, indicating that the Sponsor  did  not  start  at  the
             beginning of that pay period. The wage  slips  provided,  from
             both employers, appear to be reliable and  I  accept  them  at
             face value. They indicate,  consistent  with  the  Grounds  of
             Appeal, that the  Sponsor  has  at  all  material  times  been
             working and, then, exercising treaty rights."


 9. I asked  if  this  was  not  sufficient  analysis  of  the  discrepancy
    identified between the letter  from  Rise  Business  Services  and  the
    letter of the Appellant in which he stated that his  wife  had  started
    work there in October. He stated that it appeared to be.


10. The Appellant stated that before the date of decision, he had  sent  to
    the Respondent payslips for his wife's employment  with  Rise  Business
    Services. When he received the decision letter, he  became  aware  that
    these had not been considered by  the  Respondent  before  issuing  the
    letter. He had then  contacted  the  Respondent  and  asked  for  these
    payslips to be returned to him and he sent them to the Judge.


11. In the file, there was a letter from  the  Appellant  to  the  Tribunal
    dated 27 December 2013, in which he stated that nine  days  before  the
    decision letter was issued he had sent two letters with  four  or  five
    wage slips from the new employer and 2 photographs  which  he  did  not
    receive back. He had telephoned the Home Office to  confirm  that  they
    had received them and it  was  confirmed  that  the  first  letter  was
    received on 3 September 2014 and the second on 10  December  2013.  His
    documents however where not returned to him when  the  decision  letter
    was sent to him and he had contacted the Home Office and  obtained  the
    wage slips which he then sent to the Tribunal on 5 February 2014. It is
    clear that Rise Business Services was not referred to in  the  decision
    letter. He was asked if he had with him the payslips which he  sent  to
    the Tribunal to attempt to identify which  documents  were  before  the
    Judge, because she had clearly made reference  to  'the  first  payslip
    from Rise Business Services'  which  implied  that  there  were  others
    before her.


12. He handed up payslips from Rise Business Services Ltd for the period 26
    August 2013 to March 2014.


13. Following submission, I reserved my  decision.  The  parties  confirmed
    that with the additional evidence that I now had, which had been before
    the Judge, if I found there was a material error of law, I could remake
    the decision without the need for a resumed hearing.


Decision and reasons


14. As to background, at the date of application the Appellant's  wife  was
    working for Pals CS ltd. The Respondent telephoned the employer  on  19
    December 2013 and was informed that she was no longer  employed  there,
    which resulted in the refusal of  the  Appellant's  application  for  a
    residence card on the basis of the exercise of Treaty rights by his EEA
    Sponsor.


15. I find that the Judge did not err in law as submitted because:


              a. Whilst the Judge referred to the date of  decision  at  [6]
                 and has not explicitly referred to the date of hearing  for
                 the purposes of the assessment of facts, it is  clear  that
                 she had in mind the evidence submitted by the Appellant  in
                 relation  to  his  wife's  employment  with  Rise  Business
                 Services, which extended beyond the date  of  decision.  It
                 cannot be said that she did not assess the facts as at  the
                 date of hearing, which was 27 March 2014, when she  clearly
                 took into account the post decision evidence in relation to
                 the employment of the Appellant's wife. There is no need to
                 explicitly refer to the relevant date for the  purposes  of
                 assessing the facts if it is clear that  the  correct  date
                 was in fact used.


              b. The Judge did refer to the bank statements not extending to
                 the date of  decision  so  that  it  was  not  possible  to
                 identify if credits from the employer were  deposited  into
                 the account. This was simply to  establish  the  period  of
                 time for which the Appellant's wife was working for Pals CS
                 limited, in view of the Respondent's assertion that she was
                 no longer working there on  19  December  2013  (which  was
                 unsupported by evidence) and the  discrepancy  between  the
                 Appellant's own evidence as to when  his  wife  started  to
                 work for Rise Business Services and confirmation  from  the
                 latter for the actual start date.


              c. Having received and considered the additional evidence, the
                 Judge was satisfied that the Appellant was confused  as  to
                 when his wife started to work for Rise  Business  Services;
                 she analysed the evidence  sufficiently  to  establish  the
                 start date, was satisfied that the payslips  were  reliable
                 and concluded that these established that  the  Appellant's
                 wife was exercising Treaty rights.


16. The Judge's findings were open to her on the evidence before her,  they
    were not perverse or irrational, and no  arguable  errors  of  law  are
    disclosed.


Decision

17. The determination of Judge Pacey contains no material errors of law and
    her  decision  must  therefore  stand.  The  Respondent's   appeal   is
    dismissed.


18. I note that an anonymity direction was not made and  on  the  facts  of
    this case, I see no reason why an order should be made pursuant to Rule
    14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.












    Signed                                   Date



    Manjinder Robertson
    Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






     TO THE RESPONDENT


     No fee has been paid or is payable therefore no fee order is made.







    Signed                          Dated


    M Robertson
    Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
