
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00616/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 13 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                            MELISA MAGTOTO-BUTLER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Iqbal, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant appeals against a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Wedderspoon dated 11 June 2015 in  which  she  dismissed  the
         appellant's appeal against a decision dated  17  December  2014  to
         remove her.

Immigration history

      2. The appellant entered the UK as a visitor in 2000.  She  admits  to
         overstaying her leave.  She met her current spouse (the sponsor) in
         2002 and began  cohabitating  with  him  shortly  afterwards.   The
         appellant submitted an application for leave  to  remain  in  2010,
         which was refused.  She married the sponsor in 2011.

      3. It is therefore not in dispute that the appellant has  remained  in
         the UK for a lengthy period albeit the vast majority of  that  time
         she was here unlawfully.

Grounds of appeal

      4. The appellant  has  been  granted  permission  to  challenge  Judge
         Wedderspoon's decision on the basis of four grounds of appeal.   At
         the hearing before me  Ms  Iqbal  relied  upon  and  amplified  the
         grounds of appeal.  Mr McVeety relied upon the Rule 24  notice  and
         invited me to dismiss the appeal.

      5. After hearing from both parties I reserved my decision, which I now
         provide by reference to each of the grounds of appeal.

Ground 1 - insurmountable obstacles

      6. I am satisfied that the Judge has taken all relevant  matters  into
         account  before  deciding  that  there   are   no   'insurmountable
         obstacles' to family life continuing in  the  Philippines.   Indeed
         the grounds of appeal acknowledge at paragraph  4  that  the  judge
         recorded "all the factual matters pertinent to both  the  appellant
         and her husband's circumstances".  There is no  reason  to  believe
         that the judge failed to take all relevant  matters  into  account.
         The judge has clearly accorded  weight  to  each  relevant  matter.
         Weight is a matter for the fact-finding judge.

      7. Ground 1 amounts to no more than a disagreement  with  the  judge's
         findings of fact regarding 'insurmountable obstacles'.   The  Judge
         properly directed herself having considered the submissions on  the
         issue [14 and 15].  The Judge considered all relevant  matters  [18
         and 19].  The Judge accepted that the sponsor might find living  in
         the Philippines "challenging" but was entitled to find  that  there
         are no insurmountable  obstacles.   There  is  nothing  within  the
         grounds or the decision to suggest that the judge  approached  this
         in a purely literal way.  The judge clearly considered the relevant
         circumstances in a sensible and practical manner.

Grounds 2 and 4 - Article 8

      8. Ground 2 submits that there were arguably good grounds for granting
         leave to remain outside the Rules and the judge was obliged  to  go
         on to consider whether or not there were  compelling  circumstances
         not sufficiently recognised under the Rules to justify leave  being
         granted pursuant to Article 8.

      9. Although the  Judge  might  have  approach  Article  8  in  a  more
         structured manner, I am not satisfied  that  she  has  committed  a
         material error of law.  The  Judge  clearly  went  on  to  consider
         Article 8 [22-24].

     10. The judge considered section 117B of the  Nationality,  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 [22].  The judge did not explicitly acknowledge
         the  parties'  financially  independence  or  the  fact  that   the
         appellant speaks English under section 117B.  However the judge was
         aware that the parties are financially independent [9 and 18].   In
         any event as pointed out in AM (S 117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260
         (IAC) an applicant can obtain no positive right to remain or  enter
         from sections 117B (2) or (3), whatever the degree of  her  fluency
         in English or the strength of her financial resources.   As  little
         weight should be given to the appellant's relationship (because  it
         was established when  she  was  in  the  UK  unlawfully  -  section
         117B(4)) it  would  have  made  no  difference  if  the  judge  had
         expressly considered sections 117B(2) and (3).  I therefore do  not
         consider that the judge has committed a material error  of  law  in
         the manner alleged at ground 4.

     11. The judge directed herself to SSHD v SS  Congo  and  others  [2015]
         EWCA Civ 387.  This makes it clear at [29] that as family life  was
         established with knowledge that the appellant had no right to be in
         the UK and was therefore precarious in the relevant  sense,  it  is
         only if the case is exceptional that a violation of Article 8  will
         be established.  This principle is repeated in R (Agyarko)  v  SSHD
         [2015] EWCA Civ 440 at [28].  When the decision is read as a  whole
         it is clear that the judge did not regard there to be a  breach  of
         Article 8(1) or the case to be exceptional  as  she  believed  that
         family life could continue in the Philippines.

     12. The judge did not conclude that it followed from her finding as  to
         a lack of insurmountable obstacles that the appeal under Article  8
         must fail.  Contrary to the submissions  at  ground  2,  the  Judge
         considered Article 8 but found there would  be  no  breach  because
         family life could take place in the Philippines [23 and 24].

     13. In these circumstances the Chikwamba point as explained in R (Chen)
         v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary   separation   -
         proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) did  not  arise.   The
         judge clearly considered that there did not need  to  be  temporary
         separation because the sponsor could join the appellant whilst  she
         applied for entry clearance.

Ground 3

     14. The judge was well aware of the impact of  the  decision  upon  the
         sponsor [19].  Indeed that was one of the issues  she  specifically
         considered when considering whether  the  insurmountable  obstacles
         test was met.  The Judge expressly considered the wider family life
         enjoyed by both the appellant and  the  sponsor  [18].   I  do  not
         accept the submissions in ground 4 that the judge  failed  to  take
         into account the sponsor's private life or the wider  family  life.
         When the decision is read carefully, it is  clear  that  the  judge
         considered both matters.

Decision

     15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of a material error of law and I do not set it aside.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
9 October 2015
