
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
IA/00021/2014

                                                        IA/03239/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th July 2014                          |On 25th July 2014          |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                                  MR M C N
                                MASTER G M N
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: the first appellant
           attended but was not legally represented
          For the Respondent: Ms J Isherwood a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The first appellant is a citizen of Zambia who  was  born  on  3  July
      1969. I will refer to him as the father. The second appellant  is  his
      son, born in the UK on 26 March 2012, who has no passport but may be a
      citizen of Zambia. I will refer to him as the son and to both of  them
      as the appellants.


   2. The appellants have been given permission to appeal the  determination
      of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Rhys-Davies ("the  FTTJ")  who  dismissed
      their appeals against the respondent's decisions of 13  December  2013
      to refuse to grant the appellants leave to remain in the UK under  the
      provisions of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules or,  alternatively,
      outside the Rules on Article 8 human rights  grounds.  The  appellants
      had claimed on the basis of their close family ties with the  father's
      wife (Ms TL) and their other two children (Miss NN born on 18 December
      2001 and Master CN born on 4 May 2005). The three  children  are  full
      siblings. I will refer to the father, the son,  Ms  TL,  Miss  NN  and
      Master CN as the family.


   3. There are  two  reasons  for  refusal  letters  for  the  father.  The
      respondent originally refused his application with no right of  appeal
      on 13 June 2013. The father sought to judicially review that  decision
      and the proceedings were compromised  on  6  November  2013  when  the
      respondent agreed to reconsider his appeal and to make a new  decision
      with a right of appeal. There  is  no  separate  reasons  for  refusal
      letter for the son.


   4. In the second reasons for refusal letter dated 16  December  2013  the
      respondent concluded that the father neither satisfied the partner nor
      the parent route under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. He  could
      not benefit from paragraph EX1 because he did not meet the eligibility
      requirements as either a partner or a parent. The application was also
      refused under paragraph 276ADE because the father  did  not  meet  the
      required criteria. The respondent then considered  Article  8  outside
      the Immigration  Rules  concluding  that  there  were  no  exceptional
      circumstances which would make the decision  unjustifiably  harsh  for
      the father or his family. The  respondent  also  considered  her  duty
      under Section 55 of the  2009  Act  to  promote  the  welfare  of  the
      children. There was a functioning education system in Zambia which the
      children could enter. The respondent did not consider that Ms  TL  and
      the children would not be able to enter Zambia  and  whilst  the  move
      there might be disruptive to their private lives they  could  continue
      to enjoy family life in Zambia.


   5. Ms TL claimed to  have  an  outstanding  legacy  application  but  the
      respondent did not accept this.


   6. Both parties were represented at the  hearing  before  the  FTTJ.  The
      appellants were represented by counsel instructed  by  the  solicitors
      then acting for the appellants.  The  FTTJ  heard  evidence  from  the
      father and Ms TL.


   7. The appellants' counsel conceded  that  they  could  not  satisfy  the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules as set out in  Appendix  FM  and
      paragraph 276ADE. The FTTJ went on to consider the principles set  out
      in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT  640
      (IAC).


        The summary of the provisions of Gulshan, prepared by the author of
        that determination, Cranston J, states;


        "On the current state of the authorities:


        (a)    the  maintenance  requirements  of  E-LTRP.3.1-3.2  stand,
        although Blake J in R (on the application of MM)  v  Secretary  of
        State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 1900 (Admin) said  that
        they  could  constitute   an   unjustified   and   disproportionate
        interference with the ability  of  spouses  to  live  together;  he
        suggested that an appropriate figure may  be  around  �13,400,  and
        highlighted the position of  young  people  and  low  wage  earners
        caught by the higher figure in the rules;
        (b)    after applying the requirements of the Rules, only if there
        may be arguably good grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside
        them is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go  on  to  consider
        whether  there  are  compelling  circumstances   not   sufficiently
        recognised under them: R (on the application of) Nagre v Secretary
        of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin);
        (c)    the term "insurmountable obstacles" in provisions  such  as
        Section EX.1 are not obstacles which are impossible to surmount: MF
        (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria [2012]  UKUT  393  (IAC); Izuazu
        (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT 45  (IAC);  they  concern  the
        practical possibilities of  relocation.  In  the  absence  of  such
        insurmountable obstacles,  it  is  necessary  to  show  other  non-
        standard and particular features demonstrating that removal will be
        unjustifiably harsh: Nagre.


        The Secretary of State addressed the Article 8  family  aspects  of
        the respondent's position through the Rules, in particular EX1, and
        the private life aspects through paragraph 276ADE. The judge should
        have done likewise, also paying attention to the Guidance. Thus the
        judge should have considered the Secretary  of  State's  conclusion
        under EX.1 that there were no insurmountable  obstacles  preventing
        the continuation of the family life outside the UK. Only  if  there
        were arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside the
        rules was it necessary for him for Article 8 purposes to go  on  to
        consider  whether   there   were   compelling   circumstances   not
        sufficiently recognised under the Rules."


   8. The FTTJ found that the family enjoyed a family life with each  other.
      The father and Ms TL were the parents of all three children  and  they
      lived together at the same address. The father was a citizen of Zambia
      and Ms TL a citizen of Ghana. The father arrived in  the  UK  in  July
      1997 with entry clearance as a visitor. He had lived in the UK without
      any leave except for the first five months. Ms TL claimed to have been
      in the UK since various dates between 1982 and,  latterly,  1998.  The
      FTTJ gave detailed reasons for not believing these dates and  for  his
      conclusion that she had nevertheless been in the  UK  since  at  least
      2001. He found that she was not a credible witness.


   9. The FTTJ found that neither Ms TL nor any other member of  the  family
      had any application for leave awaiting a decision by  the  respondent.
      The father and Ms TL had established private lives in this country but
      these had been acquired when neither of them had any lawful  right  to
      be here. The two elder children were at school  and  doing  well.  The
      eldest child was in contact with relatives here and was  beginning  to
      develop a private life of her  own.  None  of  the  children  had  any
      particular health concerns. The claim that the youngest suffered  from
      asthma was not corroborated by any medical evidence.


  10. The FTTJ found that the father had  made  no  effort  to  contact  the
      Zambian High Commission about obtaining a passport for himself or  any
      of the children. No evidence had been produced to substantiate claimed
      difficulties about the children being recognised as Zambian  citizens.
      There was no evidence that Ms TL or the children would not be admitted
      to Zambia. The father had a large family in Zambia. They had  not,  as
      he claimed, disowned him.


  11. The FTTJ made it clear that whilst only the appeals of the father  and
      the son were before him he considered the effects  of  their  proposed
      removal on the family as a whole. In doing  so  he  treated  the  best
      interests of the children as a primary consideration. He found that it
      would be in the best interests of all three children to go  to  Zambia
      with the father and Ms TL. Whilst Ms TL was not currently subject to a
      decision to remove her she had  no  leave  to  remain.  There  was  no
      current decision to remove Miss NN or Master CN.


  12. The FTTJ did not believe Ms TL's evidence that if the father  and  the
      son were removed to Zambia neither she  nor  the  other  two  children
      would go with them voluntarily. He found that all  of  them  would  be
      admitted to Zambia, that if they went together the family would remain
      together and it would be in all their best interests to do so.  If  Ms
      TL and the other two children did not go with the father and  the  son
      then it would be in the knowledge that they had no right to remain and
      could be subject to a decision to remove at any time.


  13. The FTTJ concluded that "the proposed removal of the appellants  would
      not be unjustifiably harsh and that the public interest in  favour  of
      their removal in order to maintain an effective system of  immigration
      control, as permitted within the terms of Article 8 (2)  of  the  1950
      Convention (Shahzad (Art 8:  legitimate  aim)  [2014]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
      outweighs any arguments in favour of allowing  them  to  remain".  The
      appellants' appeals were dismissed both under  the  Immigration  Rules
      and on human rights grounds.


  14. The appellants applied for and were granted permission to appeal.  The
      grounds of appeal, prepared by counsel who represented the  appellants
      at the hearing, submit that the FTTJ erred in law. Firstly, by placing
      undue emphasis on Ms TL's immigration history; any assessment  of  her
      credibility  or  her  immigration   history   was   not   a   relevant
      consideration.  Secondly,  by  failing  to  have  regard  to  relevant
      evidence  in  concluding  that  there  was   no   outstanding   legacy
      application for  Ms  TL.  Thirdly,  in  assessing  proportionality  by
      failing to have regard to the express wishes of the two elder children
      or the length of time  they  had  lived  in  this  country.  Fourthly,
      although  referring  to  Gulshan,  failing  properly  to   apply   its
      principles.  Fifthly,  failing  to  take  into   account   the   son's
      relationship with his grandmother and other relatives. The  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge who granted permission to appeal thought that there was
      arguable  merit  in  the  third  ground  but  less  in   the   others.
      Nevertheless, permission was granted to argue all of them.


  15. The father  told  me  that  the  appellants  were  no  longer  legally
      represented because they could no longer afford it.  I  explained  the
      purpose of the hearing and the procedure to the father and said that I
      would do the  best  I  could  to  assist  him  within  the  bounds  of
      impartiality. I explained to him that there were detailed  grounds  of
      appeal prepared by counsel who had  represented  him  at  the  hearing
      before the FTTJ and he said that  he  wished  to  rely  on  these.  He
      submitted that the FTTJ had failed to consider Miss  NN's  and  Master
      CN's long residence in this country. Both had  lived  here  all  their
      lives and knew only life in this country. He  believed  that  she  was
      entitled to be recognised as a British  citizen.  An  application  had
      been submitted about a month ago and the decision was  awaited  Master
      CN was asthmatic and used an inhaler pump. Ghana and Zambia were  very
      different countries. Ms TL's mother  lived  here  and  was  a  British
      citizen as were his sister and brother.


  16. Ms  Isherwood  relied  on  the  respondent's  Rule  24  response.  She
      submitted that there was no error of law.  The  appeals  were  by  two
      members of the family but the other three had no leave  to  remain  in
      the UK. She argued that Ms TL's credibility  and  immigration  history
      were relevant and important. Ms TL accepted that she had  given  false
      information. It was clear that the FTTJ had  taken  into  account  the
      position of every member of the family and the family unit as a whole.
      None of them had leave to be here. Both  the  father  and  Ms  TL  had
      avoided immigration control. The FTTJ had not rejected their  evidence
      as a whole; there were a  number  of  important  positive  credibility
      findings. Proper regard had been had to  their  coming  from  separate
      countries and the length of time that all the members  of  the  family
      had been here. It was open to the FTTJ to find that Ms TL had not come
      here as long ago as she claimed.


  17. Ms Isherwood submitted that the FTTJ reached conclusions fully open to
      him on all the evidence. There were proper findings in relation to all
      the children. There was no longer a seven-year policy. She  relied  on
      Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC74 and EV (Philippines) v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA
      Civ 874. The FTTJ had fully and properly recognised  the  position  of
      Miss NN. There was no material  error  of  law  and  no  other  proper
      conclusion open to the  FTTJ.  The  grounds  disclosed  no  more  than
      disagreement with conclusions properly reached.


  18. In his reply, the father said that he had  wanted  to  regularise  his
      position by making a 14  year  residence  application  but  could  not
      afford to do so. By the  time  he  could  the  qualifying  period  had
      increased to 20 years.  He  argued  that  the  FTTJ  placed  too  much
      emphasis on the evidence of Ms TL and did  not  sufficiently  consider
      the children, their grandmother or other relatives and friends in this
      country. The UK was their home. He was 45 years of age and  would  not
      find it easy to get a job in Zambia where he had no home.  Ms  TL  had
      said that she would not go  with  him.  He  had  never  committed  any
      criminal offence and just wanted a family life here. The whole  family
      considered themselves to be British or English. They had used  up  all
      their savings fighting the case. Ms TL was a  good  wife  and  a  good
      Christian. They had three lovely children. Ms  TL  told  me  that  she
      wished she could undo the untruths  she  had  told  earlier.  She  was
      telling the truth now. I was asked to allow the appeals.


  19. I reserved my determination.


  20. In relation to the first ground of appeal I find that the FTTJ did not
      place undue emphasis on Ms TL's immigration history. The FTTJ properly
      looked at the position of each member of the family  as  well  as  the
      family unit as a whole. It would have been an error of law not  to  do
      so. The credibility of Ms TL was important and the FTTJ did not  spend
      a disproportionate part of the determination dealing with it.  It  was
      necessary to give it this much attention in order to  provide  a  full
      explanation for the conclusions that Ms TL was not a credible  witness
      and that she had claimed to have been in the UK for  far  longer  than
      was the case. Ms TL admitted to making false claims as to  the  length
      of time she had been here.


  21. As to the second ground of appeal, there was conflicting  evidence  as
      to whether Ms TL had an outstanding legacy  application.  The  adverse
      finding as to  her  credibility  was  a  relevant  factor.  There  was
      documentary evidence pointing  both  ways,  as  the  FTTJ  recognised.
      However, I find that the FTTJ made a  proper  assessment  of  all  the
      evidence and it was open to him to come to the conclusion  that  there
      was no outstanding application.


  22. In relation to the third ground I note that in paragraph 17  the  FTTJ
      noted that he had a witness statement from Miss NN which set  out  her
      perspective on her family and  school  life  and  her  hopes  for  the
      future. In paragraph 53 he found that she was doing  well  at  school,
      enjoyed school and her friends  and  participated  in  extracurricular
      activities. She had contact with her grandmother and her aunt and  her
      cousins. She had begun to develop elements of  her  own  private  life
      outside her home. The FTTJ did not hear oral evidence  from  her.  Her
      evidence was contained in the witness statement dated 2 February  2014
      and a handwritten letter. The FTTJ referred to her evidence and it  is
      clear that he took this into account. It was not necessary for him  to
      set out everything that was said in the statement letter  and  I  find
      that the length of time she had lived here and her wish to remain were
      properly taken into account. The grounds did not refer to any  witness
      statement from Master CN and I cannot find one or any indication  that
      the FTTJ failed to take into account the length of time he  has  lived
      here. The FTTJ dealt with the question of his asthma  concluding  that
      if he did have asthma it was a common condition which could be treated
      in Zambia.


  23. As to the fourth ground, the FTTJ referred to Gulshan in paragraph  35
      and I can find nothing in the determination to  indicate  that  having
      set out the principles in this case he failed to  apply  them.  It  is
      clear  that  he  did  consider  the  Article  8  grounds  outside  the
      Immigration Rules.


  24. As to the sixth ground, the FTTJ dealt  with  Miss  NN's  relationship
      with her grandmother her aunt and her cousins in paragraph 53.  I  can
      find no statement from Master CN dealing with  similar  relationships,
      although there is no indication that the FTTJ thought that these  were
      any different from the relationships enjoyed by his sister.


  25. I find that the FTTJ did consider the best interests of  the  children
      in the Article 8 proportionality exercise  including  the  periods  of
      time during which they have lived here. There is no  irrationality  in
      the conclusions that it was in their best interests to go  with  their
      parents to Zambia (Zoumbas) and,  taking  into  account  the  need  to
      maintain immigration control, that it was a reasonable to  expect  the
      children to live in that country (EV Philippines).


  26. I find that this is a clear and comprehensive determination  in  which
      the FTTJ reached conclusions open to him on all the evidence.


  27. The FTTJ made an anonymity direction and I consider  it  necessary  to
      continue this in order to protect the interests of  the  children  and
      this family.


  28. I make an order  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
      matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the appellants
      or any members of their family.


  29.  I  find  that  the  FTTJ  did  not  err  in  law  and  I  uphold  his
      determination.







      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 18 July
      2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

