
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00366/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Via Teams                            |                                     |
|On 11 August 2021                    |On 17 September 2021                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Greer
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a female citizen of Iraq who was  born  in  1986.  She
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary
    of State dated 20  July  2020  refusing  her  claim  for  international
    protection. The First-tier Tribunal, in a  decision  dated  3  December
    2020, dismissed her appeal. The appellant now appeals, with permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant claimed that she had worked  for  the  Iraqi  Nationality
    Directorate issuing nationality  certificates  to  Iraqi  citizens.  In
    2017, she refused to participate in a fraud by issuing a certificate to
    an individual whose identity card she was told  was  not  genuine.  She
    claims  that  she  was  subsequently  threatened  and  assaulted  as  a
    consequence of her refusal.

 3. In a thorough and cogently argued decision, the judge made a number  of
    findings of fact. In  some  instances,  she  accepted  the  appellant's
    account of past events but ultimately she rejected the  credibility  of
    the core of the appellant's account. At [41], the judge found that  the
    appellant's credibility had been harmed by a  'core  inconsistency'  in
    her evidence, namely her claim in cross examination that  she  had  not
    been to the  police  after  she  had  been  assaulted,  a  claim  which
    contradicted what she had said in  her  asylum  interview  (Q187).  The
    parties now agree that the judge erred by  finding  this  part  of  the
    appellant's evidence inconsistent. The  appellant  had  been  asked  in
    cross examination a specific question - whether she  had  reported  the
    threats to the police 'when they started happening.' [my emphasis]. Her
    evidence had been consistent in that she had not reported  the  threats
    at first but had done so later. The judge  had,  as  the  grounds  put,
    imagined an inconsistency where none existed.

 4. Both parties agree that the  question  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    whether that error on the part of the judge was material.  Mr  Diwnycz,
    who appeared for the Secretary of State at the Upper  Tribunal  initial
    hearing, told me that he relied on  the  judge's  alternative  findings
    regarding the availability to the appellant of internal  flight  within
    Iraq. He accepted that, if those alternative findings could not  stand,
    then the judge's error was material as it  would  not  be  possible  to
    determine to what extent the incorrect finding at [41] had informed the
    judge's overall credibility assessment at [44].  Mr Greer, who appeared
    for the appellant, submitted that the  internal  flight  findings  were
    tainted by the judge's error and therefore could not  stand.  To  avail
    herself of the option of internal flight, the appellant would  need  to
    redocument herself. That redocumentation process, in turn, would depend
    on the  cooperation  of  family  members  in  Iraq.  Having  found  the
    appellant and her husband to be unreliable witnesses  [47],  the  judge
    rejected their claims to have lost touch with family members  in  Iraq.
    Mr Greer submitted that,  if  the  entire  credibility  assessment  was
    vitiated by the judge's error, then the  findings  on  internal  flight
    also could not stand.

 5. I agree with Mr Greer's submissions. Mr Diwnycz did not seek  to  argue
    that  the  error  at  [41]  did  not  vitiate  the  entire  credibility
    assessment only that the alternative internal  flight  findings,  being
    severable from the analysis  of  the  appellant's  core  asylum  claim,
    defeated the appeal. There will,  of  course,  be  instances  different
    parts of a judge's analysis can be separated but, in this case, I  find
    that the judge's conclusions as to internal flight  are  predicated  on
    her view that the appellant and her husband are  unreliable  witnesses.
    As that view has been vitiated  by  error,  it  must  follow  that  the
    internal flight findings cannot stand.  In  the  circumstances,  I  set
    aside the decision. There will need to be a fresh fact-finding exercise
    which is better conducted in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  which  the
    appeal is now returned for that Tribunal to remake the decision.



    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision following  a  hearing
    de novo.


    LISTING DIRECTIONS: return to First-tier Tribunal sitting at  Bradford;
    not Judge Monaghan; first available date; Kurdish Sorani interpreter; 2
    hours.



         Signed                              Date 11 August 2021

        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.













