
[pic]
IAC-YW-LM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00463/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th October 2014                            |On 7th November 2014       |
|Prepared 16th October 2014                      |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                            Ms Augustia Santa Ana
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C. Physsas of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Philippines  born  on  6th  August  1971.
    She appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated  10th  December
    2013 to refuse to grant her a derivative right to reside in the  United
    Kingdom  pursuant  to  Regulation  15A  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations") (a  derivative
    residence card).  The Appellant argued that she was the  primary  carer
    of her mother, Tinsley Tinsley, born 20th May 1949, a  British  citizen
    ("Mrs Tinsley").

2.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on 18th May 2001  on  a  visit
    visa valid until 7th June 2001.  Her leave was extended, inter alia, to
    enable her to obtain private medical treatment until 3rd January  2003.
    On 29th August 2003 the  Appellant  sought  a  work  permit  which  was
    refused on 12th February 2004.  She had no leave  thereafter  but  made
    the present application on 30th January 2013, the refusal of  which  on
    10th December 2013 has given rise to these proceedings.

3.   Regulation 15A provides that a person who  satisfies  the  criteria  in
    paragraphs 2, 3, 4, 4A or 5 thereof is entitled to a  derivative  right
    to reside in the United Kingdom.  Sub-paragraph 4A  provides  that  the
    criteria is satisfied if the  applicant  is  the  primary  carer  of  a
    British citizen residing in the United Kingdom and the British  citizen
    would be unable to reside in the United Kingdom or in another EEA State
    if the applicant were required to leave.  Sub-paragraph 7 provides that
    the applicant is to be regarded as a primary carer of another person if
    they are a direct relative of that person  and  the  applicant  is  the
    person  who  has  primary  responsibility  for  that   person's   care.
    Responsibility for a person's care is not made out on the sole basis of
    a financial contribution towards that person's care (sub-paragraph 8).

The Explanation for Refusal

4.   The Respondent refused the application on the basis that the  Appellant
    had not provided evidence which would demonstrate that her mother could
    not call upon  the  services  of  outside  agencies,  including  Social
    Services or private care if required.   Mrs Tinsley  had  already  had
    contact with the NHS with regard to her medical treatment. They in turn
    had noted the Appellant's current residence in the United  Kingdom  and
    remarked that it would be beneficial for Mrs Tinsley if  the  Appellant
    could provide help regarding the domestic situation.  Mrs  Tinsley  was
    in receipt of financial  support  from  the  Department  for  Work  and
    Pensions along with a  private  income.   If  the  Appellant  were  not
    present in the United Kingdom  to  care  for  her,  Mrs Tinsley  could
    procure assistance from other sources with the help of Social Services.
     Preference and convenience were not sufficient reasons for the claimed
    primary carer, the Appellant, to assert that another responsible  adult
    procured privately or through Social Services would be unable  to  care
    for the Sponsor.

5.   No evidence had been provided of the claim that the Appellant  and  Mrs
    Tinsley had lived together since the Appellant's arrival in the  United
    Kingdom in 2001.  Mrs Tinsley lived at 8 Valetta Road but there was no
    evidence to show that the Appellant had ever lived at that address with
    her.  The representative had now stated that the Appellant lived at  an
    address 37 Hubert Road in the Romford area but there was no  indication
    that Mrs Tinley lived there with the  Appellant.   From  London  W3  to
    Romford RM13 was almost 22 miles.  It was unusual  that  the  Appellant
    would choose to move 22 miles away from the Sponsor when claiming to be
    her primary carer.  The Respondent also refused the  application  under
    Article 8, citing the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  contained
    in Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE which it was said the Appellant did
    not meet.

The Hearing at First Instance

6.   The Appellant adopted her statement in which she outlined the care  she
    provided for her mother who is now  64  years  old.   Mrs  Tinsley  had
    undergone surgery for breast cancer in  September  and  December  2012.
    She enjoyed a good  quality  of  life  despite  her  medical  condition
    because of the  assistance  given  by  the  Appellant.   The  Appellant
    prepared her mother's meals in accordance with her  dietary  needs  and
    was her only companion.

7.   Explaining the  discrepancy  over  the  addresses  she  said  that  the
    address in the Romford, Essex area was the residence of a close  family
    friend of her mother.  They had both been invited to  spend  some  time
    there.  When her mother fell ill she informed  her  solicitors  of  the
    Romford address and was uncertain as  to  how  long  they  would  spend
    there.  In 2014 the landlady of the premises at Valetta Road had agreed
    to the Appellant being joined on the tenancy agreement.

8.   In cross-examination the Appellant told the Judge that neither she  nor
    Mrs  Tinsley  had  approached  Social   Services   to   ascertain   the
    availability of care for the Appellant's mother.  If the appeal  failed
    the Appellant's mother would have to return  to  Philippines  with  the
    Appellant.  Social  Services  could  not  provide  the  level  of  care
    required such as cooking,  cleaning,  dressing  and  administration  of
    medication.

9.   The Appellant had put forward  a  letter  from  Mr  Ragheed  Al  Mufti,
    consultant surgeon who was treating Mrs Tinsley, as confirmation of the
    medical condition.  The letter stated that Mr Al Mufti understood  that
    Mrs Tinsley was "living on her  own  and  has  no  other  close  family
    members with her  in  London  ...   her  daughter  [the  Appellant]  is
    currently visiting London to visit her mother and to be with her".   He
    asked that the Appellant be allowed to stay with  Mrs  Tinsley  for  as
    long as possible.

10.  The  Appellant  stated  in  cross-examination  that  Mr  Al  Mufti  had
    misunderstood her mother's circumstances when he stated that she  lived
    alone.  He was informed of the error but he did not correct the letter.
     The Appellant's landlady had agreed to include the  Appellant  in  the
    tenancy agreement as the Appellant  had  submitted  an  application  to
    regularise her immigration status.  The Appellant did not know why  the
    letter from the solicitors to the Respondent informing  the  Respondent
    that the Appellant was now living at the Romford address had failed  to
    mention that Mrs Tinsley was also living at the Romford  address,  nor
    why had they failed to mention that this was only a temporary address.

The First Tier Determination

11.  The Judge  began  his  findings  at  paragraph  30  by  asserting  that
    Regulation 15A could not apply to two adults but only in the context of
    a parent and minor child.  As the Appellant and her mother did not fall
    into this category there  was  no  evidence  to  demonstrate  that  the
    Appellant could succeed under the 2006 Regulations.

12.  I pause to note here that that was an error of law and  had  the  Judge
    stopped there in his determination it  would  have  fallen  to  be  set
    aside.  The Regulation is not expressed to relate only  to  parent  and
    child and the Respondent had not sought  to  take  that  point  in  any
    event.  The Judge went on to deal with the merits of the  claim  as  to
    whether the Appellant was in fact the primary carer of her mother.   He
    did not accept the Appellant's explanation why the Respondent had  been
    notified of an address in Romford for the Appellant  but  not  for  Mrs
    Tinsley, nor why there had been a failure to notify the  Respondent  of
    the resumption of residence at the original address.  The  letter  from
    the Appellant's representative to the Respondent was very brief  indeed
    and there was no reasonable  explanation  why  the  representative  had
    failed to include material information in the change of address letter.
     That was said to damage the  Appellant's  credibility.   Nor  did  the
    Judge accept the explanation  that  Mr  Al  Mufti  had  made  an  error
    relating  to  Mrs  Tinsley's  sole  occupation  of  her  home  or   the
    Appellant's status as a visitor.   After  dealing  with  Article  8  he
    dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

13.  The Appellant appealed against that decision, arguing  that  Regulation
    15A was not restricted to  a  parent  and  minor  child  and  that  the
    Respondent had failed  to  consider  Article  8  when  considering  the
    Appellant's application.  That was unlawful and the decision to  refuse
    the derived residence card was not in accordance  with  the  law.   The
    Respondent had stated the Appellant should make  an  application  under
    the parent or partner route.  The Judge's adverse credibility  findings
    were irrational and perverse and not supported by the evidence and  the
    Judge's Article 8 assessment was  fundamentally  flawed  since  he  had
    failed to apply the five stage test set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

14.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett.  She  granted  permission  on  20th
    August 2014, stating that there was  an  arguable  error  as  paragraph
    15A(7) included a person who was a direct  relative  with  the  primary
    responsibility for  another  person's  care  as  being  entitled  to  a
    derivative right.  All grounds may be argued.

15.  The Respondent filed a reply under  Rule  24  on  9th  September  2014,
    stating that any error in the determination was immaterial  as  it  was
    clear that the Appellant's mother would not  be  forced  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom if the Appellant was  not  granted  a  derivative  right
    since there was no adequate evidence that alternative arrangements were
    not possible.  The refusal letter had made it clear that for  a  person
    to succeed in this category as a carer for an adult there would need to
    be shown very considerable difficulties which had not been  established
    in the case of Mrs Tinsley.   The  Appellant  was  clearly  lacking  in
    credibility in certain matters.  The Appellant could not succeed  under
    Regulation 15A.



The Hearing before Me

16.  In oral submissions Counsel argued that the application had  been  made
    correctly in this case under the 2006 Regulations. The Judge had  found
    the application misguided  and  that  had  infected  his  view  of  the
    evidence.  It was acknowledged that  the  letter  from  the  solicitors
    notifying the Respondent of the Romford address should  have  contained
    more information and made it clear that it was a temporary address.   A
    further letter dated 7th January 2014 was not included  in  the  bundle
    although it should have been which made the  position  clearer.   There
    should also have been a letter from the general practitioner before the
    Judge.  The Regulation did not require there to be evidence that Social
    Services could not provide care.  Social  Services  might  be  able  to
    provide daily care but the Judge ought to have considered  the  medical
    evidence as  to  what  other  care  was  needed.   The  Judge  had  not
    considered Mrs Tinsley's statement that she would be unable  to  afford
    medical care in the Philippines and would be returning to  poverty.  At
    present Mrs Tinsley was receiving sick pay from  her  employment  which
    was the reason why disability living allowance was not being claimed.

17.  There was a letter from the friend who had invited  the  Appellant  and
    Mrs Tinsley to stay at the Romford address but it  appeared  that  that
    letter was not put before the Judge.  The  tenancy  agreement  had  not
    been considered at  all.   The  Judge  should  have  explained  why  he
    preferred the contents of Mr Al Mufti's letter on the accommodation  of
    the Appellant as opposed to the documentary  evidence  of  the  tenancy
    agreement.  Mr Al  Mufti  had  now  provided  a  further  letter  dated
    17th September 2014 (which detailed the surgery he had performed on Mrs
    Tinsley) and again urged that the Appellant be allowed to stay with her
    mother in the United Kingdom.

18.  The Judge had made no positive findings in relation to  Article  8  and
    his errors flowed from the fact that he  had  not  considered  all  the
    evidence.  The matter should be remitted  back  in  any  event  because
    Article 8 had not been assessed in the refusal letter.  The  Respondent
    was under a common law duty to consider Article 8.

19.  In reply the Presenting Officer stated that the Respondent agreed  that
    Regulation 15A could apply to two adults  but  there  was  no  material
    error of law in the determination.  The Appellant had chosen not to put
    the further documents referred to by Counsel in the bundle.  The  Judge
    had found that there was an adult British citizen living in  London  W3
    with a daughter living 22 miles away.  The information supplied  by  Mr
    Al Mufti must have come from the Appellant herself.  He had  said  that
    the Appellant was not living with the Sponsor and here on a visit visa.
     He could only have found that out from either  the  Appellant  or  the
    Sponsor.  It was open to the Judge  to  find  that  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor were not living together.  Although  15A  could  apply  to  two
    adults, where it was an adult caring for another adult  a  higher  test
    was needed than where an adult was caring for a  child.   Mrs  Tinsley,
    had not approached Social Services to have  her  case  assessed  on  an
    individual basis.  Mrs Tinsley had not been medically retired from  her
    work, she was absent on sick pay.  The level of care being given to her
    by the Appellant was not a particularly high level in  the  absence  of
    evidence from Social Services or the NHS.

20.  There was no common law duty on the Respondent to  produce  a  decision
    under Article 8.  This was an EEA case with no removal directions.   It
    was open to the Appellant to apply on form FLR(O) or under the  carer's
    policy.  The Judge had considered the case of Razgar at paragraph 36 of
    his determination and had carried out the balancing exercise.

21.  In conclusion Counsel for the Appellant submitted that where  documents
    had not been included in the bundles before the Tribunal the  Appellant
    should not suffer  from  an  oversight  by  her  representatives.   The
    letters from friends had not  been  considered  by  the  Judge  either.
    There ought to have been a proper investigation under Article 8.

Findings

22.  I have to decide whether there has been such a material  error  of  law
    that the determination in this case should fall to be set aside and the
    matter reheard, if not then the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    will stand.  It is not in dispute  that  the  Judge  was  in  error  in
    thinking that Regulation 15A could not apply to a  situation  where  an
    adult is the primary carer of another adult.  However, the  Judge  also
    found that the Appellant in this case was not in fact the primary carer
    of her mother.  He based that on his adverse credibility findings,  the
    evidence from Mr Al Mufti and the letter from the solicitors  notifying
    the Respondent of the change of address.

23.  I do not consider that the Judge's error in his understanding  of  what
    Regulation 15A applied to infected the remainder of his findings  since
    if the Judge had maintained the view  that  Regulation  15A  could  not
    apply there was in fact no need for him to go on to  consider  anything
    else except perhaps in the context of Article 8.  What  is  clear  from
    reading the determination is that the Judge was in effect deciding  the
    case on an even if basis.  Even if there was a right  of  appeal  under
    Regulation 15A (as was the case) the Appellant still could not  succeed
    because she could not demonstrate that she was the primary carer of her
    mother.  That was a finding of fact by the  Judge.   The  disagreements
    put forward with that finding are merely that, disagreements.  They  do
    not show any error of law.

24.  The Judge had a report from Mrs Tinsley's  specialist  which  contained
    information which could only have come from the  Appellant  and/or  the
    Sponsor.   The  Respondent  had  been  notified  by   the   Appellant's
    solicitors that she was living at an address 22  miles  away  from  her
    mother.  That point was specifically raised in the refusal  letter  and
    yet no clarification was given to the Judge save for the oral testimony
    of the Appellant (which he did not accept).  It was hardly an error  of
    law for the Judge not to consider evidence that  was  not  before  him.
    Subsequent attempts to remedy the gap in the Appellant's case caused by
    the brief solicitors' letter are not relevant to  the  matters  I  must
    decide.  The Judge was only obliged to consider the evidence  that  was
    before him.

25.  Further, he was not required  to  set  out  each  and  every  piece  of
    evidence in the case.  That he made no  reference  to  the  letters  of
    support or the tenancy agreement is also not a valid criticism  of  the
    determination.  The Judge made clear what  the  evidence  was  that  he
    relied upon in  arriving  at  his  conclusions  and  that  was  neither
    perverse nor irrational.  The Judge gave reasoned  findings.   On  that
    basis the Appellant could not succeed under Regulation 15A and  it  was
    open to him to say as he did that there was  no  reliable  evidence  to
    demonstrate that the Appellant should be afforded  the  opportunity  to
    rely upon European law to regularise her immigration status  (paragraph
    30).

26.  Given that the Judge did not find that the care  arrangements  were  as
    claimed, the issue of whether Mrs Tinsley would be  required  to  leave
    the United Kingdom  in  the  event  that  the  Appellant's  appeal  was
    dismissed did not arise.  It was not therefore an error for  the  Judge
    not to consider that point.

27.  No authority was cited  to  me  for  the  proposition  that  where  the
    Respondent had not considered Article 8 her decision would  not  be  in
    accordance with the law.  In any event it was not correct to  say  that
    the  refusal  letter  had  failed  to  mention  Article  8.   What  the
    Respondent had said was  that  if  the  Appellant  wished  to  make  an
    application for Article 8 she should do so on the appropriate form  and
    notification of that form and where it could be obtained  was  provided
    in the refusal letter.

28.  The Judge  had  considered  Article  8  and  had  directed  himself  in
    accordance with the five stage test set out in Razgar.   He  was  aware
    that what was required was the assessment of the proportionality of any
    interference with  protected  rights.   He  could  not  find  that  the
    relationship between the Appellant and her mother  went  beyond  normal
    emotional ties because of the credibility issues  he  had  dealt  with.
    Since I do not accept the criticism made of the  Judge's  treatment  of
    credibility, I do not accept that  that  means  that  his  analysis  of
    Article 8 was necessarily flawed.  The Judge also took into account  in
    his Article 8 assessment not only the fact that the  Appellant  had  no
    leave to remain but that the Appellant's mother  must  also  have  been
    aware of that and must have colluded with it.  Those were  all  factors
    which could be addressed when assessing the weight to be given  to  the
    public interest in maintaining immigration control and whether  someone
    here without leave should nevertheless succeed outside  the  Rules.  In
    the light of the Judge's findings of fact it could not be  argued  that
    the Judge should have gone on to find  compelling  circumstances  which
    would take the case outside the framework of the Rules.

28.  In any event, as the Judge pointed out  at  paragraph  39,  no  removal
    directions had been set and it was still open to the Appellant to  make
    an appropriate application (which  presumably  would  be  supported  by
    better evidence than was put to the  Judge  at  first  instance).   The
    conclusions the Judge reached under Article 8 were open to him  on  the
    evidence before him.  They do not disclose any error of law.





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law and will stand.  The Appellant's  appeal  against  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal is dismissed.

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity order is made as there  is  no  public  policy  reason  for  so
doing.

As the appeal was dismissed no fee award can be made.





Dated this 6th day of November 2014


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


