

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00188/2015
                                                               IA/00193/2015
                                                               IA/00198/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |               Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                           |
|On 06 January 2016                       |               On 16 February 2016    |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                                     R N
                         (AND TWO CHILD DEPENDENTS)
                                    T S A
                                  E O T A A
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Alexander, Counsel instructed by DF Solicitors

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
original appellant has two young children. For this reason I  find  that  it
is appropriate to continue the order. Unless and until a tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member  of  her
family. This direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The appellant appealed against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    leave to remain on human  rights  grounds.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Aujla ("the judge") allowed the appeal in  a  decision  dated  15  July
    2015.

3.    It appears that there was no factual dispute between  the  parties  as
    to the appellant's immigration history and personal circumstances.  The
    judge recorded that the appellant's representative  conceded  that  she
    did not meet the strict requirements of the immigration rules [31].  As
    such the judge went on to consider whether removal  would  nevertheless
    engage the operation of Article 8 outside the  immigration  rules.  His
    self-direction on the law referred to the relevant principles including
    the tests set out in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] 3 WLR 58 and Huang
    v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11 [35]. The judge was satisfied that removal  would
    interfere with  the  appellant's  private  life  given  her  length  of
    residence in the UK [39]. In assessing the proportionality  of  removal
    he took into account the public interest factors contained  in  section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002").
    He made clear that he was required to give little weight to  a  private
    life established when she had no lawful leave to remain  and  concluded
    that the public interest considerations required removal  from  the  UK
    [42].

4.    The judge went on to weigh the public interest factors  against  those
    relating to the appellant's personal circumstances in order  to  assess
    whether there were any exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances  that
    would nevertheless render removal  disproportionate  [43-48].  He  took
    into account the fact that the appellant and her husband entered the UK
    when they were children and noted that no steps were  taken  to  remove
    them before they began a family despite the opportunity to do so  [43].
    The judge also noted that, in the absence of evidence to the  contrary,
    there was no evidence to show that the appellant or her  husband  would
    be admissible into each other's respective country  of  origin  (Uganda
    and Nigeria) [44]. The judge  took  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    appellant and her husband had both lived in the UK during an  important
    developmental period. Her parents and siblings were settled in  the  UK
    and formed an important part of her private life. The judge  took  into
    account the fact that there was no evidence of  countervailing  factors
    such as criminal convictions.  He  also  noted  that  they  both  spoke
    English and were "fully integrated into society" in the UK. He observed
    that there was no evidence to suggest  that  they  had  claimed  public
    funds or become a burden on tax payers [45].

5.    The judge went on to consider the best interests of the  children.  He
    took into account the fact that they were  not  British  nationals.  He
    considered their age, educational circumstances and the fact that  they
    could not "be  blamed  for  the  ills  of  their  parents".  The  judge
    concluded that it was in the best interests of the children  to  remain
    in the UK. Although the judge did not purport to allow the appeal  with
    reference to the immigration rules he went on to consider  elements  of
    the private life requirements contained  in  paragraph  276ADE.  Having
    considered the appellant's length of residence, the  looseness  of  her
    ties to her country of origin and her lack of family connections  there
    he concluded that there were likely to be "very significant  obstacles"
    to her reintegration. This seemed to form part of his assessment of the
    overall proportionality of removal [47]. The judge concluded  that  the
    overall circumstances were such that they could properly  be  described
    as 'exceptional' and that removal would be disproportionate [48].

6.    The respondent seeks to appeal the decision on the following grounds:

      (i)   The First-tier Tribunal erred in  finding  that  there  were  no
           countervailing factors when the appellant had  remained  without
           lawful leave. The lack of a criminal record did not add anything
           to the strength of the appellant's private life in the UK.

      (ii)  The First-tier Tribunal failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
           concluding that the appellant was not a burden on the taxpayer.

      (iii) The judge erred in apparently seeking to reverse the  burden  of
           proof when he stated that he could not assume that the appellant
           or her husband would be granted a visa to live  in  the  other's
           country.

      (iv)  The First-tier Tribunal failed to  give  adequate  consideration
           to the best  interests  of  the  child  with  reference  to  the
           relevant principles outlined in EV (Philippines) v  SSHD  [2014]
           EWCA Civ 874.

Decision and reasons

7.    After having considered the grounds of appeal and oral arguments I  am
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

8.    The grounds of appeal concentrate on fairly minor points, which in  my
    assessment would not have made any material difference to  the  overall
    outcome of the appeal. The judge quite clearly took  into  account  all
    the relevant factual circumstances,  gave  due  weight  to  the  public
    interest  considerations  and  weighed  them   against   the   personal
    circumstances of the family.
9.    The judge did not appear to give any particular  weight  to  the  fact
    that the appellant did not have a criminal record but merely noted that
    there was no such record. This could only be a factor  that  would  add
    weight to the public interest. Throughout  the  decision  it  is  quite
    clear that the judge bore in mind the appellant's  unlawful  status  in
    the UK and gave it due weight with reference  to  the  relevant  public
    interest considerations outlined in  section  117B.   While  the  judge
    noted that there was no evidence to show whether the  appellant  was  a
    burden on the taxpayer there is no evidence to suggest that he gave any
    particular weight to the matter. The judge appeared to treat  it  as  a
    neutral factor whereby  the  absence  of  evidence  simply  didn't  add
    anything to the public interest considerations.

10.   It was open to the judge to have some regard to the  fact  that  there
    was no evidence to suggest that the appellant or her husband  would  be
    admitted to the other's country of origin. I do not consider that  this
    amounts to a reversal  of  the  burden  of  proof.  Even  if  this  was
    considered to be an erroneous approach I find that  it  clearly  didn't
    form a central part of the judge's reasoning. The  main  focus  of  the
    judge's findings regarding the compelling circumstances  of  this  case
    was the appellant's young age  on  arrival,  length  of  residence  and
    strength of ties to the UK  as  well  as  the  best  interests  of  her
    children.

11.   It was not necessary for the judge to make specific  reference  to  EV
    (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 if, as a matter  of  fact,  he
    took into account the relevant factors. While his findings relating  to
    the best interests of the children are brief he considered  their  age,
    nationality, length of residence  and  stage  of  education,  which  is
    consistent with the guidance outlined by the  Court  of  Appeal  in  EV
    (Philippines).

12.   If the decision is read as a whole it becomes  clear  that  the  judge
    took into  account  all  of  the  relevant  factors  and  weighed  them
    carefully with reference to the correct legal framework.  His  findings
    were open to him  on  the  evidence  and  could  not  be  described  as
    irrational. Another judge might have come to a  different  decision  on
    the same facts but I conclude  that  the  decision  does  not  disclose
    errors of law that would have  made  any  material  difference  to  the
    overall outcome of the appeal.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand

Signed
Date 11 February 2016
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


