
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00650/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 September 2015                  |On 14 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                               Muhammad Altaf
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Janjua, Janjua & Associates
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Muhammad Altaf, was born on 15 March 1981 and is a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  The appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  on  4
    April 2014 and was given six months' leave as a visitor.  He applied in
    October 2014 for a residence card as a confirmation  of  his  right  to
    reside in this country under European Community law.  The appellant was
    refused a residence card by the  respondent  by  a  decision  dated  21
    December 2014.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Cox) which in a decision promulgated on 22 April 2015  dismissed
    the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, Designated Judge McClure stated:

         "The sponsor is a British citizen who went to Pakistan to marry and
         then went for a period of six months to  live  and  work  in  Spain
         allegedly with her spouse, the appellant.  ... at paragraph 26  [of
         the decision of the First-tier Tribunal]  the  judge  has  accepted
         that the sponsoring spouse has been self-employed in Spain.  In the
         light of that and in light of the  wording  of  Regulation  9  [EEA
         Regulations 2006] it is arguable that the judge may have imposed  a
         requirement of working for  longer  than  is  justified  under  the
         Regulations.  In the  circumstances  leave  is  granted.   However,
         consideration has to be given to Regulation 9(2)(c)."

 3. Regulation 9 of the 2006 Regulations provides:

    9. - (1) If the  conditions  in  paragraph  (2)  are  satisfied,  these
    Regulations apply to a person who is the  family  member  of  a  United
    Kingdom national  as  if  the  United  Kingdom  national  were  an  EEA
    national.

         (2)  The conditions are that -

             (a)  the United Kingdom national is residing in an EEA State
             as a worker or self-employed person or was so residing before
             returning to the United Kingdom; and

             (b)  if the family member of the United Kingdom national is
             his spouse or civil partner, the parties are living together
             in the EEA State or had entered into the marriage or civil
             partnership and were living together in that State before the
             United Kingdom national returned to the United Kingdom.

         (3)  Where these Regulations apply to the family member of a United
         Kingdom national the United Kingdom national shall  be  treated  as
         holding a valid passport issued by an EEA State for the purpose  of
         the application of regulation 13 to that family member.

 4. The judge considered the evidence carefully.  He reached  a  number  of
    findings which are set out in  the  decision  especially  at  [32]  and
    following.  He found at [37] that "the sponsor intended  to  obtain  an
    advantage  by  artificially  creating  the  conditions  laid  down  for
    obtaining rights under European law."  At [38], the judge  stated  that
    he was satisfied  that  the  sponsor  and  appellants  had  "sought  to
    manufacture a situation such as to comply  with  the  conditions  under
    Article 7 but this is artificially creating those conditions and  there
    was not a genuine intention to pursue  activities  as  a  self-employed
    person in Spain."  Importantly at [39] the judge also found that he was
    "... satisfied that the sponsor did not transfer the centre of her life
    to Spain and therefore the appellant does not meet the requirements  of
    regulation 9 of the Regulations.  I find the decision is in  accordance
    with the EEA Regulations and does not breach Community law."

 5. Designated Judge McClure was right to note that, although  the  grounds
    of appeal point out that the judge [26] found that the sponsor had been
    self-employed in Spain there was no proper  challenge  to  the  judge's
    finding that the sponsor did not transfer the centre  of  her  life  to
    Spain [39].  The grounds [5] do no more  than  to  assert  that  "ample
    evidence" had been provided by the sponsor regarding  the  transference
    of the centre of her residence to Spain but  that  assertion  is,  with
    respect, nothing more than a disagreement with  findings  made  by  the
    judge to consider both the written and the oral evidence.  It is  clear
    that the requirements of Regulation 9  are  conjunctive  and  that  the
    Appellant  in  this  instance  has  failed   to   satisfy   the   judge
    (notwithstanding any findings which he may  have  made  regarding  sub-
    paragraphs (a) and (b)) that Regulation 9(2)(c) has been satisfied.  It
    is apparent from the decision that the judge was not impressed  by  the
    sponsor as a witness and he gave detailed reasons for considering  that
    her evidence was, in certain aspects at least, unreliable.  The judge's
    finding, in  those  circumstances,  that  Regulation  9(2)(c)  was  not
    satisfied was clearly unaffected by any error of law.   Since  all  the
    sub-paragraphs must be satisfied by the appellant if he was to  succeed
    in his appeal, it follows that this appeal must be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 1 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee order.


Signed   Date 1 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

