
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00053/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 October 2017                            |On 23 October 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           mr Hafiz Faisal Shahzad
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Chohan of Counsel, instructed by SZ Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Pakistan born on 21  October
    1986.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary  of
    State's decision dated 15 December 2015 to refuse to vary his leave  to
    remain on the basis that the respondent maintained that  the  appellant
    submitted a false TOEIC certificate.  Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    allowed the appellant's appeal in a decision promulgated on 8  February
    2017  and  remitted  the  case  back  to  the  respondent  for  further
    consideration under  paragraph  245  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    appellant in this appeal is therefore the Secretary of State.   However
    for the purposes of this decision I refer to the parties as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal where Mr Shahzad was the appellant.

 2. The Secretary of State appealed on the basis that the judge  failed  to
    correctly assess the burden of proof in line with SM and Qadir  (ETS -
    Evidence - Burden of Proof): UKUT 21 April 2016.  The respondent noted
    at paragraphs 20 and 21 of SM the findings are that the respondent  has
    discharged the evidential burden of proof in respect of deception.   If
    witness statements and spreadsheets have been provided then the  burden
    shifts to the appellant, as detailed  at  paragraph  68,  to  raise  an
    innocent explanation.  If the judge accepts the explanation the  burden
    shifts back to the respondent in order to address the legal burden  and
    it was submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasoning why the respondent had not met the legal  burden  in
    this case with no assessment  of  any  innocent  explanation  from  the
    appellant.  It was submitted that the judge erred in law and  in  light
    of the evidence and failure to find an innocent explanation  the  judge
    was bound to dismiss the appeal.

 3. Mr Tufan made  detailed  submissions,  including  in  relation  to  the
    brevity of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  He relied  on  the
    grounds that the judge had not done enough in relation to the burden of
    proof and pointed to the evidence before the Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, including the supplementary bundle which included the  lookup
    tool and evidence in relation to the criminal inquiry into abuse at the
    Premier Language Training Centre where the appellant took his  test  on
    23 May 2012.  Mr Tufan submitted that the judge failed to  engage  with
    the evidence of Professor French, including that the  likelihood  of  a
    false positive in such cases was very likely to be  very  substantially
    less than one percent.

 4. Mr Tufan relied on the Tribunal case of MA (ETS TOEIC  testing)  [2016]
    UKUT 450, in particular paragraph 50, which gave reasons in relation to
    the cogent evidence as to the "lookup tool" which consists of an  excel
    spreadsheet with the name, date of birth and nationality of the  person
    identified.  However I note that it  was  also  said  in  MA  that  the
    question of whether a person engaged in  fraud  in  procuring  a  TOEIC
    English  language  proficiency   qualification   will   invariably   be
    intrinsically fact sensitive.

 5. Mr Tufan pointed to the  reasoning  in  MA  that  the  suggestion  that
    someone speaks English does not assist an appellant,  as  there  are  a
    range of reasons why persons proficient in English may engage in  TOEIC
    fraud.  Mr Tufan relied on the High  Court  decision  in  the  judicial
    review case of Gaogalalwe R (on the application of) v the Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2017] EWHC 1709, which he submitted  had
    a similar factual matrix to the appeal before me.  In that case it  was
    indicated that it was common ground that the question to be  asked  was
    whether the Secretary of State had approached the matter in the  manner
    directed by the Court of Appeal in SM and Qadir [2016] EWCA  Civ  1167.
    This involves considering whether the Secretary of State  has  met  the
    burden on her of identifying evidence that the  TOEIC  certificate  was
    obtained by  deception;  second  whether  the  claimant  satisfies  the
    evidential burden on her of raising an  innocent  explanation  for  the
    suggested deception; and third, if so whether the  Secretary  of  State
    can meet the legal burden of showing on the  balance  of  probabilities
    that deception in fact took place.

 6. Mr Tufan also indicated, although he  accepted  it  was  not  a  ground
    before me, that the judge was incorrect to remit the case back  to  the
    Secretary of State and that there were sufficient  grounds  to  dismiss
    the appeal over and above the TOEIC issue.

 7. Mr Chohan, in relation to the final point, submitted that the judge  at
    paragraph 8 had considered  this  issue  and  taken  into  account  the
    decision in Mandalia v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2015] UKSC 59, in particular paragraphs 7 and 8  and  the  judge  took
    into account that the evidential defects in  the  appellant's  evidence
    were  minor  and  could  be  corrected  and  therefore  considered   it
    appropriate to allow the respondent  to  reconsider  the  matter  under
    paragraph 245 of the Immigration Rules.

 8. Mr Chohan  submitted  that  the  judge  made  findings,  including  the
    findings at paragraph [4]  of  the  decision  and  reasons  as  to  the
    circumstances of the appellant taking the test, who he went with,  that
    he paid a fee, that he did not see any proxy present and that the first
    time that he heard  of  any  allegations  was  in  December  2015.   He
    submitted it was open to the judge to find as he did that  he  accepted
    that the appellant was credible on this and that he had spent two hours
    taking the test and did not cheat.

 9. It was Mr Chohan's submission that the judge was clearly aware  of  all
    the evidence, including of Professor French.  Although the lookup  tool
    shows that there were invalid tests, crucially the judge had found this
    appellant credible and had referred to the test in SM  and  Qadir.   Mr
    Chohan further submitted that the appellant was cross-examined  on  his
    evidence and the judge was entitled to  reach  the  decisions  he  did.
    Although the judge kept it simple he dealt with the issues.

10. In relation to the case law Mr Chohan submitted that essentially it  is
    a question of the judge's credibility and other findings.  Mr Tufan, in
    reply, referred me to the material in relation to  a  criminal  inquiry
    into abuse at the Premier Language Training Centre in Barking and  that
    there were no cases where there was no evidence of invalidity and  that
    all the tests were either questionable or invalid, with 70% found to be
    invalid at this test centre which he submitted was very high.

Decision on Error of Law

11. I am not satisfied that any material error of law has been  identified.
    In relation to the first  part  of  the  ground  of  appeal  I  am  not
    satisfied that  the  Tribunal  misapplied  the  burden  of  proof.   At
    paragraph 7 the judge sets out:

         "Whilst the generic evidence  undoubtedly  establishes  that  there
         were false TOEIC tests taken, on the evidence placed before me,  in
         which I find the appellant to be a credible witness, the respondent
         has failed to establish to the relevant standard that the appellant
         did not sit the test himself and fraudulently obtained the  English
         language qualification.  I have taken into account  the  fact  that
         the  appellant  apart  from  the  TOEIC  also  obtained  an   IELTS
         certificate in the United Kingdom and clearly speaks  good  English
         and also the criticisms in relation to the generic evidence as  set
         out in Qadir v the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2016] EWCA Civ 1167 at paragraphs 22 and 23".

    It is evident that the judge accepted that  the  respondent's  evidence
    was sufficient to provide the appellant with  a  case  to  answer,  the
    "innocent explanation" referred to as in SM and Qadir.  The  fact  that
    the judge did not use these words and specifically set out the shifting
    burden of proof as outlined in  the  case  law  is  not  fatal  to  his
    decision.

12. The judge at [2] though to [4] set out the appellant's evidence in both
    his witness statement and in oral evidence  and  in  cross-examination,
    including where he took the test, how he travelled to the  test  centre
    (by bus and train), where and when he registered for the exam  and  how
    much it cost.  The judge noted the appellant's evidence in relation  to
    the nature and construct of the exam and also that the  appellant  took
    the test where he did in Barking as it was close to East Ham  where  he
    was living at the time.  He noted that he  took  the  test  with  other
    friends who he knew from the college, that he saw no proxy present, was
    not aware of any allegation of deception, had not been in contact  with
    ETS or the college and that he had spent two hours taking the tests and
    did not cheat.

13. I take into account that the judge had the benefit of hearing  evidence
    from the appellant and hearing the  appellant  cross-examined  on  that
    evidence.  On the basis of all the evidence, the judge went on  at  [7]
    to find the appellant credible.  When read with the evidence  that  was
    set out at [2] to [4], that was a finding open to the judge  to  accept
    that the appellant had provided an innocent explanation that he did sit
    the test himself, in response to the respondent having established with
    the evidence provided that there was a case to answer.  In addition  to
    finding the appellant credible the judge also took  into  consideration
    that the appellant had obtained an  IELTS  certificate  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Whilst his finding that the appellant speaks  English  is  of
    little weight for the reasons set out in MA that was not the sole basis
    of his finding; it included that  the  appellant  also  held  an  IELTS
    certificate and  that  the  judge  found  him  credible.   It  was  not
    suggested these findings reached the high  threshold  of  irrationality
    and I am satisfied that  the  judge  did  provide  brief  but  adequate
    reasons.  It was also open to the judge to find that the respondent had
    not discharged the legal burden of demonstrating that on the balance of
    probabilities the deception in fact took place.

14. Although reference was made by Mr  Tufan  to  both  Professor  French's
    expert report and the criminal inquiry, the judge indicates that he had
    considered all the evidence including the respondent's bundle which  he
    refers to at [6] and [7].  It was open to the judge  to  find  that  he
    did, that the respondent had failed to discharge that legal burden that
    the test the appellant took was obtained by deception.

15. I am satisfied that the findings  of  the  judge  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's TOEIC test were open to him and do not contain  a  material
    error of law and shall stand.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  ground
    raised belatedly by Mr  Tufan  in  relation  to  the  remittal  to  the
    respondent was properly before me.  Even if  it  were  the  judge  gave
    adequate reasons for taking the course he did, including  that  in  the
    judge's findings the defects were minor and could be corrected and that
    the appellant should not be deprived of a remedy to repair the  deficit
    in the evidence.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.

There was no request for an anonymity direction and none is made.


Signed                                  Dated:  20 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award application was sought and none is made.



Signed                                  Dated:  20 October 2017




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

