

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration               and                Asylum                Chamber)
  Appeal Number: IA/00019/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard             at             Field             House,             London
          Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On              the              4th              January               2016
                  On the 18th January 2016

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

                          MR HAFIZ RASHID SIDDIQUE
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr Mustafa (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:      Miss Savage (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Wyman promulgated on the 1st July  2015,  in  which  he
      dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision  to
      refuse to grant him further Leave to Remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
      Student Migrant under the Points Based System.

Background

   2. On the 3rd August 2014, the Appellant made a combined application  for
      Leave to Remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier  4  (General)  Student
      Migrant under the Points Based System and for  a  Biometric  Residence
      Permit. On the 20th August 2014, the Appellant through his  solicitors
      Messrs Denning Solicitors  submitted  a  letter  indicating  that  the
      Appellant was in the process of securing admission to at a College and
      asking for the application to be held until the Appellant had  secured
      a new admission, thereby asking for extra time to secure his admission
      and provide his CAS letter. However, the letter went on to claim  that
      the Appellant was further seeking to place reliance upon paragraph 276
      ADE (vi) of the Immigration Rules, on the basis  that  it  was  argued
      that the Appellant had entered the UK on the 2nd  September  2005  and
      had lived in the UK for nearly 9 years and that during  that  time  he
      had established a private life in the UK due to the  duration  of  the
      period and strength of his connections here, and that as a  result  of
      the length of period he had been here, he  had  completely  integrated
      into the United Kingdom society and had lost all social  and  cultural
      ties in Pakistan.


   3. It was further argued that  he  could  be  adequately  maintained  and
      accommodated in the UK without recourse to public funds  and  that  if
      his application were considered outside of the Rules, then it would be
      disproportionate to the legitimate  public  aim  for  the  purpose  of
      Article 8 (2) of the ECHR and the Respondent was invited to apply  the
      5 stage Razgar test, in addition to consideration of his Human  Rights
      in respect of his private life under paragraph 276 ADE.


   4. Within the decision that was taken  on  the  3rd  December  2014,  the
      Respondent considered the Appellant's application for further Leave as
      a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant  and  found  that  as  he  had  not
      provided a valid  CAS,  he  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
      Immigration Rules. However, that Refusal Notice did not  consider  the
      question as to whether or not the Appellant  met  the  criteria  under
      paragraph 276ADE, that removal would amount to a breach of  his  Human
      Rights under Article 8 in respect of his private  life,  nor  was  his
      Human Rights considered outside of the Immigration Rules.



   5. The Appellant  sought  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, and that appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman
      on the 1st July 2015.



   6. Permission to appeal has been granted to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne on the 30th  September  2015,  on
      the grounds that it was arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      was wrong not to consider the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR  claim,  when
      this had been raised in  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. Permission was granted to appeal on  all  grounds  contained
      within the Grounds of Appeal.



   7. In his oral submissions on behalf of the Appellant, Mr Mustafa  argued
      that this was a  straightforward  case  and  that  the  Appellant  had
      applied as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant,  but  had  varied  his
      application by means of the letter dated  the  20th  October  2014  to
      include a Human Rights application, and submitted to the  Tribunal  on
      that date, a copy of the letter that was said to have been sent to the
      Respondent by recorded delivery dated the 20th August 2014. Seemingly,
      that letter was not in fact before First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman, as
      it was not contained  within  the  Respondent's  bundle,  nor  was  it
      anywhere else within the file.



   8. The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was originally listed as an oral
      appeal and a Notice of Hearing was sent out on the 24th February 2015,
      listing the appeal for an oral hearing on Tuesday 16th  June  2015  at
      10:00 a.m. at the Richmond Magistrate Court. That direction which  was
      sent to the Appellant and his representatives  on  the  24th  February
      2015 contained a direction that, inter-Alia that "the  Appellant  must
      send copies of all documents to the Tribunal and to the other party, a
      bundle of all documents you wish  to  rely  upon  in  support  of  the
      appeal.  You  should  clearly  identify  any  essential  passages  you
      consider highly significant in your appeal. Copies of documents  in  a
      language other than English must be accompanied by  a  full  certified
      English translation. It is important that you submit all the documents
      as soon as they are available, as the Respondent will  review  all  of
      the evidence you submit before the hearing of your appeal. This  could
      result in their  decision  being  revised  in  your  favour.  If  this
      happens, your appeal  maybe  treated  as  withdrawn  and  the  hearing
      cancelled."



   9. However, by letter dated the 3rd June 2015, the Appellant's solicitors
      Messrs Britain Solicitors, noted that the appeal  had  be  listed  for
      hearing on the 16th June 2015 at Richmond Magistrates  Court,  Surrey,
      but stated that "however, we are instructed by the client that he wish
      to proceed his appeal on paper hearing instead  of  oral  hearing.  We
      will we will really appreciate if you could please update your  record
      and confirm us in due course". As a result of  this  request  for  the
      case to be considered as a  paper  hearing,  rather  than  an  a  oral
      hearing, the case was considered by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman on
      the papers on the 18th June 2015, with his decision being  promulgated
      on  the  1st  July  2015.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  therefore
      considered the appeal on the papers, two days after the date  that  it
      was originally listed for an oral hearing.



  10. It is argued by Mr Mustafa on behalf of the Appellant that within  the
      Grounds of Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, it had been specifically
      argued that at ground 3 "that the decision  is  in  violation  of  the
      Appellant's rights under the Convention of Human Rights." And that  at
      ground 6 "that  the  detrimental  effect  of  the  impugned  decisions
      attracts operation of Article  8  of  ECHR"  and  that  having  raised
      Article 8 Human Rights and Human Rights arguments within  the  Grounds
      of Appeal, it should have been dealt with by First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Wyman, did not make any findings in respect  of  Article  8  or  Human
      Rights within his decision. This it was argued mounted to  a  material
      error of law such as to mean  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge should be set aside.



  11. Mr Mustafa further argued that in his experience when  the  First-tier
      Tribunal varies a hearing from an oral hearing to a  written  hearing,
      further directions are sent out indicating that any  further  evidence
      including statements, skeleton arguments and written submissions,  are
      to be filed by a certain date, but  that  in  this  case,  no  further
      directions were sent out,  and  this,  it  is  argued  amounted  to  a
      procedural irregularity, and that had directions been  sent  out,  the
      Appellant would have been in a  position  to  file  more  evidence  in
      respect of his Article 8 Human Rights claim. It was argued that if the
      decision was set aside on the basis of a material error of  law,  that
      the Appellant would now wish to adduce fresh evidence  in  respect  of
      his circumstances now and that he wished to claim that he was entitled
      to remain in the UK  on  the  basis  of  long  residence  and  seeking
      indefinite Leave to Remain on that basis.



  12. Miss Savage on behalf of the Respondent relied upon her Rule 24 reply,
      which I have fully taken account of  and  considered  in  reaching  my
      decision. She argued that there was no material error of law  in  that
      although the Grounds of Appeal referred to Human Rights claims,  there
      were no specific details given in support of an Article  8  claim  and
      that there was no evidence of the Appellant having any family  in  the
      UK or of him having established any significant  private  life  within
      the UK. She argued that the directions  had  previous  been  sent  out
      requiring the Appellant to serve any evidence as soon as possible, and
      that the case was considered on the  papers  after  the  date  of  the
      original hearing and that the case had been  converted  from  an  oral
      hearing to a paper hearing at the Appellant's own request. She  argued
      that the Appellant had  sufficient  time  to  prepare  and  serve  the
      requisite papers, if he had so desired, but had failed to do  so.  She
      argued  that  there  was  no  unfairness  in  the  procedure  and   no
      requirement for the Tribunal to send out further directions.



  13. Miss Savage sought to rely upon the case  of  Sarkar  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 195 in which she  sought
      to argue that similar Article 8 grounds had been raised in the  appeal
      but there was no evidence of Article 8 and that the  Court  of  Appeal
      had found that the First-tier Tribunal could consider that the Article
      8 case had been abandoned if it was not pursued. She further  told  me
      that she sought to rely upon the decision of the Upper Tribunal in the
      case of MM (Tier 1 PSW; Article 8;  "private  life")  Zimbabwe  [2009]
      UKAIT 00037, as authority for  the  point  that  Article  8  does  not
      include a right to work or study per se and that it is the social ties
      and relationships (depending upon their duration and richness)  formed
      during periods of study or work which  were  capable  of  constituting
      private life for the purpose of Article 8 and that there was  no  such
      evidence in this case. She argued that even though the Judge  had  not
      considered the Human Rights claim, this was not a  material  error  as
      there was no basis for the Judge  to  have  found  that  the  decision
      amounted to a breach of the Appellant's Human Rights under  Article  8
      in any event.


  14. In reply, Mr Mustafa sought to argue that the case of Sarkar could  be
      distinguished, and in  that  case  there  had  only  been  a  previous
      application under the Points Based System and not an application  made
      on Human Rights grounds and that within that case  the  Appellant  had
      been granted two opportunities of arguing that the  decision  might  a
      breach of his Human Rights, but had failed to do so. He further sought
      to argue that in that case the case had been argued at an oral hearing
      before the First-tier Tribunal where the Human Rights  claim  had  not
      been pursued. He sought to argue that the Appellant  Mr  Siddique  had
      been deprived of the opportunity of having his Article 8 claim  fairly
      considered and had been deprived  of  the  opportunity  of  submitting
      further evidence in support of his Article 8 claim,  before  the  same
      was considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.



  15.  I  reserved  my  decision  on  the  question  of  error  of  law  and
      materiality.

Error of Law and Materiality

  16. I do find as a fact that at ground 3 of the Grounds of Appeal  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal the Appellant had specifically  raised  the  Human
      Rights, in that it was there argued that "the decision is in violation
      of the Appellant's rights under the Convention of  Human  Rights"  and
      further, he had raised the issue again at ground  6,  wherein  it  was
      stated that "the detrimental effect of the impugned decisions attracts
      operation of Article 8  of  ECHR".  I  further  find  that  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Wyman was aware  that  the  Appellant  was  seeking  to
      appeal both on the basis that the decision was not in accordance  with
      the Law and also that the decision amounted  to  a  violation  of  his
      rights under the Convention of Human Rights, as was stated by  him  in
      [11] of his decision.


  17. However, I find that although  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wyman  was
      aware that the Human Rights point was  an  issue  within  the  appeal,
      nowhere within his decision has he actually considered the Appellant's
      Human Rights claim. This I find is an error of law.



  18. However, it is clear that the contentious issue in the case is  as  to
      whether or not that error is material.



  19. I reject the argument put forward on behalf of the Respondent by  Miss
      Savage that First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman could have considered that
      the Article 8 claim was abandoned, in reliance upon the case of Sarkar
      v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ  195.  In
      that case the Court of Appeal had stated that the First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge was entitled to have considered that the Article 8 case had been
      abandoned, as it was not pursued at the oral appeal hearing.  However,
      in this case the appeal did not go to an oral hearing,  and  the  case
      was considered by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wyman  on  the  papers.
      Having raised his Human Rights arguments in the Grounds of  Appeal,  I
      could find no basis on which it could be  said  that  that  ground  of
      appeal had been abandoned when the FTTJ simply failed to deal with the
      point..



  20. However, I find that had First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Wyman  considered
      the  Appellant's  Human  Rights  claim  in  his  decision,  he   would
      inevitably have dismissed the appeal on Human Rights grounds. Although
      it seems to have been accepted by the parties that the contents of the
      letter dated  the  20th  August  2014,  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
      Appellant by Messrs Denning Solicitors was  not  in  fact  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge, even if it had been, this would  have  been
      the only "evidence" available  at  that  stage,  in  relation  to  the
      Appellant's Human Rights claim. However, this is formally not evidence
      on behalf of the Appellant himself, it is simply submissions, as it is
      not a signed statement by the Appellant and is simply  submissions  on
      his behalf by his solicitors to  the  extent  that  he  did  meet  the
      requirements of paragraph 276 ADE (vi) on the basis that he had  lived
      in the UK for nearly 9 years and had established a private life in the
      UK due to the duration of the period and strength of  connections  and
      that he had completely integrated in the UK and lost  all  social  and
      cultural ties in Pakistan and  that  further  the  decision  would  be
      disproportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  aim  if  the  case  was
      considered for the purposes of Article 8 outside  of  the  Immigration
      Rules, and that the  Appellant  could  be  adequately  maintained  and
      accommodated in the UK without  recourse  to  public  funds.  However,
      there was in fact no evidence from  the  Appellant  before  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Wyman, in this regard. There was no statement from  the
      Appellant or others, nor any documentation to prove  that  he  had  no
      ties including social, cultural or family within Pakistan to which  he
      would have to go if required to leave  the  UK  for  the  purposes  of
      paragraph 276 ADE (vi), nor was there  any  statement  of  documentary
      evidence  to  show  that  he  could  be  adequately   maintained   and
      accommodated in the UK without recourse to public funds  if  the  case
      were to be considered outside of the Immigration Rules for the purpose
      of Article 8, as suggested within the letter of the 20th August  2014.
      These are bold assertions by the solicitors, and  did  not  amount  to
      evidence, even if in that letter had been before  the  Judge  and  the
      Judge would not have been entitled to place weight upon  it  as  being
      evidence that in fact the Appellant had no family, social or  cultural
      ties with Pakistan or as evidence  to  prove  that  the  decision  was
      disproportionate to the legitimate public aim sought to be adduced, if
      the case was considered outside of the Rules.


  21. It was argued on behalf of the Appellant by Mr Mustapha that there was
      a procedural irregularity in that the First-tier Tribunal had not sent
      out further directions upon the case being changed from an oral appeal
      to a paper appeal, giving the Appellant the right  to  submit  further
      documentation including statements,  skeleton  arguments  and  written
      submissions, which it is argued is  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  usual
      practice,  and  that  thereby  the  Appellant  was  deprived  of   the
      opportunity  of  presenting  his  case  fully  and  deprived  of   the
      opportunity of having a fair hearing. However, Mr Mustafa  was  unable
      to point me to any Rule within the First-tier Tribunal Procedure Rules
      2014 requiring the Tribunal to send out further directions  permitting
      further witness  statements  or  documentary  evidence  to  be  filed,
      skeleton arguments or written submissions, in circumstances where  the
      basis of the appeal changed from an oral appeal  to  a  paper  appeal.
      Although in his submission he has not come across any case  where  the
      Tribunal had not done so, there was in fact  no  evidential  basis  to
      support such an assertion, as clearly he is not in a position to  give
      evidence on this point, and he was unable to point  me  to  any  case,
      statute, procedural rule  or  practice  direction,  which  mandated  a
      further set of directions to be issued in such circumstances.


  22. In this regard, it is highly relevant that the  Tribunal  had  already
      sent out on  24th  February  2015,  both  to  the  Appellant  and  his
      representatives, in the original appeal hearing, directions  requiring
      the Appellant to send copies of all documents to  be  relied  upon  as
      soon as available, and yet between the 24th February 2015 and the 18th
      June 2015, no statement or other documentary evidence  in  respect  of
      the Appellant's Article 8 claim was filed and served on behalf of  the
      Appellant. Nor did the Appellant through his  solicitors  when  asking
      for the case to be considered on the papers, ask for further  time  to
      submit any such evidence, and again it is significant that he did  not
      seek to submit any such evidence with the request for the case  to  be
      considered on the papers. Simply requesting the case to be  considered
      on the papers as opposed to being listed for oral hearing, did not, in
      my judgement, require the Tribunal to then send out further directions
      indicating that evidence must be filed, when the Tribunal had  already
      sent out directions requiring the filing of evidence. The  appeal  was
      further not even considered until 2 days after the date that the  oral
      appeal would have been considered, such that it  cannot  realistically
      be suggested  that  the  change  in  the  date  when  the  appeal  was
      considered,  led  to  such  evidence  not   being   filed.   In   such
      circumstances, I therefore do not accept that there is any  procedural
      irregularity on part of the First-tier Tribunal, in  not  sending  out
      further directions.


  23. In such circumstances, even if First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wyman  had
      considered the Article 8 claim of the Appellant within his decision, I
      find that there was no evidential basis before him upon which he could
      have found in the Appellant's favour  on  Human  Rights  grounds.  The
      Appellant had not submitted any statement or evidence  in  support  of
      his Human Rights claim, and even though the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      did not have a letter from the solicitors dated the 20th August  2014,
      this in itself was not "evidence", as it was not a signed statement on
      behalf of the Appellant, and simply contained bold assertions that  he
      had no social or cultural ties  to  Pakistan  and  that  he  could  be
      adequately maintained and accommodated in the UK without  recourse  to
      public funds. This would not have been a sufficient  evidential  basis
      to have found in the Appellant's favour, in any event.



  24. I further bear in mind as argued by  Miss  Savage  on  behalf  of  the
      Respondent that in light of the case of MM (Tier  1  PSW;  Article  8;
      "private life") Zimbabwe [2009] UKAIT 00037, that whilst  respect  for
      private life in Article 8 does not include a right to  work  or  study
      per se, it is the social ties and relationships (depending upon  their
      duration and richness) formed during periods of study  or  work  which
      are capable of constituting private life for the purpose of Article 8.
      The fact that the Appellant had therefore been in  the  UK  previously
      studying did not in itself prove the  social  ties  and  relationships
      which he had formed during his almost 9 years in the UK by the date of
      the decision, such as to amount to a significant  private  life  which
      would be a disproportionate interference  with  as  a  result  of  the
      decision reached. There was therefore before the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge no evidence that the Appellant had any family within the UK, and
      no evidence in terms of any statements or other  documentary  evidence
      to show that the Appellant had no ties to Pakistan  including  social,
      cultural or family for the purpose  of  paragraph  276  ADE  (vi);  no
      evidence as to the strength of the social ties or relationships formed
      by him during his time in the UK, and no documentary evidence to  show
      that he was able to be adequately maintained and accommodated  in  the
      UK without recourse to public funds, other  than  the  fact  that  his
      accommodation and maintenance must  have  been  considered  previously
      when granting his previous Leave. His  claim  under  paragraph  276ADE
      would therefore have failed in any event.


  25. Nor was  there  evidence  of  any  compelling,  exceptional  or  other
      circumstances not dealt with by the Immigration  Rules,  which  should
      have led to the First-tier Tribunal Judge considering the Human Rights
      claims outside of the Immigration Rules under the 5 stage Razgar test,
      and even if he had done, there was no evidence upon which  the  First-
      tier  Tribunal  Judge  could  have  found  that   the   decision   was
      disproportionate to the legitimate public aim sought to  be  achieved.
      There being no evidential basis  for  a  finding  in  the  Appellant's
      favour before First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman in respect of the  Human
      Rights claim, the failure of the Judge to consider this claim, I  find
      was not material.


  26. In such circumstances  given  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge does not therefore disclose a material error of law, in
      that the error of law I find was not  material  to  the  outcome.  The
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman is maintained and stands.



  27. I remind myself that as and until a material error of  law  is  found,
      there is no basis upon which the Upper Tribunal can hear further fresh
      evidence regarding the Appellant's circumstances now,  and  that  even
      though it is contested that the  Appellant's  circumstances  have  now
      changed in that it is alleged that he now meets the  requirements  for
      long residence, the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Wyman  not
      containing a material error of law and being maintained, I am not in a
      position to consider any  change  of  circumstances  relevant  to  the
      Appellant's case.



Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman not  disclosing  a  material
error of law is maintained;
No anonymity order was sought before the First-tier Tribunal,  nor  was  any
such order sought before me. No anonymity order is therefore made.


Signed
Dated 4th January 2016

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
