
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/00888/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                   |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th November 2017                  |      On 5th December 2017          |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     M A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Kotas (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Claimant: Mr A. Saeed (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I refer to  the  parties  as  "the  Secretary  of  State"  who  is  the
    appellant in this matter and "the Claimant".  This is an error  of  law
    hearing at which I consider whether or not there is a material error of
    law in the decision the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Martins)  ("FTT")
    promulgated on 18th April 2017 in which  the  FTT  allowed  the  appeal
    against a refusal made on 13.5.2015 to vary leave to remain as a spouse
    in the UK and on human rights grounds.





Background

2.   The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan. He entered the UK as  a  student
    in  2011  with  leave  until  26.11.2013.   He  married  his  wife   on
    18.11.2013.  She is a citizen of Tanzania but has  ILR  in  the  UK  on
    account of having been a victim of  domestic  violence.  There  are  no
    children.

FTT decision

3.   The FTT found that the Claimant failed to meet  the  5  year  route  on
    financial grounds and went on to consider  the  10  year  route  having
    regard to insurmountable obstacles to enjoying family life outside  the
    UK [34-35]. The FTT took into account that the marriage occurred  at  a
    time when the appellant was a student [37]. It found  that  the  spouse
    had lived in the UK for 15 years,  there  was  no  place  available  in
    Tanzania, the claimant's family did not approve of  the  marriage,  and
    the spouse suffered from ill health.  The FTT concluded that there were
    insurmountable obstacles to integration in Pakistan  or  Tanzania  with
    reference to paragraph 276ADE. It  acknowledged  that  the  spouse  had
    married on the understanding that she would not  live  in  Pakistan  or
    Tanzania. It further found that in terms of the  Claimant's  return  to
    Pakistan the decisions of Chikwamba and MA (Pakistan) applied [39].

Application for permission to appeal

4.   In ground 1 it was contended that the FTT erred by appearing  to  allow
    the  appeal   under   paragraph   276ADE(1)(vi)   with   reference   to
    insurmountable obstacles rather  then  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration.  The FTT failed to conduct a balanced consideration of all
    the factors in particular regarding Pakistan; the spouse  speaks  Urdu,
    she has communication with the appellant's parents  and  there  was  no
    evidence of any disapproval.

5.   In ground 2 the Secretary of  State  argued  that  the  FTT  failed  to
    consider if there  were  compelling  circumstances  and  to  take  into
    account the public interest factors under section 117B,  under  Article
    8.

Permission grant

6.   Permission was granted by FTJ Hollingworth who found  that  there  were
    arguable grounds that the FTT failed to set out sufficient analysis  of
    the degree of weight  to  be  attached  to  factors  relevant  to  very
    significant obstacles. The FTT's error in confusing the two  tests  may
    have affected the factors  in  assessing  the  cumulative  weight.   In
    considering Article 8 the FTT failed to look at statutory provisions as
    to public interest under section 117B.

Rule 24 Response

7.   There was no Rule 24 response from the Claimant.





Submissions

8.   I heard submissions from both representatives which are set out in  the
    record of proceedings.  Mr Kotas submitted that the FTT was considering
    EX 1 with reference to EX 2 and the test was  insurmountable  obstacles
    to family life outside  of  the  UK.   The  decision  referred  to  the
    submissions but there was little in the way of findings.  There was  no
    proper analysis or assessment of  the  facts.   Mr  Kotas  argued  that
    whilst the grounds referred to paragraph 276ADE the focus of the appeal
    was on the lack of reasoning under Ex1 and Ex2.

9.   Mr Saeed acknowledged that the  FTT  had  not  properly  considered  Ex
    1(b)/Ex 2 but that the substance of the decision albeit brief was sound
    and the outcome would have been no different. The  Claimant  relied  on
    the 10 year route as the  financial  requirements  were  not  met.  The
    medical evidence was that the spouse had  thyroid  difficulties  and  a
    miscarriage in the past and the Claimant suffered from depression.

Discussion and conclusion

10.  I am satisfied that the Secretary of State's grounds are made  out  and
    that the FTT decision should be set aside as  it  contains  a  material
    error in law. The FTT failed to apply the correct test  and  failed  to
    consider the relevant law namely Ex1(b) and Ex2.   The  FTT  failed  to
    adequately reason the decision and or make proper findings of  fact  as
    to why the difficulties experienced by the couple could not be overcome
    in Pakistan or Tanzania. It is unclear whether the appeal  was  allowed
    under Appendix FM or under paragraph 276ADE and which was compounded by
    the confusion of the tests.  There was no consideration  of  Article  8
    although I acknowledge that if the FTT decided to  allow  the   appeal,
    which is a human rights appeal, on the grounds  that  the  Rules  under
    Appendix FM were met it may not have been necessary to go on to look at
    Article 8.  In light of the decision that I have made as  to  error  of
    law it remains the position that under Article 8 outside of  the  Rules
    requires section 117B factors to be considered.

11.  As the FTT failed to make specific findings of fact and  give  adequate
    reasons, I have decided that it would be appropriate for the appeal  to
    be reheard before the First -tier Tribunal (excluding  Judge  Martins).
    Both representatives indicated their agreement to this disposal in  the
    event of finding an error of law.

Decision

12.  There is a material error of law in the decision  which  shall  be  set
    aside.

    The appeal is to be reheard before the First -tier Tribunal  at  Hatton
    Cross (excluding Judge Martins).


                               Signed   Date 2.12.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


NO FEE AWARD


                               Signed   Date 2.12.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


