
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00755/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 November 2016                  |On 16 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ODO SUNDAY OFUTO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr L. Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr C. Emezie on behalf of Dylan Conrad Kreolle
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The  appellant  entered  the  UK  on  14  September  2009  with  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student migrant that was valid until 31
    January 2013. He made an application for leave to remain as  a  spouse.
    The application was refused with a right of appeal on  28  March  2013.
    The appellant is recorded as having withdrawn the appeal on 24  January
    2013 although the reason is unclear.

3.    On 17 July 2013 he made a further application for leave to  remain  as
    a spouse. The application was refused without a right of appeal  on  16
    September 2013. The appellant filed an application  for  permission  to
    bring judicial review proceedings on 20 November 2013.  The  course  of
    the proceedings is unclear from the limited evidence  currently  before
    the Tribunal. A letter from the Home Office to the appellant  dated  23
    July 2015 stated that the Secretary of State had agreed  to  reconsider
    the case but it is unclear whether this was as a result of the judicial
    review proceedings or related to another application. The letter  asked
    for further evidence relating to his wife's medical condition.

4.    The operative decision for the purpose of this appeal is a  subsequent
    decision to refuse leave to remain as a spouse dated 19  January  2016.
    The appellant asked for the appeal to be determined on the  papers  but
    served a  bundle  of  evidence  for  consideration  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

5.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hosie ("the judge") allowed the appeal in  a
    decision promulgated on 06 May 2016. The judge summarised  the  reasons
    for refusal [12]. She also took into account various pieces of evidence
    in the appellant's bundle, including medical evidence relating  to  his
    spouse, which referred to the appellant as  her  partner  [15-16].  The
    evidence relating to his wife dated from 2013-2014.

6.    The  respondent  sought  to  appeal  the  decision  on  the  following
    grounds:

         "Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hosie finds that the  A's  appeal
         succeeds in relation to EX.1 "insurmountable  obstacles".  However,
         it seems Judge Hosie fails to notice that in the RFRL it is  stated
         that:


             We were notified by your wife, [LS],  that  your  relationship
             with her no longer subsists and that she does  not  intend  to
             live with you in the future. As such, you fail to meet  E-LTRP
             1.7 and E-LTRP 1.10  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  as  defined
             below:


             E-LTRP.1.7 The relationship between the  applicant  and  their
             partner must be genuine and subsisting.


         Judge  Hosie  completely  fails  to  engage  with  this  issue  and
         therefore fails to resolve a conflict/make a finding on a  material
         matter."

7.    At the hearing Mr Tarlow said that he had considered the  reasons  for
    refusal letter and had gone through all the documents on his  file  but
    could not find any reference to the quote in the grounds.  I  had  also
    noted that the decision dated 19 January 2016, which is the subject  of
    this appeal, did not contain the quote relied upon. Mr Tarlow said that
    he could do no more than rely on the grounds of appeal, but appeared to
    accept that the Secretary of State's appeal must  inevitably  fail.  If
    the quotation relied upon was not in fact in the decision letter before
    the judge she could hardly be criticised for failing to  take  it  into
    account.

8.    Mr Tarlow stated that the Home Office file was marked to say that  the
    appellant's spouse had informed them on 12 March 2015 that she  was  no
    longer in a subsisting relationship with him. If that is  the  case  it
    seems strange that it wasn't mentioned in the decision dated 19 January
    2016. It is not clear  from  the  patchy  summary  of  his  immigration
    history whether there was a previous refusal decision, which  did  take
    it into account. Whilst  the  evidence  considered  by  the  judge  was
    somewhat dated and did not show at the date of  the  hearing  that  the
    appellant continued to be in a subsisting relationship with  his  wife,
    no challenge has been made to that issue in the grounds of  appeal.  As
    such, I conclude that the judge's findings were open to her to make  on
    the evidence as it stood before the First-tier Tribunal and disclose no
    errors of law.

9.    I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision did not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law. The decision shall stand. It is a
    matter for the respondent to decide how to proceed if there is  further
    evidence that was not placed before the First-tier Tribunal.


Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law


Signed   [pic]   Date   16 November 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








