
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/00439/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Field House                      |Decision Promulgated        |
|On 3 December 2014                        |On 7 January 2015           |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between

                                HAMID HUSSAIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms N Mallick instructed by Robinson Ravani & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr C Avery Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
   order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
   First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against
   a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wellesley -Cole promulgated on 22
   September 2014 which allowed the Appellant's appeal under the Immigration
   (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ('the 2006 Regulations.')

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 6 March 1981 and is a citizen of  Pakistan.  On
   26 July 2013 he applied for an EEA Residence Card as  a  confirmation  of
   his right to reside in the United Kingdom as  the  unmarried  partner  or
   extended family member of an EEA national.
4. On 2 December  2013  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter gave a number  of  reasons:  it  was  not
   accepted that the Appellant was in a durable relationship  with  her  EEA
   sponsor and therefore Regulation 8(5) was not met; there was insufficient
   evidence that the EEA sponsor was a qualified person  and  therefore  the
   requirements of Regulation 6 were not met.


The Judge's Decision
5. The Appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Wellesley-Cole ("the Judge")  found  that  the  Appellant  and  his
   partner were in a  durable  relationship  and  that  the  sponsor  was  a
   qualified person and allowed the appeal.
6. Grounds of appeal were lodged on the basis that even  having  found  that
   the Appellant and his partner met the requirements of Regulation 8(5) and
   (6) as the Appellant was an extended family member  all  that  the  Judge
   could do was remit the matter to the Respondent for  the  discretion  set
   out in Regulation 17 (4) of the 2006 Regulations to be exercised.   On  5
   November 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge V A Osborne  gave  permission  to
   appeal.

7. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Avery  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that he relied on the grounds of appeal.

8. On behalf of the  Appellant   Miss  Mallick  suggested  that  the  Judges
   determination could be amended without being set aside

Finding on Material Error

9. Having  heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made a material error of law such that the decision  had  to  be
   set aside and remade.

10. This was an appeal against a refusal of a residence card by an  extended
   family member. In the refusal decision the Respondent  had  not  accepted
   that the Appellant met the requirements of the Regulations 8(5)  and  (6)
   in that  it  was  not  accepted  that  the  parties  were  in  a  durable
   relationship or that the EEA sponsor was a qualified person. The decision
   letter therefore did not go on to consider the discretion available under
   Regulation 17 (4) whether to issue such a  card  as  in  relation  to  an
   extended family member the issuing of the card was not automatic even  if
   it were accepted that the relationship was durable and  the  EEA  sponsor
   was working.

11. After hearing evidence from the Appellant  and  his  sponsor  the  Judge
   made findings that the relationship was durable and the EEA  sponsor  was
   working and there has been no challenge to those findings. He allowed the
   appeal under the EEA  Regulations  without  addressing  the  issue  under
   Regulation 17 (4). The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address  and
   determine the issue of the exercise of the  discretion  under  Regulation
   17(4) constitutes a clear error of law.  This  error  I  consider  to  be
   material since had the Tribunal conducted this exercise the outcome could
   have been different. That in my view is the correct test to apply.

12. I therefore found that an error of law has  been  established  and  that
   the Judge's determination to allow the appeal cannot stand  and  must  be
   set although as there was no challenge to the credibility findings  these
   must stand





Findings

13. Having preserved the findings that the Appellant  and  her  EEA  sponsor
   are in a durable relationship and that the EEA  sponsor  is  a  qualified
   person I am satisfied on the basis of the provisions of Regulation  17(4)
   and what is said in the headnote of  Ihemedu  (OFMs  -  meaning)  Nigeria
   [2011] UKUT 00340(IAC) that
   where the Secretary of State has not yet exercised  that  discretion  the
   most an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to  allow  the  appeal  as
   being not in accordance with the law leaving the  matter  of  whether  to
   exercise this discretion  in  the  Appellant's  favour  or  not  to   the
   Secretary of State and that is what I do.

CONCLUSION

14. I therefore found that an error of law has  been  established  and  that
   the Judge's determination must be set aside and I remake the decision.

DECISION

15. The appeal is allowed as being not in accordance with  the  law  leaving
   the matter of whether to exercise  this  discretion  in  the  Appellant's
   favour or not to  the Secretary of State



Signed                                                              Date
5.12.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell




