

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00944/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 October 2014                             |On 3 October 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                               SHAHID HUSSAIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Brown (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVitty (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


       1. The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.   He  applied  for  a
          residence card on the basis of his  claimed  relationship  with  a
          Hungarian citizen under the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006.
          I shall refer to her as the sponsor.


       2. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of First-
          tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd-Smith dated 13 May  2014  in  which  his
          appeal  against  the  refusal  to  grant  a  residence  card   was
          dismissed.   Judge  Lloyd-Smith  made  robust   adverse   findings
          against the appellant and regarded his  claimed  relationship  not
          to be genuine and subsisting.

       3. In oral submissions before me Mr Brown focussed his  attention  on
          two matters.  First, the Judge placed inappropriate weight  on  an
          interview that was  uncertain  and  unclear.   Second,  the  Judge
          failed to take into account letters from  the  sponsor's  and  the
          appellant's GPS.

Interview

       4. Mr McVitty submitted that it was simply too late for Mr  Brown  to
          raise alleged defects in the interview at the hearing.   There  is
          no  evidence  that  these  alleged  defects  were  drawn  to   the
          attention of the Judge.  No effort was made to  obtain  a  witness
          statement from the appellant's representative at  the  hearing  to
          address this issue.  More importantly, the grounds of appeal  make
          no  reference  whatsoever  to  the  interview  or  any  procedural
          unfairness said  to  arise  from  the  interview.   When  granting
          permission to appeal Judge  Osbourne  made  no  reference  to  the
          interview.  I agree with Mr McVitty that it is too  late  to  seek
          to amend the grounds of appeal for the reasons he has outlined.


       5. In any event, in my judgment the submission that the Judge  failed
          to consider defects in the interview is bound to fail.  I was  not
          provided with any clear indication of  what  was  defective  about
          the interview.  The decision letter states that  a  language  test
          was carried out and found that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  were
          unable to converse effectively in the sole language  they  claimed
          to share - English.  That this is  correct  is  obvious  from  the
          very first question the appellant is invited to ask  the  sponsor.
          This continues until question 2D when the appellant  accepts  they
          have failed to communicate about the very basic  matter  of  which
          interests they share.   The Judge was entitled to agree  with  the
          respondent's submissions on  the  difficulty  the  couple  had  in
          understanding each other [16(a), 17].  This  is  manifestly  clear
          from the interview record.

GPs' letters

       6. Mr Brown submitted that the Judge  failed  to  take  into  account
          relevant  material  evidence  from  the  parties  respective  GPs.
          These state that the appellant / sponsor respectively  "has  asked
          for a letter stating [he/she] has been trying to  conceive  for  a
          child for the last 1 year with [his/her] current  partner  but  to
          no avail".  Although the Judge has not  specifically  referred  to
          these letters  it  is  clear  that  she  has  considered  all  the
          relevant evidence in the round.  She is not required  to  set  out
          every single item of evidence within the appellant's bundle.


       7. In any event the  letters  from  the  GP  cannot  be  said  to  be
          material cogent evidence.  They support the proposition  that  the
          appellant and sponsor each asked for a letter to state  that  they
          had been  trying  to  conceive.   They  do  not  state  that  they
          actually were trying to conceive or attach any medical records  to
          corroborate the relationship as claimed.

Other grounds

       8. The grounds of appeal really do  no  more  than  disagree  with  a
          determination that is clearly reasoned.    For  the  avoidance  of
          doubt the Judge was entitled to attach weight to the  difficulties
          in communication between the parties.  This was a relevant  factor
          for her to consider in the round.


       9. I do not accept that the Judge has failed  to  take  into  account
          cultural sensitivities.  The Judge was entitled to  conclude  that
          the  parties  simply  could  not  communicate  with   each   other
          adequately to engage in phone conversations as claimed.


      10. Although the Judge might have been clearer on the  status  of  the
          relationship being  relied  upon  for  the  purposes  of  the  EEA
          Regulations, I am satisfied that the Judge  was  well  aware  that
          the  parties  were  married  in  a  Muslim  ceremony  but  not  in
          accordance with English  law.   The  real  question  for  her  was
          whether they were in a relationship that  was  durable.   Although
          the Judge could have applied her  findings  more  clearly  to  the
          language of Regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations it is  very  clear
          that she did not regard them to be in a durable relationship.


      11. Finally, Mr Brown conceded that if he was unable  to  identify  an
          error of law regarding the  findings  on  the  durability  of  the
          relationship then he could not rely upon Article  8  of  the  ECHR
          and the issue of whether or not the sponsor was exercising  Treaty
          rights becomes irrelevant.

Decision

      12. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
          involve the making of an error on a point of law.


      13. I do not set aside the decision.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
1 October 2014

