

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal nos: ia 00607, 19, 30, 38-14

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   18.06.2014|
|on    09.06.2014                              |sent out:  25.06.2014        |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                         Margaret BOATENG & 3 others
                                                                  appellants
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellants: Olumuyiwa Jibowu  (counsel instructed by MJ Solomon &
Partners)
For the respondent: Mr Ian Jarvis

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Surinder Singh Chohan), sitting at Birmingham without a
    hearing (the (main) appellant ) on 1 April 2014, to  an EEA appeal by a
    citizen of Ghana, born 26 April 1963, and her dependent  children.  The
    appellant was married to a Belgian citizen in Ghana by proxy,  and  she
    was refused  a  residence  card,  because  the  Home  Office  were  not
    satisfied that marriage was valid. The judge found on  the  facts  that
    the appellant was validly married; but he  took  an  additional  point,
    about there being no evidence that the sponsor was here as a 'qualified
    person'; but Mr Jarvis conceded that  he  had  been  wrong  to  do  so,
    without giving the appellant notice that it was in issue. So  the  only
    question on this appeal was whether the appellant's marriage was  valid
    in law or not.

 2. On that question, I drew Mr Jibowu's attention to the decision  of  the
    Tribunal in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT  24
    (IAC) (16 January 2014). While the fact  that  those  representing  the
    appellant had chosen to have her appeal decided without a  hearing  had
    deprived the judge of any assistance he might have had on the law, this
    decision was declaratory of the EU/EEA law on the  point,  and  it  was
    clearly an error of law not to apply it, if relevant.

 3. After a little time for consideration, Mr Jibowu conceded  that  Kareem
    would have been decisive of the present case, and that the appeal  must
    be dismissed. As I pointed out, the appellant will be able to  re-apply
    for a residence card, once she has the evidence required  by  Kareem  ;
    and, when she does, the person dealing with her application  should  be
    well aware that there is no valid judicial decision against her on  the
    issue of whether the sponsor was or is a 'qualified person'.

 4. However, since immediately after the present case I was to hear another
    very similar appeal in which counsel did not concede  that  Kareem  had
    been relevant, I held back this decision, in case  after  hearing  that
    argument, I should decide that my provisional view of the law,  and  Mr
    Jibowu's concession in this case, had both been  wrong.  As  it  turned
    out, I reached the conclusion  that  Mr  Jibowu  had  been  right,  and
    counsel in that case wrong.

 5. I shall summarize my decision in the other case (Boakye   IA  50026-13)
    for Mr Jibowu's benefit: Mr Jarvis will have it in any event.  Briefly,
    the argument was that paragraphs e - g  of the guidance in Kareem  only
    apply in cases where there was no marriage certificate, or doubt as  to
    whether the  marriage  certificate  had  been  issued  by  a  competent
    authority.  However,  the  panel  held  that  the  governing  law   for
    recognition of marriages for EEA  purposes  was  the  law  of  the  EEA
    spouse's nationality, and  this  in  my  view  was  why  they  required
    'independent and reliable evidence' as to the relevant law. In  Kareem,
    as in Boakye, that was  Dutch  law;  in  this  case  Belgian,  but  the
    principle is of course the same.

Appeal



                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



