
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00019/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25th July, 2014                            |On 6th August 2014           |
|Singed 4th August 214                         |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                            mrs Rosalinda Caguioa

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant in this appeal is a citizen of Philippines  born  on  5th
    March, 1951.  She first landed in the United  Kingdom  on  3rd  August,
    2012 as a visitor in possession of a visa that conferred leave to enter
    until 3rd February, 2013 subject to a condition restricting  employment
    and recourse to public funds.  She  submitted  an  application  to  the
    respondent on 24th December, 2012 to vary leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom on 3rd December, 2013.

2.   The respondent refused leave to remain  and  gave  directions  for  her
    removal under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act
    2006.  In her visa application she indicated that she was a widow  with
    three children none of whom live in the Philippines.  A son is  in  the
    United States of America and a daughter is in the United Kingdom.   Her
    sponsor lives in the United Kingdom and she had previously  lived  with
    her sponsor Rowena for two years in Dubai before coming to  the  United
    Kingdom.  In the Reasons for Refusal Letter dated  3rd  December,  2013
    the respondent  pointed  out  that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE of Statement of Changes
    in Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended "the Immigration Rules" and that
    there  were  no  circumstances  which  required  consideration  of  the
    application pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human
    Rights and Fundamental Freedoms outside the Immigration Rules.

3.   The appellant appealed that decision and her appeal was heard by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Camp sitting in Birmingham on 26th February,  2014.
    The appeal was heard without an oral hearing.  The judge noted that the
    appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of  either  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  applying  Nagre  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)  and
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT
    640 (IAC) he concluded that it was not necessary for him to decide  the
    appeal under "freestanding" Article 8 jurisprudence because there  were
    no  "exceptional  circumstances"  or  "compelling   circumstances   not
    sufficiently recognised under the Rules".  He dismissed the appellant's
    appeal.  The appellant applied for permission to appeal and  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth granted permission.  In doing  so  he
    said:

         "In the light of the recent changes governing the establishment  of
         a gateway for consideration of Article 8 on  a  freestanding  basis
         following consideration of the  application  of  the  Rules  it  is
         arguable that there should have  been  a  direction  for  the  oral
         listing of this case.  There is an arguable error of law in view of
         the insufficient nature of the analysis in the determination as  to
         the reason for not proceeding to a freestanding analysis."

4.   The respondent filed  a  Rule  24  response  in  which  the  respondent
    pointed out that the judge directly corrected himself  on  recent  case
    law, gave a proper self-direction as to the law and as to whether there
    were any  compelling  or  exceptional  circumstances,  noted  that  the
    appellant had asked for a hearing on the papers and found  no  evidence
    falling within the definition of paragraph 11 of the determination  had
    been provided that would have permitted further examination outside the
    Rules.


5.   The matter was listed before me  at  10am  on  Friday  25th  July.   At
    10.30am there was no appearance by or on behalf of either the appellant
    or the sponsor.  The sponsor  had  however  written  a  letter  to  the
    Tribunal on 1st July explaining that she and her husband were due to be
    abroad on holiday and that the appellant would not be in a position  to
    travel to the hearing on her own  because  she  is  not  familiar  with
    travelling via public transport.

6.   That application was refused  on  3rd  July  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Jordan who pointed out that it was the appellant's appeal and that  she
    should be  ready  to  proceed  with  it  when  it  was  listed.   Other
    arrangements cannot take priority.

7.   There was no appearance by or on behalf of the appellant at  10.30  and
    I concluded that in the absence of  any  satisfactory  evidence  I  was
    required to proceed with the hearing of the appeal.

8.   Mr Harrison had told me that he relied on the Rule 24 response.

9.   I am satisfied having carefully read the determination that  there  are
    no errors of law in it.  The judge properly applied Nagre,  R  (on  the
    application of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]
    EWHC 720 (Admin) and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)
    [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC)  and the appellant simply  fails  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  I uphold the judge's  decision.
    The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

