
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00008/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29 November 2018                      |On 21 November 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                            mr farhad roni sarker
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Hyder (Counsel) instructed by Westbrook Law
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born on 12 January 1992.   On
    17 October 2012 he applied for leave to remain in the UK as  a  Tier  1
    Entrepreneur.  This application was refused and his appeal against that
    decision was allowed on the basis that the  Respondent's  decision  was
    not in accordance with the law.

 2. The appeal was remitted back to the Respondent for reconsideration  and
    on 13 December 2016 the Respondent again refused  the  application  but
    for different reasons.  The Appellant appealed  against  this  decision
    and his appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Pears  for
    hearing on 28 June 2018.  In a decision and reasons  promulgated  on  4
    July 2018, the judge dismissed the appeal finding  that  there  was  an
    absence of material evidence and that it would not be unduly  harsh  to
    expect the Appellant to leave the UK nor would it be  disproportionate.



 3. Permission to appeal was sought in time on a number of  bases,  but  in
    particular that the Appellant was unwell and was  in  hospital  on  the
    morning of the hearing so was unable to attend.   A  medical  note  and
    photographs of the Appellant in  hospital  were  provided  through  his
    legal  representative  at  the  hearing  and  an  application  for   an
    adjournment was made on the basis that neither of the  core  issues  in
    the appeal could be dealt with fairly or justly without the presence of
    the Appellant.  However, the judge proceeded to refuse the  adjournment
    request and went on to determine the appeal.  It was submitted that the
    judge erred materially in law in so doing.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Birrell
    in a decision dated 3 October 2018 on the basis that: "it  is  arguable
    that faced with evidence of his admission to hospital on the morning of
    the hearing it was not open  to  the  judge  to  find  that  there  was
    "insufficient evidence that he was unable to attend the hearing".

     Hearing

 5. In light of the allegation of procedural fairness and given the absence
    of a Rule 24 response on the Tribunal file, I asked Ms Pal whether  she
    intended to oppose the appeal. Ms Pal stated that she had not  received
    any of the evidence as to whether the Appellant was in hospital.   This
    was copied for her, that evidence being a note from Croydon  University
    Hospital and three photographs showing the Appellant in a hospital bed.
     Ms Pal submitted that the judge had considered whether there should be
    an adjournment at [2] and [3] of the decision  and  reasons  and  found
    that there was insufficient evidence to show why he  had  not  attended
    the hearing.

 6. Having regard to the Procedure Rules, the judge found the matter  could
    go ahead without the Appellant being in attendance at the  hearing  and
    Ms Pal submitted that the issue was whether the Appellant had  provided
    evidence from financial institutions such as Halifax and Barclays.  The
    Appellant sought to explain this in a statement which  the  Judge  sets
    out at [12] and [13] of the decision.  She  submitted  that  given  the
    issue was, amongst other things, missing documents, this would not have
    remedied the situation and thus the refusal of the adjournment did  not
    prejudice the Appellant in any way as documents were  clearly  missing.
    Even if the Appellant had been in attendance, he would  not  have  been
    able to assist the judge in this respect.

 7. Ms Pal submitted the other issue was the ETS point.  The judge declined
    to accept the Respondent's evidence in  this  respect  because  it  was
    served on the morning and because the Appellant  was  not  there.   She
    submitted that if the Appellant had been  in  attendance  the  evidence
    would not have been excluded and so there would have been no difference
    to the outcome of the appeal.

 8. In his submissions, Mr Hyder sought to rely on the grounds  of  appeal.
    He disagreed that the issue of missing bank statements could be decided
    without the Appellant  being  present  and  the  benefit  of  his  oral
    evidence. Mr Hyder submitted that the TOEIC issue clearly required  the
    Appellant's evidence as credibility was in issue.  The evidence  served
    by the Respondent at the date of the hearing and rejected  due  to  its
    lateness  was  also  generic,  as  it  was  an  Excel  spreadsheet  and
    statement.

 9. He submitted that the judge's finding would depend on cross-examination
    of the Appellant to assess his credibility and if the Appellant was not
    there it was not possible for this to happen.  Whilst the Appellant may
    not have succeeded and the appeal may not  have  been  decided  in  his
    favour, clearly the matter had  to  be  decided  through  hearing  oral
    evidence from him.  Mr Hyder submitted there was no dispute as  to  the
    Appellant being in hospital and made reference to evidence post  dating
    the hearing, that I declined to accept as part  of  the  assessment  of
    whether or not the judge had erred materially in law.

10. Mr Hyder submitted that in relation to the issue of bank documents,  it
    should be noted that the  Appellant's  business  partner's  appeal  had
    succeeded, which was heard on  the  same  day  by  a  different  judge.
    However the Appellant and his business partner have fallen out  and  he
    was not privy to his appeal reference number.  Mr Hyder  submitted,  in
    respect of the evidence from the bank, that the Appellant was  not  the
    account holder but relied instead on third party investors.  However he
    sought to rely on the judgment in Nawaz at [50] which dealt  with  that
    exact issue.

11. Consequently it was necessary to hear evidence from  the  Appellant  in
    order for him to have  the  opportunity  to  give  evidence  about  his
    attempts with the third party Sponsor to obtain documentary evidence in
    support of  his  appeal.   Mr  Hyder  sought  to  rely  on  E2  of  the
    Respondent's bundle and the fact that third party declarations had been
    made  and  included  in  the  application  but  not  included  in   the
    Respondent's bundle.

12. In summary, Mr Hyder submitted on these core issues it was not possible
    for the judge to make a decision fairly and justly in  the  absence  of
    the Appellant and that a short adjournment would not in any event  have
    prejudiced either party.

13. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

     Decision and reasons

14. I find a material error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  The test  of  whether  or  not  an  appeal  should  be
    adjourned is whether in light of the overriding objective  it  is  fair
    and just to do so.  In light of  the  fact  there  was  some  evidence,
    albeit perhaps not entirely satisfactory, that the reason the Appellant
    had not attended his appeal hearing was because he was in a hospital, I
    find this was sufficient to discharge  the  burden  of  explaining  the
    Appellant's absence. I accept the  submission  of  Mr  Hyder  that  the
    Appellant's evidence was clearly necessary  because  an  assessment  of
    credibility had to be carried out both in respect  of  the  documentary
    evidence he had submitted in support of his appeal and the TOEIC  issue
    raised by the Respondent, which  was  the  basis  of  the  Respondent's
    refusal.

     Notice of Decision

15.  In  these  circumstances  I  find  that  there  has  been   procedural
    unfairness. I set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  aside
    and remit the appeal for a hearing de novo before a different judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 13 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
