

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00204/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 July 2014                                |On 3 November 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                              MR HALIL KALLECI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani of Counsel, instructed by Kidd
Rapinet
For the Respondent:    Mr P Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal with permission against a  decision  by  Judge  of  the
   First-tier  Tribunal  Cope  dismissing  an  appeal  against  refusal   of
   indefinite leave to remain in  accordance  with  the  Turkey  Association
   Agreement 1963.

2) The main provision of the Immigration Rules with  which  this  appeal  is
   concerned is paragraph 28 of HC 510, which is preserved  intact  for  the
   purpose of the Turkey Association  Agreement.   This  provision  provides
   that a person who is admitted in the first instance for a limited  period
   and who has remained here for 4 years in approved  employment,  or  as  a
   businessman, or a self-employed person, or a person of independent means,
   may have the time limit on his stay removed unless there are grounds  for
   maintaining it.

3) The appellant is a national of Turkey who came to the United  Kingdom  in
   February 2009 and shortly afterwards  established  himself  as  a  barber
   trading under the name of Istanbul Barbers in Elswick in  Newcastle.   He
   received leave to remain under the Turkey Association Agreement.  In 2012
   the appellant handed over part or all of his business to his son  because
   of ill-health.  In  September  2013  the  appellant  took  possession  of
   premises in Houghton Le Spring,  where  he  has  established  a  barber's
   business, which opened at Christmas  2013.   He  does  not  work  in  the
   business himself but employs staff.  The application for indefinite leave
   to remain was made on 18 October 2013.

4) In refusing the application the respondent  noted  that  the  application
   was made on the basis of  the  appellant  running  the  Istanbul  Barbers
   business in Elswick.   According  to  the  Land  Registry,  however,  the
   premises at 42 Elswick Road had been transferred to Mehmet Kalleci on  10
   July 2012.  The appellant submitted a lease for premises at 10 White Lion
   Site in Houghton Le Spring.  The lease was dated 14 October 2013 but  was
   not signed and was not accompanied by an extract from the Land  Registry.
   The respondent took the view that the appellant had not  held  tenure  of
   business premises for the requisite period under the  Turkey  Association
   Agreement.   In  addition  he  had  not  shown  that  he  was   genuinely
   established in business.  In particular, he had ceased to  operate  as  a
   self-employed business person on 10 July  2012  and  had  not  since  re-
   established himself.

5) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal directed himself that the burden  of
   proof was upon the appellant to show that he had continued to be in self-
   employment.  On the basis of the available evidence, the  judge  was  not
   satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the  appellant  had  shown
   that he had established himself in business as a barber  at  Houghton  Le
   Spring and therefore he would not succeed under  the  Turkey  Association
   Agreement.

6) The judge went on to find that the appellant had been living  in  the  UK
   for only 5 years  and  would  not  therefore  meet  the  requirements  of
   paragraph 276ADE in terms of private life.  Although the appellant's  son
   was in the UK the appellant was not claiming a right  to  remain  on  the
   basis of family life.  There was nothing in the evidence to indicate that
   the refusal was disproportionate under Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
   Convention.

7) Permission to appeal was given on several grounds.  First of all  it  was
   arguable that there had been a procedural irregularity in that a point in
   the application form on which the judge relied in his  determination  had
   not been put to the appellant at the hearing for  an  explanation.    The
   second point was that arguably the judge did not consider the documentary
   evidence properly.  The judge noted that the  evidence  had  been  lodged
   late.  It was arguable that the judge did not  assess  the  documents  on
   their own terms according to their content and origin but having made  an
   adverse credibility finding then decided  that  the  documents  were  not
   reliable.

8) Thirdly, it was arguable that the judge had not had  regard  to  relevant
   evidence in the form of a letter  from  the  appellant's  accountants  in
   which they expressed the view that  the  appellant  was  genuinely  self-
   employed.

Submissions

9) At the hearing before me Mr  Bandegani,  for  the  appellant,  said  that
   these three issues overlapped and all fell under a general  challenge  to
   the fairness of the decision.  Mr Bandegani began with  the  accountant's
   letter, which confirmed that the appellant is self-employed  and  trading
   as Istanbul Barbers in Houghton Le  Spring.   The  letter  was  dated  19
   February 2014  and  was  from  Choudry  Associates,  Chartered  Certified
   Accountants.  It states that they had been acting for the appellant  from
   7 February 2014  and  that  he  was  self-employed  and  trading  in  the
   circumstances set out  above.   The  letter  criticises  the  appellant's
   former accountants for seemingly  not  having  submitted  self-assessment
   returns for the appellant despite the appropriate documents  having  been
   supplied to them in 2009.

10) Mr Bandegani submitted that this letter of  19  February  2014  was  not
   considered by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal and was  not  referred
   to in the determination although  it  was  directly  concerned  with  the
   primary issue in the appeal.  The appellant's evidence at the hearing was
   the he was still involved in the original shop  in  Elswick  as  well  as
   running the business in Houghton Le Spring.

11) Mr Bandegani continued that at paragraphs  31-33  of  the  determination
   the judge commented that the application was based  on  the  business  at
   Elswick and not at Houghton Le Spring.  The judge referred to  the  lease
   for the property at Houghton Le Spring and to other documents taken  into
   consideration.   The  judge,  however,   treated   these   documents   as
   unreliable.  In doing so the judge did not look at all  the  evidence  in
   the round.  At paragraph 50 of the determination the  judge  pointed  out
   that the appellant had seemingly signed the lease for Houghton Le  Spring
   and seemingly had been in the premises for some weeks beforehand but  the
   judge did not consider that the lease was reliable evidence.   The  judge
   expressed concern that although the documents relied upon were dated from
   December 2013 or earlier, they had only been produced and served the  day
   before the hearing despite a direction dated 22  January  2014  from  the
   Tribunal requiring documents to be submitted within 3 weeks of that date.
    Mr Bandegani submitted that  the  late  lodging  of  the  documents  was
   irrelevant to the assessment of their reliability.   Although  the  judge
   referred in his determination to the case of Tanveer Ahmed [2002] Imm  AR
   318, the judge was not required to consider timeliness in terms  of  that
   decision.  At the same time  the  judge  disregarded  the  letter  of  19
   February 2014  from  the  accountants.   The  judge's  treatment  of  the
   documentary evidence was sufficient to amount to a material error of law.



12) The third issue to which Mr Bandegani  referred  was  the  lack  of  any
   reference in the application form to the business in Houghton Le  Spring.
   As a result the judge  said  that  the  appellant's  evidence  about  his
   business in Houghton Le Spring was unreliable.   The  appellant  was  not
   given an opportunity at the hearing to comment on this point.  The  judge
   recorded at paragraphs 51-52 of the determination that the appellant  had
   offered to produce photographic evidence of his business but he  was  not
   given an opportunity to answer the judge's concerns.  The judge  did  not
   consider all the evidence in the round, contrary to  his  claim  that  he
   had.

13) Mr Bandegani further stated that an application had  been  made  for  an
   adjournment for further evidence to be lodged but this had been  refused.
   The judge did not properly consider the evidence and the decision  should
   be set aside.

14) Mr Mangion referred to a rule 24 response on behalf of  the  respondent.
   This stated that the judge took into account all the  material  documents
   and oral evidence and it was open to the judge to take into  account  the
   application form and contrast the details given there with the  documents
   for the business in Houghton Le Spring.   There  was  an  opportunity  to
   offer further evidence on the business in Houghton Le Spring but this was
   declined, according to paragraphs 51-52 of the determination.  The  judge
   considered the evidence in the round and correctly directed himself as to
   the burden and standard of proof.

15) Turning to the accountant's letter  of  19  February  2014,  Mr  Mangion
   acknowledged that the judge did not  refer  specifically  to  this.   The
   judge referred at paragraph 43  of  the  determination  to  problems  the
   appellant had had with his former accountants and said the appellant  had
   failed to provide evidence of his new business from other  sources,  such
   as a bank, suppliers, regular customers, HMRC,  utilities  or  the  local
   authority.  The point about the accountant's  letter  was  not  material.
   The content of the letter was based  on  no  more  than  the  information
   provided by the appellant.

16) Mr Mangion continued by pointing out the judge's references to the  case
   of Tanveer Ahmed.  This case did not give a list of which should be taken
   into account.  It  was  for  the  judge  to  assess  the  factors  to  be
   considered in assessing the reliability of the documentary evidence.  The
   judge was entitled to find that the late submission was of  some  concern
   and did not overstate this point.

17) Turning to the content of the application  form,  Mr  Mangion  said  the
   appellant was given notice of this point through the reasons for  refusal
   letter of 3 December 2013.  It was pointed out on page 2 of  this  letter
   that the appellant had applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the
   basis of the business at Elswick but the premises had been transferred on
   10 July 2012.  The unsigned lease dated 14 October 2014 for the  premises
   at Houghton Le Spring was produced but it was not accepted as genuine  by
   the  respondent.   Mr  Mangion  pointed  out  that  the   appellant   was
   represented before the First-tier Tribunal and this point in the  refusal
   letter should have been identified as the main issue in that letter.  The
   judge was not asking  for  specified  evidence  but  found  two  explicit
   contradictions in the evidence before him, as identified at paragraphs 39
   and 46 of the determination.

18) Mr Mangion continued that  the  evidence  did  not  cover  the  position
   between July 2012, when the appellant passed the business in  Elswick  to
   his son, and October 2013, when he began the new lease.  The business  in
   Houghton Le Spring did not begin operating until  Christmas  2013.   This
   left a gap of a year for which there was no evidence.

19) Mr Mangion acknowledged that the business recognised for the purpose  of
   the Turkey Association Agreement need not be the  same  business  as  the
   appellant had set up on arrival in the UK.  He stated, however,  that  it
   would not be permissible to close one business and then start up  another
   just before making an application for leave to remain.

20) In response Mr Bandegani referred to the case of EK  (Ankara  Agreement-
   1972 Rules - construction) [2010] UKUT 425.   There  was  no  requirement
   that a later application be made on the same terms  as  a  previous  one.
   The appellant had  supplied  evidence  with  his  application  about  the
   setting up of a new business and there  was  evidence  relating  to  each
   business.  The Secretary of State had not accepted that the lease of  the
   property in Houghton Le Spring was a genuine document  so  the  appellant
   had sought to produce further evidence in relation to  this.   The  Rules
   were open-textured and did not require evidence in a  specified  form  or
   within a specified time.  Even if there was a gap in the evidence  for  a
   particular year the application could still succeed.

21) The parties were agreed that if  there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the
   determination, as a result of which it was set aside, the  appeal  should
   be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a further hearing.

Discussion

22) Notwithstanding the accomplished manner in which Mr Mangion  argued  the
   case for the respondent, I am satisfied that the approach  taken  by  the
   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal was flawed and amounted to an  error  of
   law.  I acknowledge that in the reasons for refusal letter the  Secretary
   of State had identified an apparent discrepancy between  the  application
   form, which depended on the appellant's involvement in  the  business  in
   Elswick, and the additional documentation provided, incomplete though  it
   was, which related  to  a  new  business  in  Houghton  Le  Spring.   The
   respondent was entitled to rely  on  this  discrepancy  in  refusing  the
   application.  The appellant was equally entitled to  adduce  evidence  in
   the course of his appeal to explain the discrepancy.

23) Where the  evidence  lodged  for  the  purpose  of  the  appeal  was  in
   documentary form, the judge should have approached this by looking at the
   sources of the evidence and considering whether it did or did not support
   the oral evidence given by the appellant.  Instead the  impression  given
   by the judge in his determination  was  that  he  found  the  appellant's
   evidence to be lacking in  credibility,  largely  on  the  basis  of  the
   discrepancy identified by the respondent  arising  from  the  application
   form, and then, on  the  basis  of  having  found  that  the  appellant's
   evidence  was  lacking  in  credibility,  decided  that  the  documentary
   evidence was unreliable, in part because it was lodged and served late.

24) I refer to  the  judge  giving  this  impression  in  his  determination
   because it may not have been the way in  which  the  judge  assessed  the
   evidence in his own mind.  As far as the parties are concerned,  however,
   they have only the determination by which to assess the judge's reasoning
   and the impression given  by  the  judge  as  to  his  reasoning  in  the
   determination is all that the parties can found upon.  The judge may  not
   have thought he was being unfair but that is the impression he has  given
   by the way in which his reasons are expressed.

25) An appeal like this  one  is  quite  different  from  an  asylum  appeal
   concerned mainly with events that have taken place in another country and
   where there may be very little evidence of these events  apart  from  the
   appellant's own testimony.  In such an appeal  there  may  be  supporting
   documents from the appellant's country of origin on which  the  appellant
   relies but these cannot be tested and assessed  in  the  same  way  as  a
   document produced in the United Kingdom by an identified and named  third
   party.  This appeal was concerned wholly with the appellant's  activities
   in the UK and although the  judge  heard  oral  evidence  only  from  the
   appellant, there was a significant volume of  documentary  evidence  from
   named third parties in the UK.  This documentary evidence required to  be
   properly assessed and could not be treated as unreliable  simply  because
   of the judge's concerns about the credibility  of  the  appellant's  oral
   testimony.

26) The consequences of the way in which the judge  approached  this  appeal
   and expressed his reasons were that the appellant  appears  not  to  have
   been given a fair hearing and the judge's reasoning is not sufficient  to
   support his conclusions. These amount to errors of law on  the  basis  of
   which the decision is set aside.

27) The appropriate course is for the appeal to be remitted  to  the  First-
   tier Tribunal to be reheard.  It was clear from the points  made  by  the
   judge and by the discussion before me  that  there  are  questions  still
   arising from the appellant's  evidence  which  require  to  be  answered.
   These include, for example, the extent of his involvement in the  Elswick
   business after July 2012; the  extent  of  his  involvement  in  the  new
   business in Houghton Le Spring; and  his  activities  during  the  period
   between the transfer of the Elswick premises to his son and  the  setting
   up of the new business.  It is to be anticipated that for the purpose  of
   the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal further  documentary  evidence
   will be provided by the appellant in accordance with the directions to be
   made by the First-tier Tribunal and that this documentary  evidence  will
   emanate from appropriate sources.  The Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
   drew attention to the absence of evidence from, for  example,  HMRC  and,
   while at that time the appellant explained this omission on the basis  of
   an alleged failure by his previous accountants, the appellant has now had
   adequate time in which to remedy the position in this regard.

Conclusions

28) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.

29) I set aside the decision.

30) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  a  hearing  before  a
   judge other than Judge Cope.





Signed                                             Date: 3 November 2014

Judge of the Upper Tribunal

