
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00592/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Prepared at Field House On the Papers         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 November 2013                           |On 16 December 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG



                                   Between

                            nitin krishna shetty

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, who is a national of India born on 12 February 1989, has
    appealed against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hopkinson, who
    had dismissed his appeal against the refusal of the respondent to  vary
    his leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General)  Student.   At  the
    same time as refusing the appellant's application, the respondent  also
    made a decision to remove the appellant  by  way  of  directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. On 15 July 2013 I refused permission to appeal against the  substantive
    decision, but gave  the  appellant  permission  to  appeal  limited  to
    arguing that the removal decision was not in accordance with  the  law.
    The following day, in a document entitled "Decision and Directions",  I
    set out the provisional view  of  the  Tribunal  that  the  appellant's
    appeal against  the  removal  decision  should  be  allowed  without  a
    hearing, to the extent that the respondent's  decision  to  remove  the
    appellant was not in accordance with the law, for the reasons  set  out
    in the grounds in support of the application for permission to appeal.

 3. I stated further that before so ordering, the Tribunal would considerer
    any representations made on behalf of the respondent  as  to  why  this
    appeal should not be allowed to this limited extent, so  long  as  such
    representations  were  filed  with  the  Tribunal  and  served  on  the
    appellant by no later than 7 days after service of this decision.

 4. Following service of this decision on the parties, and of  my  decision
    granting limited position to appeal, a response was received  from  the
    respondent, dated 31 July  2013,  in  which  the  respondent  expressed
    agreement  with  the   Tribunal's   provisional   view.    No   further
    representations have been  received from or on behalf of the appellant.



 5. It appears that the file was mislaid and it has only just  been  placed
    before me, containing the response  from  the  respondent  referred  to
    above.  In light of this response I  now  make  the  decision  which  I
    indicated I intended to make, for the reasons set  out  in  my  earlier
    Decision.

Decision

I set aside the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  as  containing  a
material error of law and substitute the following decision:

The appeal against the respondent's substantive decision, refusing  to  vary
the appellant's leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  is
dismissed.

The appeal against the respondent's  simultaneous  decision  to  remove  the
appellant by way of directions under Section 47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum
and Nationality Act  2006  is  allowed  to  the  limited  extent  that  this
decision was not in accordance with the law.



Signed:                                 Dated: 10 December 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
