
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00524/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4th August 2017                        |On 20th September 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          mr vicneswaran selvartnam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge V A Cox promulgated on 17th March 2017, following  a  hearing  at
    Stoke-on-Trent on 16th March 2017.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant on the basis that in Sala  (EFMs:
    Right of Appeal) [2016] UKUT 00411, a vice presidential  panel  of  the
    Upper Tribunal decided that "there is  no  statutory  right  of  appeal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State not to grant  a  residence
    card to a person claiming to be an extended family  member"  (paragraph
    2).

 2. On 26th May 2017, permission to appeal was granted on the basis of  two
    fundamental points.  First, that  the  appeal  fell  to  be  determined
    within the 2006 Regulations rather than the 2016 Regulations, and  that
    the 2012 amendment to the 2006 Regulations, adding  Regulation  26(2A),
    showed that there was a right of appeal.  Second, that the  Regulations
    are not consistent with the Citizens Directive.

 3. In granting permission, the First-tier Tribunal  also  noted  that  the
    "Sala point" was on its way to the Court of Appeal and that a reference
    had been made to the CJEU by the President of the Upper  Tribunal.   An
    additional point raised in granting permission by the Tribunal was that
    the Secretary of State has  now  changed  the  position  that  she  had
    adopted in  Sala  (that  there  was  an  appeal  right)  and  the  2016
    Regulations now reflect that case.

 4. The issue was a live one and  proceedings  were  before  the  Court  of
    Appeal and the CJEU.  A final point taken by the Tribunal was  that  it
    was arguable that  the  judge,  although  understandably  refusing  the
    appeal on the basis of  the  "Sala  point"  had  nevertheless  a  legal
    obligation to address the legal submissions made at the hearing.

 5. A Rule 24 response dated 12th June 2017 was  to  the  effect  that  the
    Tribunal was correct below in deciding that there was  no  jurisdiction
    to hear the appeal in the first place because the case of Sala  applied
    and that this case had not been overturned, and until such time  as  it
    was, it had full effect on the current state of the law.

 6. At the hearing before me on 4th August 2017, Mr  Sharma,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant submitted that, of  the  points  taken  by  the
    Tribunal in granting permission on 26th May 2017, one  important  issue
    was whether the judge had addressed the legal submissions made  at  the
    hearing.  At paragraph 4 Judge VA Cox does not address all  the  issues
    that were submitted before the Tribunal.  For  example,  she  does  not
    address the enabling provisions that allowed for the finding of a right
    of appeal within the jurisdiction of powers of this Tribunal.

 7. In the same way, there is no discussion about what Regulation 8 is  all
    about, as this was a matter addressed to the judge as well.  Mr  Sharma
    submitted that he was Counsel in the case of MK (Pakistan) C9/2016/4413
    which had been floated before the Court of Appeal  in  July  2017,  and
    raised the same issue, but the case had now been set down for a hearing
    in the new term in September 2017.  He referred me to documentation  on
    his laptop in the form of  a  letter  dated  5th  June  2017  from  the
    government legal department and another letter dated 5th May 2017  from
    the Supreme Court in relation to SM (Algeria) (aka Mediouni) which,  he
    submitted, pointed to this Tribunal having the  power  to  adjourn  and
    stand out all cases involving the "Sala point" until  such  time  as  a
    definitive ruling with given either by the Court of Appeal or the CJEU.



 8. Mr Sharma's submission before me today, therefore, was  that  I  should
    either adjourn this matter, or find that there was an error of law, and
    remit this matter back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined  on
    the basis of the arguments fully addressed  to  the  Tribunal,  in  the
    manner that they were not fully addressed by Judge V A Cox below.

 9. For her part, Ms Aboni submitted that the judge plainly  had  addressed
    the issues fully because she  states  (at  paragraph  3)  that  Counsel
    appearing  for  her  had  "suggested  that  the  decision  in  Sala  is
    incorrectly decided.  Detailed reasons are given in the skeleton".

10. Second, she had specifically taken instructions this morning  from  the
    London office and had been informed that the position set  out  in  the
    Rule 24 response, namely, that the ruling in  Sala  that  there  is  no
    jurisdiction to hear the appeal, remains the position of the Respondent
    Secretary of State.

11. Accordingly, these cases involving the "Sala point" should  neither  be
    adjourned, nor be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard
    afresh.

Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

13. First, the grant of permission by the First-tier Tribunal on  26th  May
    2017 sets out  a  number  of  reasons,  not  least  one  which  is  the
    application of Regulation 26(2A) for why permission  should  have  been
    granted, and also refers to the fact that there was a legal  obligation
    on the Tribunal to address the legal submissions made at the hearing.

14. Second, whilst it is the case that in Sala  the  Upper  Tribunal  found
    that there is no jurisdiction to hear an appeal because an EFM  has  no
    entitlement to a residence card in that the issue of residence card  is
    discretionary and not mandatory, the argument before the Tribunal below
    was that the Regulations are not consistent with the  Directive.   This
    is because there was a wider definition of a family  member  under  the
    Directive, which encompassed an EFM,  and  that  Article  2(2)  of  the
    Directive defines a family member and that Article 3(2) defines  "other
    family members" and those in a durable relationship.  Article 3(2) also
    requires the State to facilitate  their  entry  and  residence  in  the
    Member State.  The issue of residence card was a mandatory  requirement
    and it therefore followed that there was an entitlement, and  if  there
    was an entitlement then there would be a right of appeal to  a  refusal
    to that entitlement.

15. Indeed, the entirety of the remainder  of  the  Directive,  as  to  the
    rights and procedural requirements, treats all  family  members  (under
    Article 2(2) and Article 3(2)) in the same manner.

16. For all these reasons, the Tribunal below should have given a much more
    extensive consideration to these arguments than appeared at paragraph 4
    of the determination, if only because these are live  issues  that  are
    presently before the Superior Courts and  Tribunals,  before  a  proper
    decision could be made in respect of them.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is  allowed
under Practice Statement 7.2(a) because the effect of the error has been  to
deprive a party before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair  hearing  or  other
opportunity for that party's case to be put to and considered by the  First-
tier Tribunal.  I direct that the matter  is  heard  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal by  a  judge  other  than  Judge  V  A  Cox.   I  cannot  end  this
determination without echoing the words of the First-tier Tribunal that  the
decision of Judge V A Cox was entirely "understandable" in the light of  the
accepted impact of Sala in the jurisdiction, nevertheless.  This  appeal  is
allowed to that extent.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 19th September 2017

