



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal Number: IA/00817/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 2nd December 2014                         |On: 5th February 2015        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                            Fecicia Ocaide James
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Browne, Anderson Browne Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Nigeria  date  of  birth  18th  October
    1950. On the 28th August 2014 the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Archer)
    allowed her appeal against a decision to remove  her  from  the  United
    Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999[1].  The
    Secretary  of  State  now  has  permission  to  appeal   against   that
    decision[2].


 2.  The  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concerned  Ms   James'
    application to  remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  her
    established private and family life in the UK. She had last entered the
    country as a visitor in June 2006 and had been  here  ever  since.  The
    basis of her application, and appeal, was her close  relationship  with
    her adult daughter, Beatrice.   She asserts that she and  Beatrice  are
    dependent upon one another and that if  she  were  to  be  returned  to
    Nigeria she would be destitute. Although she does have  family  members
    in  Nigeria,  including  two  adult  children,  they   are   struggling
    financially and would not be able to support her.  In the UK she  would
    hope to be able to work and has taken a NVQ in caring.  She  has  other
    family members to whom she is close including her sisters and  brothers
    and their children.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal did not accept that Ms James had lost all  ties
    to Nigeria as required by paragraph 276ADE (vi) of the Rules.  She  had
    children of her own there and had lived in that country til she was  56
    years old.  She had not been here long enough to benefit from any other
    part of paragraph 276ADE.  Turning to consider Article 8 outside of the
    Rules the Tribunal directed itself  that  a  claimant  may  succeed  in
    showing a breach of Article 8 where there are "sufficiently compelling"
    circumstances.  The determination notes  that  the  witness  statements
    were unchallenged and that this compelled the Tribunal to  accept  that
    there is a relationship  between  Ms  James  and  Beatrice  which  goes
    "beyond the normal relationship a daughter and mother would share".  It
    further found that Ms James has a strong private life in the  UK  which
    encompassed her relationships with her siblings and their children.  It
    found that her removal would be an interference with those Article 8(1)
    rights and that the  Article  is  engaged.  In  assessing  whether  the
    Secretary of State had shown  the  decision  to  be  proportionate  the
    Tribunal took into account the "best interests" of  unspecified  "child
    relatives"; the delay in dealing with the   application  and  the  fact
    that Ms James had become "increasingly frail and vulnerable"  over  the
    years;  medical  evidence   relating   to   Ms   James'   hypertension,
    hypercholesterolaemia and knee pain and the "dire situation"  that  she
    would face in returning to Nigeria. Against that was weighed  the  fact
    that Ms James had "overstayed for many years"  and  that  "there  is  a
    strong  public  interest  in  maintaining  an   effective   system   of
    immigration control".




    The Challenge


 4. The grounds of appeal are fairly detailed and in many places appear  to
    amount simply to a disagreement on the facts as found by the First-tier
    Tribunal. I mean no disrespect to their author in  distilling  them  as
    follows:

        i)  In  assessing  proportionality  the  Tribunal  failed  to  take
           relevant facts into account:


           In finding that Ms James' daughter was dependent  upon  her  the
           Tribunal failed to consider whether other family members in  the
           UK could have taken on that role.  In  finding  that  she  would
           face a "dire situation" if returned to Nigeria the Tribunal  has
           not  considered  whether  the  same  family  members   who   are
           supporting  her  financially  in  the  UK  could   support   her
           financially in Nigeria.


       ii) There was a material misdirection in law in  that  the  Tribunal
           failed  to  have  regard  to  the  terms  of  ss177A-D  of   the
           Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended by  the
           Immigration Act 2014)

           This appeal was heard on the 13th August 2014 and  as  such  the
           terms  of  section  117B  should  have  been  considered.    The
           determination  appears  to  attach  significant  weight  to  the
           relationships that Ms James has established in the UK whilst she
           has been an  overstayer.  The  statute  stipulates  that  little
           weight should be attached to such relationships.

      Error of Law

 5. As I note above, the grounds of appeal come  perilously  close  to  re-
    arguing the case. Issue is taken with findings of fact which were  open
    to the Tribunal, particularly since, it is recorded at paragraph  7  of
    the determination, there was no challenge to the evidence of any of the
    witnesses.  I am nevertheless satisfied that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal contains errors of law such that it must  be  set  aside.
    The appeal was allowed on Razgar Article 8  grounds  and  although  the
    determination does refer to the public interest  there  is  no  express
    consideration given to any of the matters  set  out  in  s117B.   I  am
    further satisfied that the determination contains an error of  fact  so
    material as to amount to an error of law: at paragraph 23 the  Tribunal
    appears to attach significant weight to a two year delay on the part of
    the Respondent, when in fact the decision took no longer than 7 months.
     Paragraph 22 of the determination  places  some  weight  on  the  best
    interests of  some "child relatives" in the UK: it is unclear  why  the
    Appellant's removal would be contrary to the best  interests  of  these
    unidentified children or why that should weigh in  her  favour  in  the
    balancing exercise.


 6. The decision on Article 8 is therefore set aside. I remake  it  on  the
    evidence before me.  The decision on the Rules was that the appeal  was
    dismissed, the First-tier Tribunal finding that  the  Appellant  cannot
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE. There  is  no  challenge  to
    that finding and that part of the decision is upheld.


    The Re-Made Decision

 7. I proceed, as the First-tier  Tribunal  did,  on  the  basis  that  the
    written evidence of the witnesses is unchallenged  by  the  Respondent.
    The witnesses were available at both the hearing  before  Judge  Archer
    and myself and were not subject to any challenge in  cross-examination.
    Those witnesses are the Appellant herself  and  her  daughter  Beatrice
    James.  I have considered all of the evidence before me and my findings
    are as follows.


 8. The Appellant is now aged 64.   She came to the UK  on  the  13th  June
    2006 as a visitor and since that  time  has  lived  with  her  daughter
    Beatrice. Beatrice is a British citizen.  The  Appellant  is  supported
    financially by Beatrice, but also  emotionally.  The  Appellant  states
    that she has no-one to  whom  she  can  turn  in  Nigeria  and  she  is
    extremely anxious about return there. She has health  concerns  and  is
    growing older: Beatrice provides her  with  reassurance  and  emotional
    support about these matters.  Beatrice herself was  made  redundant  in
    August 2012 and it is the evidence of her GP that since  then  she  has
    suffered from "increasing depressive related symptoms": Dr  Rachel  Lau
    writes[3] "her mother has been supporting her  during  this  depressive
    period and Miss James feels that her mother is playing a  crucial  role
    towards her recovery, [and] thus  feels  that  her  mother's  continued
    presence is paramount".     Paragraph  5  of  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement caused Judge Archer to find  that  this  interdependence  did
    amount to  a  Kugathas  family  life  between  the  Appellant  and  her
    daughter:

         "My daughter Beatrice remains  my  only  family,  hope  and  future
         support. My relationship with my daughter goes  beyond  the  normal
         relationship a daughter and her  mother  would  share.   She  is  a
         pillar of support to me and my age means that there  is  a  further
         vulnerability  as  far  as  I  am  concerned.  I  enjoy  a  special
         relationship with my daughter.  Amongst  my  children  she  is  the
         closest to me. She has no family of her own and  we  rely  on  each
         other for emotional support. We have a very strong  mother-daughter
         bond".

    I see no reason to depart from that finding and I find that there is  a
    family life in the UK.   A  number  of  other  relatives,  friends  and
    members of the church have written to say how close  they  are  to  the
    Appellant and what a kind, caring and helpful woman she  is.  I  accept
    that she has also established a private life in the UK in the eight and
    half years that she has spent here.  I find that her removal  from  the
    UK would be an interference with these Article 8 (2) rights.

 9. Ms Browne did not contest that this decision is one that the Respondent
    is lawfully entitled to make, nor that the decision to  remove  persons
    with no leave to remain in  the  UK  is  rationally  connected  to  the
    Article 8(2) aim of protecting the economy. The only question remaining
    is proportionality.





10. I am bound by statute to have regard  (in  particular)  to  the  public
    interest factors set out in s117B of the NIAA 2002:

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases


         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.


         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-


           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.


         (4) Little weight should be given to-


           (a) a private life, or
           (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.


         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


           (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and
           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
           United Kingdom.

11. Section 117B(6) has no application in this case.   Nor does (2),  since
    the Appellant speaks perfect English. Weighing against her is that  the
    maintenance of immigration control is in the public interest.  That  is
    axiomatic and it is a factor that I attach significant weight  to.  The
    Appellant came to the UK as a visitor, then overstayed for some 6 years
    before she made an application to regularise  her  stay.    It  follows
    that little weight  can  be  attached  to  the  relationships  she  has
    established as part of her private life in the  UK  -  her  friendships
    with, for instance, members of her church congregation,  have all  been
    established when she was in the UK unlawfully and as such they fall  to
    be considered in line with s117B(4)(a).  The Appellant  was  previously
    financially supported by her daughter,  but  since  Beatrice  was  made
    redundant in 2012 the pair have subsisted on Beatrice's state benefits.
    It cannot therefore  in  my  view  be  argued  that  the  Appellant  is
    financially self-sufficient.   That is a further factor which makes her
    removal from the UK in the public interest.  The  factors  set  out  in
    117B are not an exhaustive list: that much is illustrated by the use of
    the term "in particular" in s117 (2)(a).  Neither  Mr  Bramble  nor  Mr
    Snowdon (the PO who appeared in the First-tier)  identified  any  other
    matter than might weigh against this Appellant. She has, as far  as  we
    are aware, had no adverse contact with  the  police  and  there  is  no
    evidence  that  she  has  ever  worked  illegally  in  the  UK.     The
    Respondent's case  for  the  Appellant's  removal  then  rests  on  the
    following submissions:


        i) The Appellant has not, since her leave to  enter  as  a  visitor
           expired in January  2007,  had  any  leave  to  remain  nor  any
           entitlement to be in the UK;


       ii) The private life that she has established since she arrived  can
           only therefore attract a "little" weight in the  proportionality
           balancing exercise;


      iii) Although she has not claimed any state benefits herself  she  is
           living off those of her daughter; this is arguably  contrary  to
           public policy and means that she cannot properly be regarded  as
           financially self sufficient. The current  circumstances  of  the
           Appellant and her daughter would suggest that she is  likely  to
           make a direct claim for benefits herself should  she  become  so
           entitled, and this would be an immediate and  direct  impact  on
           the economy.


    For those reasons the Respondent submits that the  Appellant's  removal
    would be proportionate.


12. Against those very  weighty  factors  I  must  balance  the  particular
    circumstances of the Appellant. She is now 64 years old and as  I  note
    above it is the unchallenged evidence that she and her  adult  daughter
    Beatrice share a bond over and above that normally enjoyed by a  mother
    and her adult children.  Unlike the other  relationships  mentioned  in
    the evidence the Appellant's relationship  with  her  daughter  is  not
    (just) part of the Article 8(1) private life she has established  since
    she arrived in the UK: she has always been close to  her  daughter  and
    they have shared a family life since Beatrice was born.   This  is  not
    therefore a relationship that falls under s117B(4)(a).   The  Appellant
    expresses fear and anxiety about return to Nigeria where,  her  witness
    statement asserts:


         "I have no house there and no one I can turn to for  accommodation.
         I have no savings and no money of my own to  support  myself  if  I
         return there; I have no social support network in Nigeria.  It  may
         be hard to imagine, but things are not as they  used  to  be  where
         people would accommodate you for free. Things are  very  tight  for
         everyone now and those that had some free space in their homes, are
         now renting it out. Rent is required yearly in advance, and that is
         a responsibility that neither me nor my daughter would be  able  to
         handle.


         My two children in Nigeria are in no way able to  assist  me,  they
         are struggling themselves and have already warned my  and  declared
         that they are in no position to assist at all..."


13. Beatrice has,  understandably,  also  expressed  her  distress  at  the
    prospect of her mother facing old age in these  circumstances.  In  her
    witness statement she describes her shock at how "dreadful" her  mother
    looked when she arrived in  the  UK  to  attend  Beatrice's  graduation
    ceremony: "life has been unfair to her, she was alone and neglected  in
    Nigeria".  The medical evidence and witnesses all add to this the  fact
    that the Appellant is suffering from a  number  of  medical  complaints
    related   to   her   age:   hypertension,   hypercholesterolaemia   and
    osteoarthritis.   The First-tier Tribunal  described  these  cumulative
    circumstances as "dire". In the grounds of appeal the Respondent  takes
    issue with that characterisation, pointing out that if the Appellant is
    being supported by Beatrice and others in the UK they could provide for
    her in Nigeria. That submission mirrors the requirements of the current
    rules in  Appendix  FM  relating  to  admission  of  elderly  dependent
    relatives. The difficulty is that there is no evidence  to  the  effect
    that any of the Appellant's relatives here would be able or willing  to
    make remittances to her in Nigeria. In respect of Beatrice the  witness
    statements makes very clear that the couple are managing on her  income
    at present because they live together  and  are  able  to  share  their
    meagre  resources;   it  would  not  stretch  to  maintaining   another
    household in Nigeria.  I find that  Judge  Archer's  use  of  the  word
    "dire" was quite  apt.   On  the  basis  of  the  unchallenged  witness
    statements I find that the Appellant would be facing her  old  age  and
    increasing frailty with no support, no housing and no discernible means
    of survival.


14. The other side of the coin is that  the  Appellant  and  Beatrice  have
    demonstrated an unusual level of emotional dependence upon one  another
    in the UK. Beatrice came to the UK to study, worked hard  and  got  her
    degree.  She  thereafter  had  a  number  of  different  jobs  but  was
    unfortunately made redundant in  2012.  That  hit  her  hard.  She  has
    suffered from depression to the extent that the  NHS  was  required  to
    intervene and offer her  psychological  therapies.  Beatrice  is  quite
    clear that she would not however have made the recovery  that  she  has
    were it not for the support of her mother.  She  expresses  a  wish  to
    return to paid employment but believes that she  would  not  feel  well
    enough to do this if her mother were to return to Nigeria. Her  witness
    statement sets out the extent of the support her mother has offered her
    - not just in terms of daily practical  issues  but,  for  instance  in
    staying awake with her during her "sleepness and weeping nights".

15. I have weighed all of these factors in the balance. I have  attached  a
    great deal of weight to the public interest factors set out above and I
    have had in mind at all times that the adverse impact of  removal  must
    go well beyond inconvenience or preference: the impact  must  be  at  a
    sufficiently high level of seriousness to outweigh the very substantial
    factor that the Appellant has not, in over seven years, had  any  right
    to be in the UK.   Having done so I find that on the  particular  facts
    of this case the Respondent has not shown the Appellant's removal to be
    proportionate.


      Decisions

16. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
    it is set aside.

17. The decision in the appeal is remade as follows:

    "The appeal is dismissed under the Rules.


    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".


18. I was not asked to make a direction as to anonymity and I see no reason
    to do so.






                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                  1st
                                February 2015
                           -----------------------
[1] Decision dated 9th December 2013
[2] Permission granted on the 7th October 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Colyer
[3] In her letter of 15th March 2013

