
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00805/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 April 2018                              |On 2 May 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Shanmuga Mani
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr H Kannangara of Counsel, instructed by Legend
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent, Shanmuga Mani, to whom I shall refer as "the Applicant"
    is a citizen of India born on 13 March 1985.  On  6  February  2015  he
    entered as a student in which capacity  his  leave  was  extended.   It
    appears from the bundle filed for the Appellant to whom I  shall  refer
    as "the SSHD" that  subsequently  the  Appellant  applied  for  an  EEA
    residence card.  This was granted and later revoked on 3 December 2014.
     He lodged an appeal which  he  withdrew  after  he  had  submitted  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain on 10 March 2015 leading  to
    the Respondent's decision of 14 December 2015 to refuse him  indefinite
    leave against which he appealed.

The SSHD's Decision

 2. On 14 December 2015 the SSHD refused the Applicant's application by way
    of reference to paragraph 322(5) of the Immigration Rules  because  she
    considered the Applicant had used a proxy to take a TOEIC speaking test
    with Educational Testing Service (ETS) on 29 August 2012 and for  these
    reasons his presence in the United Kingdom was  not  conducive  to  the
    public good by reference to paragraph S-LTR.1.6 of Appendix FM  to  the
    Immigration Rules.  The application was also refused  by  reference  to
    paragraph 322(10) of the Immigration Rules because  the  Applicant  had
    failed without reasonable explanation to attend for  interview  on  two
    separate occasions.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

3.   There was no Presenting Officer for the SSHD  at  the  hearing  in  the
    First-Tier Tribunal.  By a decision promulgated on 24 July  2017  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal R J  N  B  Morris  allowed  the  Applicant's
    appeal on  Immigration  grounds.   She  accepted  the  explanation  the
    Applicant had  given  why  he  had  not  attended  either  of  the  two
    interviews.  She found he had given a  sufficient  explanation  of  his
    attendance on 29 August 2012 in person to take the TOEIC speaking test.



 3. The SSHD sought permission to appeal and on 25 January  2018  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchison refused permission.

 4. The SSHD renewed the application to the Upper Tribunal and on  7  March
    2018  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  granted  permission  because  she
    considered it arguable that Judge Morris had given  inadequate  reasons
    for concluding the Applicant had provided an  innocent  explanation  to
    rebut the SSHD's allegation of fraud and erred in the  weight  she  had
    given to his English language speaking facility, having regard  to  the
    decision in MA (ETS- TOEIC testing) Nigeria [2016] UKUT 450 (IAC).

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 5. The Applicant attended the hearing.  Mr Bramble for the SSHD relied  on
    the grounds submitted to the Upper Tribunal for permission  to  appeal.
    These referred to the decision in MA  (ETS  -  TOEIC  Testing)  Nigeria
    [2016] UKUT 450 and in particular paragraph 57 setting out reasons  why
    an individual might have adequate facility  in  English  but  retain  a
    proxy to take an English language speaking test.

 6. Mr Kannangara for the Applicant relied on the  Judge's  findings  about
    the Appellant's various  educational  achievements  including  a  first
    degree from Greenwich University and other UK  diplomas  and  his  2004
    IELTS results.

Findings and Conclusions

 7. The Judge gave sustainable reasons for finding the Applicant had  given
    an innocent explanation sufficient to rebut the allegation of fraud  in
    his TOEIC English speaking test.   The  SSHD  had  not  challenged  the
    Judge's  findings  that  the  Applicant  had   given   a   satisfactory
    explanation why he had not  attended  for  interview  on  two  separate
    occasions.  The SSHD had not shown that the Judge's  findings  are  not
    adequately or sustainably reasoned or that they disclose  any  material
    error of law.  Consequently, I find the Judge's decision  should  stand
    to the effect that the Applicant's appeal under the  Immigration  Rules
    is allowed.  There was no cross-appeal against the  dismissal  of  this
    appeal on human rights grounds.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal decision did not contain an error  of  law  and
    shall stand.

    The SSHD's appeal is dismissed.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 30. iv. 2018

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

The First-tier Tribunal decision stands so there is no requirement  for  any
further fee award to be considered.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 30. iv. 2018

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
