
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00359/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26 January 2018                    |On 22 February 2018                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     A D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Sadeghi, Counsel instructed by Refugee and
Migrant
     Forum of Essex and London (RAMFEL)
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of St Lucia and his date of birth is 21  May
    1966.
2.   The Appellant made  an  application  for  leave  to  remain  which  was
    refused by the Secretary of State on 30 November 2015.   The  Appellant
    appealed and his appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge E  S
    Aujla in a decision that was promulgated on 8 February 2017,  following
    a hearing at Taylor House  on  23  January  2017.   The  Appellant  was
    granted permission by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on  7  September
    2017.  Thus, the matter came before me on 26 January 2018.

3.       The error of law hearing was originally listed on 3  October  2017.
    It was adjourned at the request of the Appellant  and  re-listed  on  1
    December 2017.  A further application for an adjournment  was  made  by
    the Appellant.  However,  because  it  was  received  on  28  November,
    shortly before the hearing  on  1  December  the  application  was  not
    considered prior to the hearing. On 1 December the matter  came  before
    Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker.  On that occasion the  Appellant  and  his
    partner attended the hearing without a representative from RAMFEL.  The
    Appellant made an application for an adjournment. Judge Zucker  granted
    this. He made directions in relation to costs. I  will  return  to  the
    issue of costs later in this decision.

4.   The First-tier Tribunal heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner whom I shall refer  to  as  SW.   The  Appellant's  immigration
    history as recorded by the judge at the start of the  decision  is  not
    challenged. He came to  the  UK  in  2006  having  been  granted  entry
    clearance as a spouse of a British citizen with valid  leave  until  16
    January 2008.  The Appellant was interviewed by Immigration Officers on
    22 April 2012 when he stated that his  relationship  with  the  British
    citizen had broken down five days after he entered the UK.  He made  an
    application on 20 October 2010 on the basis of  his  relationship  with
    another British citizen female.  This application  was  refused  on  19
    November  2010  with  no  right  of  appeal.    The   application   was
    reconsidered and the Appellant was granted discretionary  leave  on  20
    May 2011 which was valid until 20 May 2014.  On re-entering the  UK  on
    22 April 2013 Immigration Officers interviewed the Appellant and it was
    discovered this relationship broke down on 25 January 2011 and that  he
    had failed to notify the  Home  Office.  His  discretionary  leave  was
    cancelled.  He lodged an appeal but without a fee and  the  appeal  was
    rejected.  He made an application on 29 September  2014  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his family life with SW a British  citizen  born
    on 14 April 1979.  The application was refused on 20 January  2015  and
    the Appellant was not given a right of  appeal.  After  reconsideration
    the decision was maintained on 27 October 2015. He was given a right of
    appeal.

5.   The Appellant was represented at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by Mr Sadeghi of Counsel.  The judge recorded at paragraph  13
    that Counsel confirmed that the appeal was based solely on  Article  8.
    Mr Sadeghi conceded at that hearing that the Appellant did not  satisfy
    the requirements of Appendix FM. He conceded that he  did  not  satisfy
    the definition  of  a  "partner"  and  the  Appellant's  appeal  to  be
    determined outside of the Immigration Rules  and  the  appeal  was  not
    pursued under the "parent" route.  The Appellant relied  on  Article  8
    outside of the rules.

6.   The judge heard oral evidence from the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  and
    he made the following findings:-

         "30. I have carefully considered the  documentary  evidence  placed
             before me, the witness statements of  the  Appellant  and  the
             sponsor,  their  oral  evidence  and  the  written  and   oral
             submissions made by both representatives.


         31.  The only issue in this appeal is article 8.  It was  correctly
             conceded on behalf of the Appellant that he  did  not  satisfy
             the requirements of the Immigration Rules in  Appendix  FM  to
             the Immigration Rules.  Article 8, as far as family  life  was
             concerned, was to be considered outside the Immigration Rules.


         32.  For the sake of completeness, I find that  the  Appellant  did
             not satisfy the requirements of Appendix  FM.   The  Appellant
             made his application on article  8  grounds  on  29  September
             2014.  The Appellant claimed that he had moved in to live with
             the sponsor in May 2014 whereas  the  sponsor  stated  it  was
             January 2014.  There was therefore a discrepancy  between  the
             accounts.   Furthermore,  the  letter  from  the   Appellant's
             representatives dated 27 September 2014, which accompanied the
             application, stated that they were  not  living  together.   I
             have no reason to believe that the Appellant's representatives
             would have made an error.  Furthermore the  letter  from  HMRC
             dated 10 July 2015 addressed to the sponsor  stated  that  she
             was receiving tax credits as a single  mother.   The  sponsor,
             having been in receipt of benefits almost all her adult  life,
             would be fully aware that she was required to inform both HMRC
             and DWP of a change in circumstances and that  not  to  do  so
             would be a criminal offence.  I do not believe  for  a  moment
             that she would commit a criminal offence by not informing them
             of changes, already being in the delicate position of  looking
             after four children alone and living on benefits.  I therefore
             do not accept any suggestion that the couple had  been  living
             together since May 2014 or for that  matter  July  2015.   The
             Appellant therefore did not satisfy the requirement of being a
             partner for at least two  years  prior  to  the  date  of  the
             application and therefore there was no need  to  consider  any
             other requirements.  He did not satisfy the basic  requirement
             of Appendix FM.


         33.  As regards the private life claim, it was incumbent  upon  the
             Appellant  to  show  that  there  would  be  very  significant
             obstacles to his integration into St Lucia.  For  the  reasons
             given by the Respondent in the refusal  letter,  I  reach  the
             same conclusion myself.  The Appellant spent most of his  life
             in St Lucia.  He has only lived in the United Kingdom since 21
             January 2016, a period of 11 years.  He came to United Kingdom
             when he was 40 years old.  He  is  fit  and  well.   There  is
             nothing to  suggest  that  there  would  be  very  significant
             obstacles to his integration into society in St Lucia  on  his
             return.  I therefore find that article 8 was  not  engaged  in
             this appeal on account of private life.


         39.  Although the Appellant did not, in my view properly,  rely  on
             the relationship between him and the  sponsor's  children  for
             article 8 purposes, I  have  taken  their  circumstances  into
             account in considering proportionality.  I have borne in  mind
             section 55 of Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009.
             The Children Are British and they are not subject  to  removal
             from the United Kingdom.  The relationship  between  them  and
             the Appellant is not strong in any shape or form.  He  is  not
             the biological father of the children.  Even if I  accept  the
             Appellant's account, he had  only  recently  come  into  their
             lives.  The children were already used to living in  a  single
             parent household with their mother.  They no doubt would  have
             some relationship with their biological father or  fathers  as
             well.  I am left in no doubt that the Appellant's removal from
             the United Kingdom would not have any or significant impact on
             the sponsor's children.


         40.  I have considered the Appellant's family  life  claim  outside
             the  Immigration  Rules.   I  find  there  were  discrepancies
             between the accounts about the duration of  the  relationship.
             I find that the Appellant's credibility was already undermined
             in that he had previously failed to disclose to the Respondent
             in the course of his previous application for further leave to
             remain the fact that his relationship with  a  former  partner
             had broken down.  However, I am prepared to give the Appellant
             the benefit of the doubt.  I find that there  was  at  present
             family life between the Appellant and the sponsor although its
             strength was questionable.


         41.  I find that the Appellant's removal from  the  United  Kingdom
             would  not  constitute  interference  with  his  family  life.
             Firstly, having stated in examination-in-chief  that  she  was
             not willing to go with the Appellant, the sponsor changed  her
             evidence and stated in cross-examination  that  she  would  be
             willing to go to St Lucia with the Appellant, to maintain  her
             family life.  Furthermore, the  option  of  returning  to  the
             United Kingdom after obtaining entry clearance  as  a  partner
             was  open  to  the  Appellant.   If  he  satisfied   all   the
             requirements of Appendix FM applicable to entry clearance as a
             partner, there was no reason why  he  should  not  be  granted
             entry clearance.  Any interference with his family life  would
             be purely temporary.  I therefore find that there would be  no
             interference with his family life.  Article  8  was  therefore
             not engaged in this appeal.


         42.  In the event that my conclusion that article 8 was not engaged
             was erroneous,  and  the  interference  with  the  Appellant's
             family life would have consequences  of  such  gravity  as  to
             engage article 8, I have considered the matter further.


         45.  As I have mentioned above, I am prepared to give the Appellant
             the  benefit  of  the  doubt.   I  find  that  he  was  in   a
             relationship  with  the  sponsor  although  its  strength  was
             questionable, given the Appellant's previous track  record  in
             connection with relationships.  He was living with the sponsor
             as well as her children.  They both  claimed  that  they  were
             living together since 2014.  That is  the  sum  total  of  his
             circumstances.


         46.  On the other hand, the Appellant's  leave  to  remain  in  the
             United Kingdom came to an end on 20 April 2013.  He was  never
             granted further leave to remain.  He had  previously  provided
             incorrect information to the  Respondent  about  his  previous
             relationship, thereby misleading the Home Office.  The sponsor
             accepted that she was fully aware that the  Appellant  had  no
             permission to remain in the United Kingdom  when  she  entered
             into the relationship with him and was equally aware  that  he
             could be removed.  The Appellant established his  family  life
             with the sponsor knowing full well that he had  no  permission
             to remain in the United Kingdom and he could only remain  here
             if he qualified under the Immigration Rules or  on  article  8
             grounds.  He established his family life when  his  status  in
             the United Kingdom was illegal, as an overstayer.  I take into
             account, as required, section  117B  of  the  2002  Act  which
             requires  me  to  give  very  little  weight  to  family  life
             established in those circumstances.


         47.  Having balanced the Appellant's personal circumstances against
             the need to uphold the requirements of  Immigration  Rules,  I
             find that the Appellant's  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom
             would be fully proportionate and would not  place  the  United
             Kingdom  in  breach  of  its  obligations   under   the   1950
             convention.





The Grounds of Appeal

7.   The grounds of appeal are twofold.  The first ground of appeal is  that
    the judge did not properly consider the Appellant's partner's  children
    and their best interests (with specific reference to  paragraph  39  of
    the decision).  It was submitted at the  hearing  that  the  children's
    biological father died in 2009 and in support  of  this  the  Appellant
    relied on his death certificate. This was  raised  in  the  Appellant's
    witness statement and that of SW.   In determining the children's  best
    interests the judge did not have regard to the  evidence;  namely,  the
    evidence of the children's biological father's death and  the  evidence
    from the children themselves in the form of letters/witness  statements
    in the Appellant's bundle and the other "independent evidence" from the
    children's school confirming the role  that  the  Appellant  played  in
    their lives.

8.      The second ground of appeal is that the judge made  an  inconsistent
    assessment of the relationship between the Appellant and SW. In support
    of this, reference is made to paragraph 32 of the judge's decision.  In
    light of the grant of permission, Mr Sadeghi was brief in  relation  to
    his submissions on ground 2.

Error of Law

9.   In my  view,  the  judge  erred  when  assessing  the  children's  best
    interests. He did not take into account the evidence of  the  Appellant
    and SW  in  respect  of  the  children;  namely,  that  the  children's
    biological father was deceased and the evidence about  the  Appellant's
    relationship with them.  SW in her witness statement  referred  to  the
    children calling the Appellant "dad" and  stated  that  they  would  be
    devastated should he have to return to St Lucia.  It is not clear  from
    the decision that the judge took into  account  the  death  certificate
    relating to an individual who is purported to be the biological  father
    of the children. In addition, there are letters from at  least  two  of
    the children and the judge made no reference to these.  The  judge  was
    entitled to attach limited weight to the above-mentioned  evidence  but
    it is not clear from his decision what he made of it. It is  not  clear
    whether he attached no weight to it or he failed to have regard to  it.
    Whilst the judge recorded at [39] that the Appellant did  not  rely  on
    his relationship with the children, considering the grounds  of  appeal
    before him, although section 117B (6) was not relied on, the  Appellant
    did rely on his relationship with the children.  Their  best  interests
    were an integral part of the proportionality assessment.  I  find  that
    in relation to ground 1 the judge materially erred.

10.      In my view,  the  other  findings  of  the  judge  are  lawful  and
    sustainable. There was no coherent challenge to  these  in  any  event.
    There is no inconsistency in the finding of the judge relating  to  the
    Appellant and his partner's evidence about when they  started  to  live
    together. I shall deal with this in more detail in due course; however,
    the weight to attach to the evidence and the interpretation  it  was  a
    matter for the judge.

11.    Ground 1 is made out. I set aside the decision to dismiss the  appeal
    under Article 8.   There  was  no  further  evidence  produced  by  the
    Appellant or the Respondent and no reason raised by either party why it
    would not be appropriate for me to remake the  decision  on  Article  8
    grounds on the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal.

12.   I heard submissions from  both  parties.  Mr  Sadeghi  now  relied  on
    Section 117B (6) of the 2002 Act.   It was also submitted by Mr Sadeghi
    that the Appellant could now meet the Rules under Appendix  FM  because
    he has been living with SW for two years.  The thrust of  Mr  Sadeghi's
    argument was that it was in  the  children's  best  interests  for  the
    Appellant to remain in the UK because he has a genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with the children.  It would not be reasonable to
    expect the children to leave the UK.  He did not  make  submissions  in
    relation to very significant obstacles to integration or insurmountable
    obstacles to family life in the context of Appendix FM.

13.  It is necessary to set out the evidence that was before the  First-tier
    Tribunal and which is now before me.  The parties  gave  oral  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal and there is no need for me to go behind
    that evidence as recorded by the judge. There was no challenge to it.

The Appellant's Evidence

14.      The Appellant adopted his witness statement of 23 January  2017  as
    his evidence- in- chief before the First-tier Tribunal.   His  evidence
    can be summarised.  He came to the UK on a spousal  visa  in  2006  and
    within a month of arriving here  his  then  wife  asked  him  to  leave
    indicating that she regretted marrying him.  He has not spoken  to  her
    since February 2006 although they are still legally married.  He  would
    have returned to St Lucia then but did not have any money in  order  to
    buy a ticket home.  He ended up sleeping rough. He managed to make some
    friends with UK residents and was offered accommodation. He moved  from
    property to property staying with friends. He was unable to obtain work
    and relied on the support of others.  His spousal visa expired in March
    2008. He was happy to return home but unable to pay for a  ticket.   In
    summer 2008 he met a British citizen, FB. He moved in with her and  her
    children.  In 2011 he applied for leave to remain on the basis of  this
    relationship but whilst the application was pending it broke  down.  FB
    started a relationship with another man.  He advised his  lawyer  about
    this but his lawyer advised him not to tell the  Home  Office.  He  was
    granted  three  years'  discretionary  leave  on  the  basis   of   his
    relationship with FB. His leave was due to  expire  in  2014.   Shortly
    after the breakdown of the relationship with FB  he  commenced  another
    relationship with a female.  He did not officially  move  in  with  her
    because there were restrictions on her council  tenancy  agreement.  He
    helped her care for  her  daughter  who  had  autism.   She  ended  the
    relationship in 2013.  At around the time he separated  from  her,   he
    began a relationship with SW.

15.   He moved in with SW in 2014 and they continue to  live  together.   SW
    has four children living with her.  I shall refer to SW's  children  as
    JZ (date of birth 1 April 2004), JT (date of birth 15  February  2005),
    JI (date of birth 6 February 2007) and JC (date of birth 11 July 2008).
     The Appellant's evidence is that he views  all  the  children  as  "my
    flesh and blood and cannot imagine being separated from them".   Should
    the Appellant be forced to return to St  Lucia  his  children  will  be
    devastated. The children have already suffered the heartbreak of losing
    their father and it would be very difficult for SW to care for them  as
    a single parent.

SW's Evidence

16.    SW adopted her witness statement of 23 January 2017  as  evidence-in-
    chief before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   Her  evidence  can  be
    summarised.  SW was married in 1998 to PAW.  She had two children prior
    to this marriage. They are now adults and reside  in  Birmingham.   The
    marriage broke down in 2001 and they divorced in 2003.  In 2000 she met
    DQ and they had four children together JZ, JT, JL and JC.  They are all
    British citizens.  On 14 February 2009 DQ  died  from  meningitis.  The
    children were devastated as a result.   She  had  known  the  Appellant
    prior to her husband's death.


17.      In 2009 she contacted the Appellant and asked him  for  support  as
    she was struggling to cope after DQ's death.  The  Appellant  supported
    her and the children both mentally and emotionally. Their  relationship
    commenced in 2014. They moved in together in 2014.  The  children  view
    the Appellant as their father. They call him "dad".  He helps them with
    their school work and is always there for them emotionally.   She  does
    not know how they would have coped following DQ 's death if it were not
    for the Appellant.  The children may be taken into care if he is forced
    to leave the UK. There was some  involvement  of  the  social  services
    following DQ's death. However, they have not had any involvement  since
    2013. This is solely to do  with  the  Appellant's  presence  in  their
    lives.  The children have lost one parent and losing a second one would
    seriously traumatise them.

Supporting Evidence

18.  The Appellant  relied  on  a  letter  from  a  GP  of  9  January  2015
    confirming that the Appellant and the four children were living  at  an
    address and registered at the GP's surgery.  There are two  deed  polls
    indicating that on 15 January 2014 the children,  JI  and  JC,  changed
    their respective surnames adopting the Appellant's surname.  There  was
    a letter from the Britannia Village Primary School of 8 September  2014
    confirming that the four children are attending the school and they are
    collected from the school either by their mother or their "stepfather,"
    AD.  There is a letter of 9 January 2015 from the head  of  the  school
    confirming that she has seen a utility bill dated 31  October  2014  in
    the name of AD as confirmation that he resides at an address  which  is
    on the school database as being the home for the family.   There  is  a
    third letter of  9  October  2015  from  the  head  who  describes  the
    Appellant as the children's step father/guardian and that he  has  been
    known to the school for two years. The head states that "I  must  write
    and highlight the importance stability and continuity is, (sic) to this
    family as a whole but particularly these 3 young children".  The author
    states that the Appellant regularly collects the children  from  school
    and "I believe he contributes to a stable and positive home life".  The
    children have written letters  to  support  the  Appellant  which  were
    before the FtT. The hearing before me was attended by the Appellant and
    SW.

Conclusions

19.  The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal took place a year  ago.   It
    was a matter of concern that there was no further  evidence  before  me
    today, particularly in the light of how  the  appeal  was  advanced  in
    respect  of  SW's  four  children  and  their  relationship  with   the
    Appellant. There was no independent evidence exploring the relationship
    and identifying the children's best interests. I do not accept that the
    Appellant and SW are credible witnesses. I accept  that  three  of  the
    children have already lost their biological father, DQ. However,  there
    is no evidence about the family circumstances when DQ died. It  is  not
    clear whether he was living with the  family.  Nevertheless,  I  accept
    that his death was significant and must have had an impact  on  SW  and
    the children.

20.      There are documents in the  Respondent's  bundle  produced  by  the
    Appellant in support of previous  applications  and  this  application.
    They significantly undermine  his  credibility.  The  Appellant's  case
    before me was advanced on the basis that DQ was the  biological  father
    of all four children. I do not accept that DQ is JC's father. He had  a
    different surname. I note from his birth certificate that his father is
    not named.   It was troubling that the Appellant asserted in 2014  that
    he was JC's biological father; however, this was not  accepted  by  the
    Respondent  who  requested  DNA  evidence.    No   DNA   evidence   was
    forthcoming. Instead the Appellant's case changed paternity not  having
    importance because the Appellant has assumed a parental  role  for  all
    the children. The false assertion that the Appellant is JC's father was
    supported by SW. There is a letter from SW addressed "to  whom  it  may
    concern" dated 12 October 2015. She  stated  that  she  has  known  the
    Appellant for eight years and they first met  at  a  family  gathering.
    They had a sexual encounter which resulted in a  pregnancy  and  it  is
    implied the birth of JC.   I find that the Appellant and  SW  attempted
    to mislead the Respondent and this damages their credibility. The  case
    was advanced before me on the basis that the  Appellant's  relationship
    with the children is akin to that of father  and  biological  children.
    Whilst I accept that a step-father can have a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with non-biological children, the evidence before me  does
    not establish that the Appellant does have  such  a  relationship  with
    SW's four children.

21.       The  Appellant  and  SW  have  shown  that  they  are  willing  to
    manipulate the truth to advance the Appellant's case. In the absence of
    supporting independent evidence, for example from a social  worker  who
    has had the opportunity to analyse and investigate the relationship,  I
    am not prepared, in the light of the significant credibility issues, to
    accept that  the  relationship  is  of  the  nature  suggested  by  the
    Appellant and SW.  I am  not  persuaded  that  the  children  who  have
    already sadly lost a father (the eldest three) or the youngest,  who  I
    reasonably infer  from  the  evidence  has  a  father,  look  upon  the
    Appellant as a father figure.  In any event, I find that the  Appellant
    has manipulated the situation. He has not  assumed  a  proper  parental
    role with all the onerous responsibilities that involves. I  find  that
    the Appellant has exaggerated the role he plays within  the  family.  I
    attach limited weight to the letters from the children,  the  documents
    from the school and the photographic evidence.  It is not clear  to  me
    from the head of school's letter how she has  reached  her  conclusions
    about the Appellant's relationship with the children. Her third  letter
    states the obvious about the importance of stability and continuity but
    does not state  that  this  is  what  the  Appellant  provides  to  the
    children.  I attach some  weight  to  the  evidence  that  two  of  the
    children have  changed  their  names.  However,  I  conclude  that  the
    Appellant is manipulative and the children's letters must be considered
    in the light of this. The Appellant and SW are not reliable or credible
    witnesses.  The children's best interests are served by them  remaining
    in the UK with their mother.

22.      I have reached these conclusions having considered  the  following.
    There is a statement from the Appellant in the Respondent's bundle  (Q)
    in support of a previous application in 2010.  The statement refers  to
    his relationship with FB and the support he gives  and  role  he  plays
    within her family, particularly towards her children and grandchildren.
    He described his  relationship  with  his  "grandson"  (the  biological
    grandson of FB) and his step- daughter who called him "step-daddy."  He
    described a parental relationship with other children of FB.   In  2013
    the Appellant was interviewed and  a  transcript  of  this  is  in  the
    Respondent's bundle (L). During this interview the Appellant  spoke  of
    his relationship with N and his "adopted daughters" (N's children), for
    one of whom he was the carer.  He  asserted  that  one  has  taken  his
    surname. It was asserted that these children would be  "devastated"  if
    the Appellant was not here with them in the UK.  The thrust is that  he
    has assumed a parental role for the  children.  Whilst  I  accept  that
    there is a relationship between the Appellant and SW  and  between  the
    Appellant and SW's children, the quality,  stability,  seriousness  and
    permanence of the relationship has  been  greatly  exaggerated  by  the
    witnesses.  I accept that SW may have been manipulated by the Appellant
    which may explain, to a limited extent, why she has  been  prepared  to
    assert an untruth about her child's paternity and to consent to two  of
    the children changing their surnames. I find  that  the  children  have
    been manipulated by the Appellant. A parental  relationship  would  not
    cease on  the  breakdown  of  the  relationships  with  the  children's
    respective mothers, but  there  is  no  evidence  before  me  that  the
    Appellant has maintained a relationship let alone a parental  role  for
    the children or grandchildren of FB or N. SW stated  that  there  is  a
    fear of the children being taken  into  care  in  the  absence  of  the
    Appellant. This is wholly unsupported and I reject this evidence.

23.      There is no reason to depart from the findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in respect of the Appellant and  SW  living  together.   Their
    evidence was inconsistent on the issue and the judge  was  entitled  to
    take that view and interpret the letter from the solicitors in the  way
    that  he  did.   The  letter  from  RAMFEL  of  27  September  2014  is
    unequivocal in stating that the Appellant and SW do not  formally  live
    together. I find that  this  is  also  a  thread  running  through  the
    previous relationships. There is no evidence  that  the  Appellant  has
    formally lived in the same household as any of the children  over  whom
    he claims to have assumed a parental role or that he  has  assumed  any
    financial responsibility for them. The letters  from  the  GP  and  the
    school are of some assistance to  him;  however,  they,  together  with
    copies of utility bills  and  the  letters  from  the  school  must  be
    considered in the round.   I am not satisfied that the Appellant and SW
    have lived together continuously for a period of two years at the  date
    of the hearing before me. Staying with the family, but formally  living
    elsewhere so as to avoid  SW  losing  benefits,  if  that  is  what  is
    happening, is not living together for the purposes  of  the  Rules  and
    does not in  this  case  amount  to  the  assumption  of  any  parental
    responsibility.  The Appellant cannot meet the requirements of Appendix
    FM. He does not have a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with the children and he has not been living with SW for 2 years. It is
    not necessary to consider insurmountable obstacles to family life.

24.  There is no evidence before me that there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to integration.  The case was  not  advanced  on  this  basis
    before me.

25.      There is family life, albeit not to  the  extent  advanced  by  the
    Appellant. The Appellant's relationship commenced when he had no lawful
    leave to be here and  affects  the  weight  to  attach  to  it  in  the
    balancing exercise.  This is not a Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 case. It is
    not the case that the Appellant would be certain to  be  granted  entry
    clearance from abroad which may reduce  the  public  interest  in  some
    circumstances in removal.  The Appellant's history is unimpressive.  In
    these proceedings he has been prepared to manipulate the truth about  a
    child's paternity.  He was granted discretionary leave on the basis  of
    a relationship with a woman and her children  which  terminated  before
    the application was considered. He made an unsupported  assertion  that
    he was advised by his solicitor not to tell the  Home  Office.   Whilst
    stability and continuity is in the children's best interests, there  is
    no evidence that it is likely they will have this should the  Appellant
    stay. I have attached weight to the impact of removal  on  SW  and  the
    children. I accept the children have a relationship with the Appellant,
    albeit of a more tenuous and precarious nature than that claimed by the
    Appellant. I reject the unsupported assertions that SW is not  able  to
    cope without the Appellant and his loss will result in the intervention
    of the social services. Removal is in  the  public  interest.   I  have
    considered proportionality through the lens of section 117B of the 2002
    Act.  Neither the Appellant nor SW is financially independent.  In  the
    absence  of   a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental   relationship,
    reasonableness is not an issue in  this  case.   I  conclude  that  the
    Appellant has failed to establish compelling circumstances to allow his
    appeal outside of the Immigration Rules.  The  balance  of  the  scales
    weighs heavily in favour of removal.

26.   I dismiss the appeal under Article 8.

Costs

27.  A notice of the hearing on 1 December 2017 was sent to the  Appellant's
    representative on 19 October 2017. By way of a fax sent and received on
    28 November, RAMFEL made an application to adjourn  the  hearing.  This
    was made so late in the day that it was not  considered  prior  to  the
    hearing. This matter was listed for an  error  of  law  hearing  before
    Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker on 1 December 2017. On that day  there  was
    no representative from RAMFEL in attendance.   The  Appellant  attended
    without representation. He made an application to adjourn. Judge Zucker
    granted the application. However, he directed RAMFEL to show cause  why
    a wasted costs order should not be made pursuant to rule 10 (3) of  the
    2008.

28.   Mr  Sadeghi  addressed  me  on  the  direction.  He  stated  that   an
    adjournment application was made because he  was  not  available  on  1
    December. RAMFEL, a charitable organisation,  had  given  the  Tribunal
    Counsel's available dates and 1 December was not one  of  them.     The
    advisor  with  conduct  of  the  Appellant's  case  is  grade  3   OISC
    accredited.  He was on holiday between 8 and 20 November.  He  attended
    the office only twice after 20 November. He attended the office  on  25
    November and made the application to adjourn on 27  November  intending
    to fax it that day. However, there were problems with the  fax  machine
    and he could not fax it until 28. Resources are limited.  He could  not
    explain why there was no representative in attendance  on  1  December.
    The advisor worked two full days and one evening after 20 November  and
    in his absence  there  was  no  one  available  to  manage  his  cases.
    RAMFEL's response to the direction of Judge Zucker was read to me by Mr
    Sadeghi. The advisor stated as follows,

         "It is exceptionally difficult for an organisation of this size  to
         manage  appeals  such  as  this  when  balanced  against  competing
         priorities ... following 2012 cuts  to  legal  aid  Appellants  are
         increasingly  reliant  on  voluntary  sector  organisations   which
         inevitably do not have the same resources as private and legal  aid
         firms. The impact of wasted  costs  is  greater  on  the  voluntary
         sector"

29.  Ms Ahmad did not pursue a wasted costs order.  Whilst  the  failure  to
    make a timely adjournment application and to attend the  hearing  on  1
    December was unfair to the Appellant and involved a waste of court time
    and judicial resources, there was  no  evidence  that  costs  had  been
    incurred by the Secretary  of  State  as  a  result  of  any  improper,
    unreasonable or negligent act  or  omission  by  RAMFEL  (or  the  OISC
    advisor).  Whilst, the response by RAMFEL  raises  legitimate  concerns
    about the organisation's ability to manage cases generally, I  make  no
    order for costs.


Notice of Decision

30.  The appeal is dismissed under Article 8.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 16th February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam




