
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00842/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 September 2015                  |On 3 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD zUBAIR
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Khan, Counsel, instructed by Sheratons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Wylie who, on  5  February  2015,  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against a refusal by the Secretary of State to grant him further
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student.   The  appellant,  whose
    date of birth is 1 October 1990, is a citizen of Pakistan.  He  entered
    the United Kingdom on 11 September 2010.  On 15 October 2012 he applied
    for further leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student.  That
    application was to enable him to study at St. John's  College  Limited.
    When he made his application St. John's College had a sponsor  licence.
    The college subsequently lost its licence and, on  15  June  2013,  the
    Secretary of State varied the appellant's leave so that it would expire
    60 days hence.

2.   On 17 August 2013 the appellant varied his application  to  enable  him
    to study at Northam College. When  his  application  was  made  Northam
    College was an educational institution that held the  relevant  sponsor
    licence. Unfortunately for the appellant Northam College, at some  time
    after his variation application was made, lost its sponsor licence.  On
    2  December  2013  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    variation application and made a decision to remove  him  from  the  UK
    pursuant to Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act
    2006.  Aggrieved with this decision the appellant sought to  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

3.   In her determination the  Judge  noted  that,  at  the  time  that  the
    decision was made, the appellant did  not  have  a  valid  CAS  because
    Northam  College  had  lost  its  licence.   The  judge  was  therefore
    satisfied that the appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules in relation to the accumulation of  30  points  under
    the Points-Based System. The judge very briefly  considered  Article  8
    and found that Article 8 would not be breached should the appellant  be
    removed from the United Kingdom.

4.   The judge made no  reference  to  the  case  of  Patel  (Revocation  of
    sponsor licence - fairness) India [2011]  UKUT  00211.  This  authority
    from the Upper Tribunal indicates that, in circumstances where, through
    no fault or involvement of an appellant,  a  college  at  which  he  is
    studying or proposes to study loses its sponsorship  licence  after  he
    applies for further leave to study there, then, pursuant to  principles
    of common law fairness, the Secretary of  State  ought  to  grant  that
    person a period of 60 days leave to enable him to find another  college
    at which to study. Failure to  do  so  renders  the  decision  unlawful
    through unfairness.

Grounds of appeal and hearing before the Upper Tribunal

5.   The grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  contend  that  the  judge
    failed to consider or apply the authority of Patel. I took  account  of
    submissions from Mr Clarke representing  the  Secretary  of  State.  Mr
    Clarke submitted that the wording and structure  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's Tier 4 policy guidance did  not  envisage  multiple  grants  of
    variations of leave of 60 days on subsequent occasions.   He  submitted
    there was no case law suggesting the respondent  was  obliged  to  give
    repeated grant of leave to individuals in the appellant's position.  Mr
    Clarke invited me to find that there must be consistency  in  both  the
    nature of applications and decision-making and that fairness plays both
    ways. It was, he submitted, not proportionate to enable  an  individual
    in such circumstances to have a further grant of leave  so  they  could
    find another college.



Discussion

6.   I have considered the Tier 4 Sponsor policy  guidance  provided  by  Mr
    Clarke at the hearing (v16.0, valid  from  26  November  2013).  I  can
    detect nothing in the wording of the guidance  that  would  prevent  an
    applicant  in  the  appellant's  circumstances  from  being  granted  a
    subsequent period of leave following an initial grant  of  60  days  to
    give him the opportunity to apply to another college. I do  not  accept
    that there would be uncertainty in a situation  where  individuals  are
    able to make further applications after the  second  college  to  which
    they lawfully applied loses its licence.  I am satisfied this is likely
    to  be  a  relatively  rare  occurrence.  Nor  can  I   ascertain   any
    disproportionally to the respondent in granting  a  further  period  of
    leave.

7.   I am also satisfied, having regard to  the  authority  of  Patel,  that
    there is no reason why the principles enunciated in that case ought not
    to be applied to the  current  situation.  The  appellant  is  entirely
    blameless as to the reasons why Northam College lost its licence. I  am
    satisfied there is no reason why the appellant should  be  deprived  of
    the opportunity of applying to a second college simply because  he  has
    already been granted a period of 60 days leave following the withdrawal
    of his first college's licence.

8.   I am  therefore  satisfied  that  the  judge's  failure  to  apply  the
    principles enunciated in the case of Patel  does  disclose  a  material
    error of law.  I allow the appeal on the basis that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision is not in accordance with the law. The effect of  this
    is that the application remains outstanding and  it  will  be  remitted
    back to the Secretary of State to enable her to make a lawful decision.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does disclose a material  error
of  law.  The  appeal  is  allowed  to  the  extent  that  the   appellant's
application remains outstanding until a lawful decision is made.

I direct that any fresh decision is not to be made for  a  period  of  sixty
days from the date  of  the  reasoned  decision  being  transmitted  to  the
parties, in order to give the appellant a  reasonably  opportunity  to  vary
his application

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]    02 September 2015
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  whole  fee
award for the following reason. The respondent acted unfairly in failing  to
give the appellant an opportunity to  vary  his  application  following  the
withdrawal of his college's sponsorship licence.


[pic]    02 September 2015
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

