
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
IA/00169/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13 February 2018                        | On 20 March 2018                |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mr Zahirul Islam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Hossain, Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent (hereafter the claimant) is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.
    He was granted leave to enter the UK as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant on 10 April and received extensions in the same capacity  until
    15 March 2014.  On 25 February 2013 his further leave to  remain  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student was curtailed due to revocation of the Tier  4
    sponsor licence.  On 27 April 2013 he had applied for leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 4 Student.  On 7 August 2015  the  appellant  (hereafter  the
    Secretary of State or SSHD)  refused  this  under  paragraphs  322(1A),
    322(2) and 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules on  the  basis  of  alleged
    deception in the use of an English test  certificate  from  the  TOEIC.



2.   The claimant's grounds of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)
    disputed that he had ever used deception and also claimed that the SSHD
    should have granted  him  60  days  when  she  curtailed  his  licence,
    pursuant to the Upper Tribunal guidance in Patel (revocation of sponsor
    licence - fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211 and similar cases.


3.   His appeal came before Judge Freer of the FtT.  He found that the  SSHD
    had not proven deception and in consequence

    (1)  the SSHD could not rely on any of the general grounds of  refusal;
         and


    (2)  the claimant should  succeed  under  the  substantive  Immigration
         Rules set out in Appendices A and C:


             "For that [the general grounds which relied on deception]  was
             the only reason he failed in points under the appendices."


    The judge went on to state that as the claimant was entitled to succeed
    under the Immigration Rules he did not need to decide the human  rights
    grounds 'but it appears highly unlikely that  he  would  succeed  under
    Article 8'" (paragraph 33).

4.   The SSHD's grounds of appeal  challenged  the  judge's  decision.   The
    principal contention was that the judge had failed to address correctly
    the burden of proof in respect of the  deception  issue.   The  grounds
    also contended that the judge had failed to make  a  finding  that  the
    maintenance requirement was met and that it was not open to  the  judge
    to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules  without  finding  that
    the claimant met the maintenance requirements.

5.   In granting permission UTJ Plimmer stated that the principal  challenge
    raised by the SSHD was "not arguable".

6.   Ms Isherwood stated that she did not seek to go behind that  conclusion
    and said she felt the SSHD was in  difficulty  in  pursuing  the  other
    grounds because although  incorrect  to  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules, the judge should have allowed the appeal on fairness
    grounds applying the Upper Tribunal guidance in Patel, especially since
    the judge found the claimant  credible  and  the  SSHD  has  raised  no
    challenge to the facts as set out by  the  claimant  before  the  judge
    (except in relation to the deception issue).

7.   I am grateful to the submissions I  heard  from  Ms  Isherwood  and  Mr
    Hossain.

8.   As already noted the SSHD  does  not  maintain  her  challenge  to  the
    judge's finding that the SSHD had not  made  out  any  of  her  general
    grounds of refusal.

9.   This is an "old style" appeal under s.82(1) of the NIAA  and  hence  it
    was open to the judge to allow it on the basis that  the  claimant  met
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

10.  However, it is clear that the judge was not entitled to allow it  under
    the Immigration Rules because the evidence before him did not establish
    that the claimant met the maintenance requirements of the  Rules.   The
    SSHD did not say in her refusal letter that the only relevant matter as
    regards meeting the maintenance requirement  concerned  being  able  to
    score points by providing a valid CAS.  She stated that because he  had
    been unable to provide a valid  CAS  "we  are  unable  to  assess  your
    remaining course fees  or  monthly  maintenance  (funds)  requirement".
    That accurately reflects the requirements set out at  paragraph  11  of
    Appendix C.  Since by the time of decision the claimant no longer had a
    valid CAS there was no concrete reference point  for  deciding  whether
    the specified documents demonstrated that he had funds amounting to the
    course fees.  The FtT Judge was wrong to consider that the claimant met
    the maintenance requirements.

11.  Since the judge himself stated that it was "highly unlikely"  that  the
    claimant could succeed on Article 8 grounds if  he  did  not  meet  the
    Immigration  Rules,  the  judge's  error  regarding   the   maintenance
    requirement was clearly material.  Whilst there was a further ground on
    which the judge might have allowed the appeal - the fairness ground -
    this was not relied on by the claimant's Counsel at the hearing  before
    Judge Freer and it was not automatically the  case  that  the  claimant
    stood  to  succeed  on  that  ground  even  if  it  had  been   raised.
    Accordingly I set aside the judge's decision for material error of law.



12.  I am in a position to re-make the decision without further ado.

13.  The SSHD's reliance on general grounds of refusal has fallen away.

14.  It remains  the  case  that  the  claimant  cannot  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules since he did not show that  he  met  the  maintenance
    requirements.  There  remains  no  way  of  knowing  if  the  specified
    document he produced would suffice to cover the course fees.

15.  Both representatives agree, however, that  there  is  another  possible
    ground on which the claimant is entitled  to  succeed  in  his  appeal,
    namely, if he can establish that the SSHD failed to act fairly  in  not
    granting the claimant 60 days' leave in which to obtain  a  valid  CAS.
    Ms Isherwood for the SSHD states, that the claimant's  position  seemed
    to fall under the SSHD's own policy governing 60 days' leave to  obtain
    a valid CAS.  In addition, I  see  from  my  own  inspection  that  the
    claimant's CAS was valid at the  date  of  his  application,  and  only
    became invalid in the period in between date of application and date of
    decision.  The claimant still had more than 60 days'  leave  to  remain
    based on the original grant to him of an extension until 15 March 2014.
     Whilst the SSHD had curtailed the claimant's leave to remain prior  to
    his application for further leave to remain, this  (so  far  as  I  can
    tell) was not  a  matter  on  which  the  SSHD  thereafter  placed  any
    reliance.  In such  circumstances  (with  particular  reference  to  Ms
    Isherwood's stated position on the issue), I consider that the decision
    of 7 August 2015 was not in  accordance  with  the  law  by  virtue  of
    unfairness on the part of the SSHD in not applying to the claimant  her
    policy to grant 60 days' leave to obtain a valid CAS.

16.  The situation  created  by  my  decision  is  uncomfortably  artificial
    because nearly five years have  elapsed  since  the  SSHD  should  have
    considered applying the 60 days'  policy.   Nevertheless  the  rock  on
    which the immigration appeal system is  built  is  that  a  person  who
    succeeds in his appeal should be put back in  the  position  he  should
    have enjoyed but for the wrongful decision.

17.  At the same time, in order to  act  on  my  decision,  the  SSHD  would
    certainly need to be satisfied that the claimant still wished to pursue
    studies as a Tier 4  (General)  Migrant  and  can  currently  meet  all
    relevant requirements currently.

18.  To summarise:


    The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.


    The decision I re-make is to dismiss the claimant's  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules but to allow it as "not in accordance with  the  law"
    on fairness grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 16 March 2018
            [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

