

                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/00826/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Determination Promulgated|
|On July 22, 2014                |On August 4, 2014        |
|                                |                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                       MR MUHANAD MOHD AHMAD HATAMLEH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Quattara (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, born June 11, 1979, is a citizen of Jordan. On  May  25,
    2012 he applied to vary his leave to enable him to remain in the United
    Kingdom to enable him to  secure  a  suitable  sponsor  for  a  Tier  2
    application. He had previously been granted Tier 1 leave.

 2. The respondent refused his application on December 28,  2012,  2013  on
    the basis there  were  no  compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances
    surrounding the case that would persuade the respondent to exercise her
    discretion and grant further leave. The  same  day  removal  directions
    under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  nationality  Act  2006
    were issued.

 3. On January 10, 2013 the appellant appealed under Section 82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. The matter was listed before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hague
    (hereinafter referred to as "the  FtTJ")  on  May  9,  2013  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on May  17,  2013  he  dismissed  the  appeal
    finding the  section  47  decision  was  invalid  but  the  substantive
    application could not succeed because leave to remain  outside  of  the
    Rules was  a  discretion  conferred  on  the  respondent  and  was  not
    susceptible to appeal as section 84(1)(f) of the 2002 Act only  permits
    consideration of a discretion conferred by the Rules. This  application
    had been refused for a mandatory reason under paragraph 322(1) HC 395.

 5. The appellant appealed that decision on May  24,  2013.  Permission  to
    appeal was initially refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Keane
    on June 4, 2013. Permission was renewed to the Upper  Tribunal  and  on
    July 17, 2013 Upper Tribunal Perkins found it was arguable the FtTJ had
    erred because:-

     a. The fact he was not able to satisfy the Rules did not mean  he  was
        not entitled to have his application decided.


     b. Refusal had been under  paragraph  322(1)  HC  395  but  this  Rule
        provides as a ground for refusing an application for leave to enter
        that the application is made for  a  purpose  not  covered  by  the
        Rules.


    Upper Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  was  not  at  all  sure  there  was  an
    appealable decision but felt  there  may  be  a  wrong  contemporaneous
    decision to remove that should have been allowed.


    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 6. The appellant was not  in  attendance  and  Mr  Quattara  requested  an
    adjournment. His reason for an adjournment was because he had only been
    instructed last night  and  was  unclear  what  applications  had  been
    submitted. The appellant was ill today and unable to attend the hearing
    and was believed to have a temperature and  was  vomiting.  Mr  McVeety
    submitted the issue for today was about whether there had been an error
    and no oral evidence was necessary and he submitted there was  no  need
    for an adjournment.

 7. I considered this request  but  refused  the  adjournment  because  the
    appellant had been aware of the hearing for over 28 days and it appears
    he  only  chose  to  instruct   solicitors   yesterday   evening.   The
    representatives were clearly equipped to deal with  the  error  of  law
    hearing.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW


 8. Mr Quattara submitted the respondent had acted unfairly in that she had
    been aware of the appellant's offer of employment prior to the date  of
    decision but had informed  the  hospital  that  the  appellant  had  no
    status. He submitted the decision was therefore not in accordance  with
    the law. Alternatively, he argued  the  decision  was  an  "immigration
    decision" as it was covered by Section 82(2)(d) of the 2002 Act because
    it was an application to  extend  his  leave  and  the  consequence  of
    refusing the application was he would have no leave to remain.


 9. Mr McVeety submitted that there was no immigration decision because  he
    had not made an application under the Rules. He had applied outside  of
    the Rules to  extend  something  (his  Tier  1  status)  that  was  not
    possible. The respondent had correctly refused  the  appeal  under  the
    mandatory ground of refusal paragraph 322(1) HC  395.  It  was  not  in
    dispute that he did not meet the PBS requirements and  his  application
    was not a variation application within the Rules.

10. Both parties agreed  the  FtTJ  in  addition  to  finding  the  removal
    decision invalid should have allowed the appeal against  that  decision
    and remitted it back to the respondent for a decision to be taken.

11. I reserved my decision.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT


12. In order to understand this application it is necessary to have  regard
    to the appellant's  application  and  status.  When  he  submitted  his
    application he was in the United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  1  (post  study
    worker). His leave expired on May 27, 2012 and he filed Form FLR(O). He
    ticked  the  box  in  section  3  indicating  he  was  applying  for  a
    purpose/reason not covered by other application forms. He explained his
    reason for applying was :

        "I am applying for an extension of my current Tier  1  (post  study
        work) as I am unable to switch into Tier 2 (General) because my new
        employer is unable to give me a certificate  of  sponsorship  until
        their licence is renewed"

13. The problem the appellant  had  was  that  Tier  1  (Post  study  work)
    category closed on April 12,  2012  and  in  any  event  there  was  no
    provision to extend his stay under this category.

14. The appellant did not apply to extend his stay under any other category
    and the respondent therefore treated his application as  a  request  to
    extend his stay outside of the Rules.

15. The FtTJ identified  that  such  a  decision  was  not  an  immigration
    decision and during a court room discussion Mr Quattara  accepted  this
    to be the case.

16. In Ukus  (discretion:  when  reviewable)  [2012]  UKUT  00307(IAC)  the
    Tribunal confirmed that where the decision maker has lawfully exercised
    his discretion and the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to intervene,  i.e.
    because the discretion was a discretion exercised outside of the Rules,
    then there cannot be a right of appeal for the Tribunal to consider.

17. In assessing the grounds of appeal and the permission  I  have  started
    from this position. Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins  was  uncertain  about
    whether there was a right of appeal

18. The application was dealt with under paragraph 322(1) HC 395  and  this
    provides that leave to remain is to be refused where the  variation  is
    sought for a purpose  not  covered  by  these  Rules.  The  Immigration
    Decision referred to this provision and there appears to be no  dispute
    that paragraph 322(1) HC 395 is a mandatory ground of  refusal  and  it
    therefore follows that unless there was something else to be dealt with
    then there was no basis for any appeal.

19. The matter was further complicated  because  in  the  same  decision  a
    removal direction was given under Section 47 of the 2006 Act. The  FtTJ
    recognised that this was an invalid decision but did nothing about it.

20. Accordingly, I find that the substantive application did not attract  a
    right of appeal as it had been mandatory refused under paragraph 322(1)
    HC 395. However, the section 47 removal was an invalid decision and the
    FtTJ should have dealt with this at the hearing. Merely identifying  it
    as an invalid decision does not deal with it.  The  respondent  accepts
    there is a material error in law in respect of this issue.

21. I do make the general observation that this appellant would now  appear
    to meet the Immigration Rules for a Tier 2 application.

    DECISION


22. There is a material error of law only in  respect  of  the  section  47
    removal.  I allow the appeal to the extent that I remit the matter back
    to the respondent for a decision taken on the basis there has  been  no
    valid decision taken in respect of removal.

23. In all other respects I uphold the decision.

24. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.

Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as the main application did not succeed.

Signed:                                        Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
