
IAC-HW-MP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/00671/2014
     IA/00672/2014
     IA/00673/2014
     IA/00675/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19 November 2014               |On 29 December 2014               |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                          CHANNA RAJEEVA KOHOMANGE
             PRASANDA SUDHARSHANI KOHOMANGE HITIHAMY APPHAMILAGE
                         MANJANA MATHEESHA KOHOMANGE
                          SENALI SETHMINI KOHOMANGE
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Martin, Counsel, instructed by Indra Sebastian
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants are all citizens  of  Sri  Lanka.   They  are  the  main
    Appellant, Channa Rajeeva Kohomange born on 18  March  1966,  his  wife
    born on 7 December 1966, and their children, a son born  on  2  January
    1994 and a daughter born on 1 January 2001.  The main  Appellant  first
    arrived in the UK on 19 October 2005 when he was given leave  to  enter
    as a student until 24 March  2007.   He  was  then  granted  successive
    periods of leave to remain as a student nurse, as a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student, and as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant  until  11  November
    2013.  He then applied for further leave to remain on the basis of  his
    family life.  That application was refused for the reasons given  in  a
    Refusal Letter dated 5 December 2013 when the Respondent  also  decided
    to remove the  main  Appellant  under  the  provisions  of  Section  47
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The remaining Appellants are all dependants of the main  appellant  and
    as such received similar decisions.

 3. The Appellants appealed, and their appeals  were  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oliver (the Judge) sitting  at  Richmond  on  29  August
    2014.  He decided to dismiss the appeals under  the  Immigration  Rules
    but to allow them on human rights grounds for the reasons given in  his
    Determination dated 19 September 2014.  The Respondent sought leave  to
    appeal that decision, and  on  14  October  2014  such  permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 4. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge to allow the appeal on
    human rights grounds contained an error on a point of law  so  that  it
    should be set aside.

 5. The Judge allowed the appeal on the basis that it was accepted by  both
    parties that if returned, the family would return to Sri Lanka together
    and therefore removal would not amount to an  interference  with  their
    family life.  However, the Judge considered that such a  removal  would
    amount to a disproportionate breach of the  Appellants'  private  life.
    The Judge attached weight to the fact that the youngest  Appellant  had
    resided in the UK for nearly nine years, having arrived at the age of 4
    years.  He took account of the considerations  to  establish  the  best
    interests of a child as given in  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others  (Decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197.  The Judge decided
    that the circumstances of the Appellants should be  considered  outside
    of the Immigration Rules, and that as none of the factors  set  out  in
    Section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    adversely   affected   the   Appellants,   their   removal   would   be
    disproportionate.

 6. Miss Holmes argued that the Judge had erred in law in  coming  to  this
    conclusion.  She referred to the grounds of application  and  submitted
    that following the decision in R (On the application of Nagre)  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), the Judge had erred in law  by  proceeding  to
    consider the Appellant's human rights outside of the Immigration  Rules
    without first making a finding that there were arguably good grounds in
    the nature of any compelling circumstances  to  do  so.   Further,  the
    Judge had not taken into account  the  decision  in  Nasim  and  Others
    (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC) in respect of private  life  cases,
    and had dealt with the children in the family as if they  were  British
    citizens.

 7. Further, the reasons of the Judge were insufficient  and  contained  no
    real analysis of the Appellants' circumstances.  The Judge  had  failed
    to attach sufficient  weight  to  the  public  interest,  and  had  not
    demonstrated that he had carried out a proper balancing exercise.

 8. In response, Mr Martin referred to the Rule 24 response and argued that
    any error of law was not  material.   This  was  because  the  youngest
    Appellant qualified  for  leave  to  remain  under  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 276ADE(iv) of HC 395.  Considering  her  best  interests,  it
    would not be reasonable for her to  return  to  Sri  Lanka.   This  was
    particularly so  as  she  suffered  from  alopecia.   If  the  youngest
    Appellant was allowed to remain in the UK under this provision, then it
    would be a disproportionate breach of her right to a  family  life  for
    her parents and brother to be removed to Sri Lanka.  Her brother was in
    full-time education in the UK.

 9. I do find an error of law in the decision of the  Judge  to  allow  the
    appeal in  respect  of  all  four  appellants  under  Article  8  ECHR.
    Following the decisions in R (MM and Others) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985
    and R (On the application of Esther Ebun Oludoyi  and  Others)  v  SSHD
    (Article 8 - MM (Lebanon) and Nagre) IJR  [2014]  UKUT  539  (IAC),  it
    cannot  be  successfully  argued  that  the  Judge  erred  in  law   by
    considering the Appellants' Article 8 ECHR rights.  However,  in  doing
    so, the Judge gave insufficient reasons for  his  conclusion  that  the
    Appellants' removal would amount to a disproportionate breach of  their
    right to a private life.  The Judge carried out no adequate analysis of
    the evidence, and paid scant regard to the public interest  represented
    by the need to maintain the economic well-being of the country  through
    effective immigration control.  The Judge did not demonstrate  that  he
    had carried out any sort of balancing exercise  apart  from  a  passing
    reference to the factors contained in Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

10. I therefore set aside the decision of the Judge, and then proceeded  to
    re-make that decision.

Re-made Decision

11. In order to re-make any decision of the Judge,  there  was  no  further
    evidence, but I heard more submissions from  the  representatives.   In
    this connection, Miss Holmes argued that it  would  be  reasonable  for
    this family to return home.  They have had  the  benefit  of  leave  to
    enter and remain, but that had now  expired,  and  as  such  leave  had
    always been limited, the family had no expectation of being allowed  to
    stay.  The family would return to Sri Lanka as a whole.  It  would  not
    be unreasonable for the youngest Appellant to continue her education in
    Sri Lanka.  She had no right to an education in the UK.  There  was  no
    evidence that the youngest Appellant  could  not  be  treated  for  her
    alopecia in Sri Lanka.

12. In response, Mr Martin said that he relied upon what he had said by way
    of submissions earlier.   He  argued  that  I  should  focus  upon  the
    situation of the youngest Appellant.  Looking  at  the  factors  to  be
    considered as given by Azimi-Moayed,  it  would  not  be  in  her  best
    interests and therefore unreasonable for  her  to  be  removed  to  Sri
    Lanka.  The key test for a non-British citizen  child  remaining  on  a
    permanent basis is the length of residence in the UK of that child.

Decision and Reasons

13. I will first consider the situation of the youngest  Appellant,  Senali
    Kohomange, as regards the provisions of Section 276ADE of HC 395.   She
    arrived in the UK with her family on 19 October 2005, at which time she
    was aged 4 years 10 months.  She has  been  resident  in  the  UK  ever
    since, a period which at the date of this hearing amounted to just over
    nine years.  It is evident therefore that this Appellant satisfies  the
    length of residence requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iv).  I  must  now
    consider if it would not be reasonable to expect the youngest Appellant
    to leave the UK and return to Sri Lanka with her family.  To do  so,  I
    will take account of the factors set out in Azimi-Moayed  to  ascertain
    what would be in the best interests of this appellant.

14. It seems to me that the part  of  the  decision  in  Azimi-Moayed  most
    relevant to this appeal states as follows:

         "(iii)   Lengthy residence in a country other  than  the  state  of
              origin can  lead  to  development  of  social,  cultural  and
              educational ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt in
              the absence of  compelling  reason  to  the  contrary.   What
              amounts to lengthy residence is not clear cut  but  past  and
              present policies have identified seven years  as  a  relevant
              period."


15. The youngest appellant has spent just over nine years in the  UK  since
    her arrival at the age  of  4.   According  to  the  evidence,  and  in
    particular the school reports relating to this Appellant, she is  fully
    integrated into UK society.  All of her primary education was  received
    in the UK, and she has now progressed to her secondary education.   She
    has achieved much success at school and has many  friends  there.   She
    participates in school teams.  She has no knowledge  or  experience  of
    the education system in Sri Lanka, and according to her  statement,  no
    recollection of life in Sri Lanka.  She feels at home in the UK.

16. It is in the public interest for the youngest Appellant  to  return  to
    Sri Lanka as she does not otherwise qualify under the Immigration Rules
    for leave to remain.  However, on the evidence before me, I  find  that
    it  would  be  inappropriate  to  disrupt  the  social,  cultural   and
    educational ties which she has developed in the UK and  therefore  that
    it would not be reasonable to expect this Appellant to  return  to  Sri
    Lanka. There are no compelling reasons requiring such  disruption.  She
    therefore qualifies  for  leave  to  remain  under  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 and I re-make the decision in her case so as
    to allow her appeal.

17. I will now consider the appeals of the remaining three Appellants,  all
    brought under the provisions of Article 8 ECHR.  It is not  in  dispute
    that they have a family life  together,  and  also  with  the  youngest
    Appellant. I take her Article 8 ECHR rights into account following  the
    decision in Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39.   Indeed,  her  best  interests
    must  be  treated  as  a  primary  consideration.   I  include  Manjana
    Kohomange as a member of this family unit even though he is  an  adult.
    This is because he remains financially dependent upon his parents as  a
    university student and therefore has a dependency upon them which  goes
    beyond normal emotional ties.

18. I find that little weight is to be attached to the public interest.   I
    accept that these Appellants do not qualify for leave to  remain  under
    the Immigration Rules, but their time in the UK has always been lawful.
     Further, referring to the factors set  out  in  Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  all  these  Appellants
    speak English, and it is clear from the statements that they are  self-
    financing and are not a burden  on  the  taxpayer.   Their  immigration
    status is not precarious because although their leave was  limited,  as
    mentioned above their presence in the UK has always been lawful.   More
    to the point, and referring to Section 117B(vi) of the 2002 Act, it has
    not been disputed that the first two  Appellants  have  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child  being  the
    youngest Appellant who has lived in the UK for a continuous  period  of
    seven years or more.

19. Set against the public interest, in my judgment  the  circumstances  of
    these  Appellants  carries  the  greater  weight.   It   is   not   the
    Respondent's case that this family should  be  split  up,  and  I  have
    already decided that the youngest Appellant has a right to remain under
    the Immigration Rules.  My judgment  is  that  this  family  should  be
    allowed to continue its life in the UK and therefore that it  would  be
    disproportionate to remove them.

20. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law in respect of all Appellants.

21. I set aside those decisions.

22. I re-make the decision in respect of  the  Appellant,  Senali  Sethmini
    Kohomange, by allowing her appeal under the Immigration Rules.   I  re-
    make the decision in respect of the other Appellants by allowing  their
    appeals on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Anonymity

23. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order and I  find  no
    reason to do so.



Signed        Date 29 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have  decided  to  repeat  the  fee
award made by the Judge as the outcome of this appeals is that  the  appeals
remain allowed.



Signed        Date 29 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

