

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00416/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 14th November 2013 & 14th January 2014   |On : 16th January 2014       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             ASWANI KUMAR BOBBA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A. Holmes  & Miss A. Everettt of the Specialist
Appeals Team

For the Respondent:    Mr Edwin Lewis of Acculegal Solicitors


                                DETERMINATION

1.   On 30th November 2012 Mr Bobba's application for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom was refused.  He needed to  have  spent  a
    period of ten continuous years here  with  lawful  leave  in  order  to
    succeed under Part 7 of the Immigration Rules,  but  according  to  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter there were two intervening periods  when  he
    had no leave.  The first ran from 1st July to 7th September  2005,  the
    second from 1st to 8th October 2007.  The refusal to  vary  Mr  Bobba's
    leave was accompanied by a decision to remove him under section  47  of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006, and an appeal against
    those decisions was lodged with the First-tier Tribunal.

2.    After some procedural  complications  the  appeal  came  before  Judge
    Thanki on 12th July 2013.  He allowed the appeal  because  he  regarded
    the time spent here without leave ~ which he took to be 21 days  rather
    than the much longer total set out in the Reasons for Refusal Letter  ~
    to  be  insufficient  to  break  the  continuity  of  residence.    The
    application had also been refused  because  Mr  Bobba  had  an  unspent
    conviction, and it was a requirement of rule 276B(iii) of HC  395  that
    the applicant should  not  have  any  unspent  convictions  within  the
    meaning of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974.  Judge Thanki took
    the view that Mr Bobba's offence was relatively minor (he was fined for
    drink-driving, and disqualified from driving for 15 months), so that to
    refuse his application because his conviction was  not  yet  spent  was
    disproportionate.  Because he was purporting to allow the appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules, the judge did not think it necessary to consider
    the Article 8 issue which was raised in the amended Grounds of Appeal.

3.   This outcome was challenged on behalf of the Secretary of State on  the
    sole basis that, in respect of  the  requirement  to  have  no  unspent
    convictions, the Tribunal had "no power to require  the  respondent  to
    exercise discretion outside of the  Immigration  Rules."   In  granting
    permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Judge  Cox  thought  it
    arguable that paragraph 276B(iii) was "not a provision which calls  for
    an exercise of discretion or,  as  the  Judge  put  it  at  one  point,
    consideration of proportionality."  When the matter came before  me  on
    14th November Mr Lewis did  attempt,  albeit  not  too  vigorously,  to
    contest this point.  It is a bad one.  Paragraph 276D  stipulates  that
    indefinite leave "is to be refused if the Secretary  of  State  is  not
    satisfied that each of the requirements  of  paragraph  276B  is  met."
    Accordingly, the requirement at  paragraph  276B(iii)  is  a  mandatory
    requirement, which the Secretary of State  can  only  disapply  if  she
    departs from the Immigration Rules.  Section 86(6) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  makes  it  clear  that  a  refusal  to
    depart from the Immigration Rules is not the exercise of  a  discretion
    which is amenable to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.

4.   Mr Lewis also sought to rely upon the argument which  he  had  advanced
    before the First-tier Tribunal, namely that  a  requirement  for  leave
    could not be dependent upon something extraneous to the Rules.  But  it
    was clear to me that the principle in Pankina and Alvi,  which  forbids
    requirements for leave to enter or remain  to  be  set  out  in  Policy
    Guidance rather than in the Immigration Rules, does  not  extend  to  a
    requirement made by reference to  primary  legislation.   The  sticking
    point for the Policy Guidance was that it  had  not  been  laid  before
    Parliament.  That cannot be said of  the  Rehabilitation  of  Offenders
    Act.  And as Sedley LJ said at paragraph  26  of  Pankina,  "a  measure
    which has to be laid before Parliament is not vitiated if, rather  than
    being self-contained, it derives part of its content from an extant and
    accessible outside source."  The notion of 'incorporation by  reference
    in legislation' is discussed by Foskett J in  English  UK  [2010]  EWHC
    1726 (Admin), and clearly there is nothing wrong with the reference  to
    the 1974 Act in rule 276B(iii).

5.    But  Mr  Lewis  now  had  an  altogether  different   argument.    The
    requirement to have no unspent convictions was deleted on 13th December
    2012 by HC 760, just two weeks after the decision in the instant  case,
    and was replaced by a requirement that "the applicant does not fall for
    refusal under the general grounds for refusal."  Simultaneously on 13th
    December 2012, a new paragraph 322(1C) was inserted into Part 9 of  the
    Rules, which provides that  a  person  who  has  been  convicted  of  a
    criminal offence but not given a custodial sentence is  to  be  refused
    variation of his leave if his application is made within 24  months  of
    the conviction which earned the  non-custodial  sentence.   Mr  Bobba's
    conviction was 5th November  2009,  more  than  two  years  before  his
    application for ILR on  9th  March  2012.   Had  the  decision  on  his
    application been made on or after 13th December  2012,  it  would  not,
    said Mr Lewis, have been subject to mandatory refusal.

6.   That would, in my view, be a factor to weigh  in  the  balance  if  one
    were considering an Article 8 claim, but it does not enable Mr Bobba to
    succeed under the Rules.  Mr Lewis tried yet another argument.  In  May
    2012 the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment  of  Offenders  Act  2012
    received the Royal Assent, and section 139 amended  the  Rehabilitation
    of Offenders Act 1974 so as to reduce to 12 months the period taken for
    a fine to be 'spent'. Mr Lewis  was  unable  to  say,  at  the  earlier
    hearing, when this section came into force, but it turns  out  to  have
    been on 12th October 2012, although the Rules were  not  amended  until
    13th December.  But he contended that section  141(1)-(2),  which  says
    that section 139 "applies in relation to  convictions  ...  before  the
    commencement  date"  and  that  the  Rehabilitation  of  Offenders  Act
    "applies in relation to convictions or cautions before the commencement
    date as if the amendments and repeals made by section  139  had  always
    had effect", applies  to  his  client.   The  retrospective  effect  of
    section 141 was, according to Mr Lewis,  such  that,  when  Mr  Bobba's
    application was decided in November last year, even if  it  was  before
    LASPO was in force (about which we were not  sure  at  the  time),  his
    conviction had long  ago  been  spent,  because  his  fine  incurred  a
    rehabilitation period of only one year.

7.   Miss Holmes did not think that such an interpretation  of  section  141
    could be right, and Mr Lewis could not cite any authority  to  back  up
    his interpretation.  There was also the problem  that  section  140  of
    LASPO inserted a new section 56A into the UK Borders Act  2007,  headed
    "no rehabilitation for certain immigration  or  nationality  purposes",
    and one of these purposes is a decision on leave to  remain  under  the
    Rules.  It seemed possible that 140  cancelled  out  any  effect  which
    section 141 might have on the present appeal.

8.   The best course seemed to be to adjourn the appeal  so  that  Mr  Lewis
    could consider whether he should continue  to  advance  the  contention
    that his client was eligible for indefinite leave under the Rules.   If
    he was not, he was entitled in any event to a decision on his Article 8
    claim, which was left undetermined by the First-tier Tribunal.

9.   When the hearing resumed today, the Secretary of State was  represented
    by  Miss  Everett,  who  handed  up  a  copy  of  section  4   of   the
    Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974.  This sets  out  the  'effect  of
    rehabilitation', namely that  a  person  whose  conviction  has  become
    'spent' under the Act need never admit to having had such a conviction,
    except in circumstances provided for  by  order  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.  I already had a copy of Chapter 8 of the Legal Aid,  Sentencing
    and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 ('LASPO'), section  139  of  which
    amends the 1974 Act so as, inter alia,  to  reduce  the  rehabilitation
    period for a fine (as incurred by Mr Bobba)  from  five  years  to  one
    year.  But section 140 inserts a new section 56A into  the  UK  Borders
    Act  2007,  headed  'No  rehabilitation  for  certain  immigration   or
    nationality purposes'.  This means that, for the purpose of deciding an
    application for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules, as  in  Mr
    Bobba's case, it matters not that  a  previous  conviction  has  become
    'spent'.  The Secretary of State may still take it into account for the
    purposes of the General Grounds of Refusal, which have taken the  place
    of references to the Rehabilitation of  Offenders  Act  throughout  the
    Immigration Rules.

10.   Where  does  that  leave  Mr  Bobba?   Section  141  of  LASPO   makes
    transitional and consequential provisions, and  Mr  Lewis  had  already
    drawn attention to subsections (1) and (2),  which  give  retrospective
    effect to section 139.  But the fact that Mr Bobba's conviction was  to
    be regarded as spent before he  made  his  application  for  indefinite
    leave would not avail him if  section  140  prevented  him  from  being
    regarded as rehabilitated.

11.  Fortunately for Mr Bobba, subsection (9) of section 141  comes  to  his
    rescue.  This says that section 140 "does not affect -
         (b) any applications for immigration or nationality decisions made
         but not finally determined before the commencement date."


12.  Mr Bobba's application was made in January and  re-submitted  in  March
    2012, i.e. before the commencement date of 1st October  2012,  but  the
    application was only decided on 30th  November  2012,  i.e.  after  the
    commencement date.   So  for  the  purposes  of  his  application,  the
    rehabilitation provisions of the 1974 Act were still to be applied, and
    by virtue of section 139 of LASPO the  rehabilitation  period  for  his
    conviction was only one year, not five.  The upshot is  that,  although
    paragraph 276B(iii) of HC 395 still required, at the date  of  decision
    in Mr Bobba's case, that "the applicant  does  not  have  one  or  more
    unspent  convictions  within  the  meaning  of  the  Rehabilitation  of
    Offenders Act 1974", Mr Bobba did in fact have no unspent  convictions,
    because the fine imposed on him in  2009  had  become  spent  in  2010,
    thanks to the retrospective changes wrought to the 1974 Act by  section
    139 of LASPO.  These changes were in force from 1st October  2012,  and
    hence at the date of decision on 30th November 2012.

13.  It turns out therefore that Judge Thanki reached the  right  conclusion
    for the wrong reasons.  It was not a question of Mr  Bobba  failing  to
    meet the requirement of rule  276B(iii)  and  the  Secretary  of  State
    failing  to  exercise  discretion  in  his  favour,  resulting   in   a
    disproportionately harsh decision.  As explained above,  there  was  no
    discretion  to  be  exercised.   Mr  Bobba  did  actually  satisfy  the
    requirement of rule 276B(iii), because by  the  date  of  decision  his
    conviction fell to be treated as having become spent in November 2010.

14.  Rather than holding that the First-tier Tribunal made a material  error
    of law requiring the decision on the appeal to be re-made by the  Upper
    Tribunal, I think it is simpler to say that there was an error of  law,
    but it was not material to the outcome, so that the First-tier decision
    stands.  In closing  I  would  just  apologise  to  Mr  Lewis  for  the
    inconvenience caused by his having to apply for an adjournment  of  the
    second hearing, which was originally listed for 2nd January.  I had  in
    fact left a note on the file that the case was not to be listed  before
    5th January, but the note appears to have been overlooked.



     DECISION

     The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                           14th January 2014

                                    [pic]
