

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00902/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal  |Decision & Reasons promulgated    |
|on 24 October 2017                       |on 27 October 2017                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               HARPREET BANGER
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr R H Rashid instructed by Murria Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr D Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Aziz promulgated on 4 January 2017 in which the Judge dismissed the
        appellant's appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  and  outside  the
        Rules pursuant to articles 3 and 8 ECHR.



Background


     2. The appellant is a national of India born on 6  February  1985  who
        entered the United Kingdom on 20  October  2010  as  the  dependent
        partner of his wife, a Tier 4 student.  The  applicants  leave  was
        valid to 29 February 2012.  On  27  February  2012,  the  applicant
        applied for leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules which was
        refused on 29 October 2012  and  an  appeal  against  the  decision
        dismissed. An appeal to the Upper Tribunal was partially successful
        in that the appeal  was  allowed  to  the  limited  extent  it  was
        returned to the respondent for a lawful  removal  direction  to  be
        made with all other findings being preserved.
     3. The respondent, instead of just making a lawful removal  direction,
        is said to  have  revisited  the  entire  application  and  in  the
        decision dated 29 January 2016 refused the application for leave to
        remain on private  and  family  life  grounds,  against  which  the
        appellant appealed.
     4. The preserved findings from the determination  of  original  First-
        tier Tribunal, Judge P Clark, was summarised in the decision of the
        Upper Tribunal in the following terms:


         4. Judge Clarke analysed the evidence in detail in paragraphs 9  to
            11 of his determination  before  setting  out  his  findings  at
            paragraphs 17 to 33 which can be summarised as follows:


             i.   That the Judge was not being told the whole  truth  about
                  the situation of the appellant and  his  prospects  if  he
                  were returned to India. Paragraph 17.


             ii.  That the appellant's family were doing all they could  to
                  try to ensure that he remained in the UK. Paragraph 17.


             iii. That the appellant's marriage has  broken  down  although
                  the Judge did not consider it necessary to  determine  the
                  precise cause of the breakdown. The appellant and his wife
                  lived together in  India  for  a  few  years  before  they
                  arrived in the  United  Kingdom;  although  did  not  live
                  together for more than a few days, weeks at most, in  this
                  country after his arrival. Paragraph 18 (i).


             iv.  Shortly after arrival the appellant moved  to  live  with
                  his  parents  and    brother  in  Coventry  where  he  has
                  remained, bar a short  period  after  an  assault  by  the
                  appellant on his father, when he was advised to leave  the
                  property; although the accounts of this were found  to  be
                  infected  by  significant  discrepancies   and   to   lack
                  credibility.  Paragraph  18   (ii)   with   reference   to
                  paragraphs 9 (xxiii) and 10 (xxv).


             v.   The appellant's employment with Foleshill Metal Finishing
                  Co ended on 23rd October 2012 although his claim  to  have
                  been dismissed was not accepted. Paragraph 18  (iii)  with
                  reference to paragraph 9 (xxv).


             vi.  The claim the appellant has no ties to India was found to
                  be inaccurate for  two  reasons:  (1)  the  oral  evidence
                  showed there are a considerable number of  family  members
                  in India. The evidence did not support a claim they  could
                  not help the  appellant  in  various  ways  if  necessary.
                  Paragraph 18 (v) with reference to paragraph 9 (xxxi)  and
                  (xxxiv).


             vii. (2) Although no mention was made in a  witness  statement
                  about the     appellant's family owning a house in  India,
                  divergences in the evidence  regarding  ownership  of  the
                  property and three accounts about when  the  property  was
                  allegedly sold, meant Judge Clarke was  not  satisfied  it
                  had been sold at all. Paragraph 18 (v) with  reference  to
                  paragraph 9 (ix).


             viii.    There are number of aspects of Dr Maganty's report of
                  concern. It was unclear how much of the  report  is  based
                  upon his own diagnosis and how much was reliance upon what
                  he been told during the consultation  with  the  appellant
                  during  which  he  was  accompanied  by  his  parents  and
                  brother. Paragraph 18 (vi).


             ix.  Dr Maganty indicates the appellant may harm  himself  and
                  others but does   not explain fully why  this  is  so  and
                  what material he relies upon for stating  that.  Paragraph
                  18 (vi).


             x.   The diagnosis of  an  underlying  depressive  illness  is
                  difficult to reconcile with the evidence  of  his  parents
                  and brother. The only reference to suicidal tendencies  as
                  distinct from self harm is from the appellant  himself  as
                  this phrase is not used by Dr Maganty. Paragraph 18 (vi).


             xi.  The appellant claims to have private life  but  the  only
                  documentary   evidence is a letter from the local  temple.
                  His brother claimed he has no friends and did not say that
                  he previously had friends but no longer did. Paragraph  18
                  (vii) with reference to paragraph 9 (xxviii)  and  (xxxii)
                  above.


             xii.  The  respondent's  submission  that  the  marriage   was
                  concocted and used as a device to enable the appellant  to
                  enter the United Kingdom as a means  of  enabling  him  to
                  remain  here  is  not  supported  by  adequate   evidence.
                  Paragraph 18 (viii).


             xiii.    The appellant lives with his parents and his  brother
                  and there are ties  between  them  although  much  of  the
                  material  relating  to  the  ties  was  based   upon   the
                  appellant's  needs  as  an   individual   suffering   from
                  depression. Paragraph 22.


             xiv. The appellant is 27,  was  living  with  his  mother  and
                  brother in India before they came  to  the  UK,  lived  in
                  India with his wife for about a year, and has  only  lived
                  with his parents for the last two years or so. Taking  all
                  matters cumulatively it was not accepted that there was  a
                  family life between the appellant and his family  members.
                  Paragraph 22.


             xv.  It is accepted the appellant has developed  private  life
                  in the United Kingdom although  on  the  evidence  he  has
                  little contact outside his family. Paragraph 24.


               xvi.      The  principal  claim  relies  upon   his   medical
   condition. Paragraph 25.


             xvii.    Judge Clarke did not consider  the  appellant  was  a
                  suicide risk      although it  is  accepted  there  was  a
                  possibility he may self harm. It  is      accepted  he  is
                  depressed although there was  no  clear  evidence  he  was
                  actually   receiving   treatment   save   for   prescribed
                  medication, although if he tried  to  obtain  it  he  will
                  obtain such treatment. Paragraph 29.


             xviii.   Facilities for treating mental health  are  available
                  in India although it is accepted they may not  be  to  the
                  same standard as that available  in  the  United  Kingdom.
                  Paragraph 30.


             xix. The respondent's decision would not  affect  the  private
                  life of the appellant on return to India  where  he  could
                  receive medical treatment and where his private life could
                  be carried on. Paragraph 32 (i).


             xx.   In  the  alternative,  if   the   issue   was   one   of
                  proportionality, taking into    account the length of  the
                  appellant's stay in the United  Kingdom,  his   depressive
                  illness, the availability of medical treatment  in  India,
                  the  presence of relatives, the fact he  may  be  able  to
                  work in the future, the fact he is a graduate, the fact he
                  has worked as a sweet maker in India and in a  factory  in
                  the United Kingdom which is indicative of an education and
                  willingness to undertake  a  range  of  jobs,  and  little
                  evidence of his private life, the Secretary of  State  had
                  shown the decision was proportionate. Paragraph 32 (iv).


             xxi. That although Article 3 was not mentioned in submissions,
                  the      circumstances the appeal fall far  short  of  the
                  high threshold in N v UK (2008) 47 EHRR 885. Paragraph 33.




         5. The Judge was entitled to take as a starting point the  previous
            decision. The Judge sets out in detail the appellant's case  and
            applicable legal  provisions  and  has  clearly  considered  the
            evidence with the  required  degree  of  anxious  scrutiny.  The
            appellant's case relied on before the Judge was largely the same
            as that put forward before Judge Clarke.
         6. Judge Aziz sets out the findings of  fact  in  relation  to  the
            December 2016 appeal, relevant points of which can be summarised
            in the following terms:


                  a. The factual basis of the appellant's family and private
                     life claim is largely the same as that put  forward  in
                     the previous appeal [61 - 62].
                  b. Since the hearing before Judge Clarke the appellant has
                     accrued a further 3 � years private and family life  in
                     the United Kingdom [72].
                  c. Since the decision of Judge Clarke there have been  two
                     instances of the appellant having been sectioned  under
                     the Mental Health Act 1983 on 30 January 2013 and on 23
                     May 2015 [73].
                  d. Judge Clarke had considered medical evidence suggesting
                     that the appellant's mental health would stabilise over
                     the  next  year  and  that  he  could  even  return  to
                     employment which has been  shown  to  be  an  incorrect
                     prognosis in light  of  what  has  happened  since  the
                     appeal  hearing.  Not  only  has  the  appellant   been
                     sectioned twice but the  report  of  a  Dr  Elanjithara
                     makes it clear the appellant's condition is  much  more
                     serious than had originally been thought and he has not
                     recovered within the anticipated one-year period [76].
                  e. Whilst accepting the observations in respect of the two
                     occasions the appellant was sectioned and the  findings
                     of Dr Elanjithara in his April 2013 report,  there  was
                     no up-to-date psychiatric/medical report which put  the
                     First-tier Tribunal in a difficult position when making
                     any sort of reliable findings  as  to  the  appellant's
                     current diagnosis, his current medication, his  current
                     treatment (if any), and his prognosis [77].
                  f.  The  observations  in  [77]  were  accepted   by   the
                     appellant's representative who referred the  First-tier
                     Tribunal to a number  of  documents  including  letters
                     from the appellant's GP dated 2  November  2015  and  4
                     November 2016 which reaffirmed the  appellant  has  the
                     same condition, depressive psychosis, for which  he  is
                     on regular medication, and  that  he  was  not  fit  to
                     attend the court or tribunal hearing [78].
                  g.   The   Judge   carefully   considered   the    medical
                     evidence/notes contained in the appellant's bundle  all
                     of which were taken into account [79].
                  h. The Judge accepted the  prognosis  made  regarding  the
                     appellant's mental health in  the  earlier  psychiatric
                     report was wrong when concluding  the  appellant  could
                     potentially recover from his  mental  health  condition
                     and return to work in a 12-month period [80].
                  i. At [82 - 83] the Judge finds:


                      82.  Therefore, apart from  the  psychiatric  reports
                           which are now several years old, the Tribunal has
                           before it to the testimony of the witnesses and a
                           limited amount  of  medical  correspondence/notes
                           appertaining  to  the  appellant  having  ongoing
                           treatment for his mental health issues.  However,
                           this evidence is scant  and  lacking  in  detail.
                           There is also no country information  as  to  the
                           availability or otherwise of healthcare in India.
                           I remind myself that the burden of proof is  upon
                           the appellant to establish each and every  aspect
                           of this case.


                      83.  Therefore, whilst I am prepared to  accept  that
                           the appellant's  prognosis  may  have  been  more
                           severe and long-lasting than had been  originally
                           anticipated when the  First-tier  Tribunal  heard
                           his first appeal in early 2013, the absence of an
                           up-to-date   medical/psychiatric   report    puts
                           Tribunal in some difficulty in making any sort of
                           reliable assessment as to the  current  state  of
                           his mental health, his prognosis and severity  of
                           his suicidal ideation as of the date of  hearing.
                           As commented, there is also  a  lack  of  country
                           information or  objective  evidence  as  to  what
                           level of  health  care  and  medication  will  be
                           available in India to deal with  the  appellant's
                           mental health issues.


                  j. The Judge reminded himself the  previous  Tribunal  had
                     disbelieved the appellant's  parents  claims  that  the
                     appellant would not have any family support or home  to
                     return to in India. Two witnesses who gave evidence  on
                     this issue had given evidence at the previous  hearing.
                     That evidence was not found to be credible.  There  was
                     nothing presented to the Judge which led that  Tribunal
                     to conclude that it could depart from the  findings  of
                     the previous Tribunal [84].
                  k. The Judge noted the appellant relied on  paragraph  276
                     ADE(vi) [86].
                  l. In [87] the Judge finds:


                      87.  In light of my findings at  paragraph  80  -  84
                           above, I am.  not persuaded  that  the  appellant
                           has  been  able  to  establish  that  there   are
                           insurmountable obstacles to his integration  into
                           India if  he  were  returned.  He  is  an  Indian
                           national and has resided in the country  for  the
                           majority of his life. The previous Tribunal  made
                           findings that he has a home to return to and that
                           there would be family members  who  could  assist
                           him. He can continue to be financially  supported
                           by his father from the UK.


                  m. The appeal could not succeed under Article  3  ECHR  on
                     the basis of the evidence made available [88].
                  n. In the alternative, taking the appellant's case at  its
                     highest and accepting the severity of his condition has
                     proved to be worse than that predicted at the  previous
                     hearing, the appellant would struggle to meet the  high
                     threshold set out by the Article 3 case law [89].
                  o. The appellant does not meet  the  requirements  of  the
                     Immigration Rules in relation to article 8 [90].
                  p. When considering article 8 ECHR,  it  is  accepted  the
                     appellant has a family and private life in  the  United
                     Kingdom, it is accepted the degree of  interference  is
                     sufficient to engage article 8. The issue was  that  of
                     the proportionality of the decision. [91 - 93].
                  q. Section 117B Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
                     2002 applies [95].
                  r. Considering whether the countervailing public  interest
                     in removal will be outweighed by the  consequences  for
                     the health of the applicant  because  of  disparity  of
                     healthcare, this was not shown to be one of those cases
                     that fell in the appellant's favour [96].
                  s. The appellant cannot succeed under article 3 or 8 ECHR.


         7. At [98] the Judge makes an observation in the following terms:


                  98.  Whilst the appellant's appeal  cannot  succeed  under
                      the Immigration Rules or Articles 3 and  8  ECHR  for
                      the reasons set out above, I still have some level of
                      sympathy for the appellant and his parents and I find
                      that there are  compassionate  circumstances  in  the
                      appellant's  case  (even   if   those   compassionate
                      circumstances fall short  of  his  appeal  succeeding
                      outside of the Immigration Rules). If  the  appellant
                      is able to submit to  the  respondent  an  up-to-date
                      psychiatric report detailing his diagnosis, treatment
                      and prognosis, then I would not seek to dissuade them
                      from considering that evidence and look into granting
                      the  appellant  some  form  of  discretionary   leave
                      outside  the  Immigration  Rules   on   compassionate
                      grounds.  As  indicated,  there   are   compassionate
                      circumstances  in  this  case   despite   the   above
                      findings. However, I fully recognise that  it  cannot
                      compel the respondent to grant the appellant any such
                      leave. It will be a matter entirely at the discretion
                      of the respondent.


         8.  The  above  observations  do  not  introduce  any  element   of
            contradiction in  the  decision  under  challenge  as  the  core
            finding of the Judge is  clearly  that  the  appellant  has  not
            established any arguable basis for being permitted to remain  in
            the United Kingdom either under or outside the Rules.
         9. Despite the Judge referring to the poor quality of the  evidence
            provided in support of this appeal in relation to the appellants
            health issues, Mr Rashid advised the Upper Tribunal  that  there
            was  still  no  up-to-date  report   available   detailing   the
            appellants current situation.
        10. Permission to appeal was sought and initially refused by another
            judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  granted  on  a  renewed
            application by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on limited grounds  on
            the basis "it is on balance arguable that the judge erred in his
            evaluation of the claim in respect of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi),
            as contended in the grounds and as a consequence it is  arguable
            that the judge's decision contains an error or errors of law".




Error of law


        11. The pleaded error in relation to paragraph 276  ADE  relates  to
            the wording of the decision. The relevant paragraphs are  [86  -
            87]. Paragraph 87 is set out above in which the Judge finds  the
            appellant  has  not   been   able   to   establish   there   are
            insurmountable obstacles to his integration into India if he was
            to be returned. The correct test is that set out at  [86]  where
            the Judge states:


                  86.   Immigration  Rules:  the   appellant   relies   upon
                      paragraph 276ADE(vi); that he is  aged  18  years  or
                      above, has lived continuously in the UK for less than
                      20 years (discounting any  period  of  imprisonment),
                      but there would be very significant obstacles to  the
                      appellant's integration into the country to which  he
                      would have to go if required to leave the UK.


        12. It is submitted on the appellant's behalf that the Judge applied
            an  incorrect  test  when  assessing  whether  very  significant
            obstacles to the appellant's  integration  existed  rather  than
            whether there were insurmountable obstacles.
        13. In Treebhawon  and  Others  (NIAA  2002  Part  5A  -  compelling
            circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC) it was held  that  mere
            hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles, mere upheaval and  mere
            inconvenience, even where multiplied, are  unlikely  to  satisfy
            the test of "very significant hurdles" in paragraph 276  ADE  of
            the Immigration Rules.
        14. The term insurmountable obstacles  appears  in  the  Immigration
            Rules (in relation to Article 8)  under  Appendix  FM  paragraph
            EX.1.  It was held in Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11 that the definition
            of  "insurmountable  obstacles"  at  EX.2   as   meaning   "very
            significant difficulties which would be faced by  the  applicant
            or their  partner  in  continuing  their  family  life  together
            outside the UK and which could not be overcome or  would  entail
            very serious hardship for the applicant or  their  partner"  was
            consistent with Strasbourg case law.  The court referred to  the
            case of Jeunesse v  Netherlands.   Leave  to  remain  would  not
            normally be granted in cases where an  applicant  for  leave  to
            remain under the partner route  was  in  the  UK  in  breach  of
            immigration laws, unless the applicant or  their  partner  would
            face "insurmountable obstacles" (as defined) in continuing their
            family life together outside the UK.  Even in a case where  such
            difficulties did not exist leave to remain could nevertheless be
            granted  outside  the  rules  (according   to   the   IDIs)   in
            "exceptional circumstances" i.e. "circumstances in which refusal
            would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for   the
            individual such that refusal of the  application  would  not  be
            proportionate".  The rules and  IDIs  together  were  compatible
            with  Article  8.   This  was  not  to  say  that  decisions  in
            individual cases would necessarily be compatible with Article 8.
             "Exceptional circumstances" did  not  mean  that  a  unique  or
            unusual feature  was  to  be  sought  and  in  its  absence  the
            application rejected.  A proportionality test had to be  carried
            out.  A court or tribunal considering whether a refusal of leave
            to remain was compatible  with  Article  8  in  the  context  of
            precarious family life had to decide  whether  the  refusal  was
            proportionate in the particular case before  it,  balancing  the
            strength of the public interest in the removal of the person  in
            question against the impact on  private  and  family  life.   In
            doing so, whilst also considering all factors  relevant  to  the
            specific case in question, it should give appropriate weight  to
            the Secretary of State's policy,  expressed  in  the  rules  and
            instructions, that the public interest  in  immigration  control
            can be outweighed, when considering an application for leave  to
            remain brought by a person in the UK in  breach  of  immigration
            laws,  only  where  there  are  "insurmountable  obstacles"   or
            "exceptional circumstances" as defined. "The critical issue will
            generally be whether, giving due weight to the strength  of  the
            public interest in the removal of the person in the case  before
            it, the article 8 claim is sufficiently strong to  outweigh  it.
            In general, in cases concerned with precarious  family  life,  a
            very strong or compelling claim  is  required  to  outweigh  the
            public interest in immigration control".
        15. Whilst it is  accepted  that  the  terminology  relates  to  two
            separate aspects of the Immigration Rules  and  that  the  Judge
            while setting out the correct  wording  in  [86]  sets  out  the
            incorrect phrasing in [87], the real question is whether this is
            a typographical error rather  than  a  misunderstanding  of  the
            correct legal test and application of the same.
        16. The Judge was clearly aware that the correct test was  the  very
            significant obstacles test. The Judge  was  clearly  aware  that
            this test could not be satisfied on the basis of mere  hardship,
            mere  difficulty,  mere  hurdles,   mere   upheaval   and   mere
            inconvenience. It is necessary to read the decision as  a  whole
            to ascertain the Judge's findings. The finding  is  that  having
            weighed up the previous determination,  the  medical  and  other
            evidence  made  available  and  representations  made   by   the
            appellant's advocate, the appellant had not established he could
            satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276ADE (vi) as he had  not
            established  there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
            integration into India.
        17. Mr Mills submitted that despite the different wording the  tests
            were, effectively, the same and that  any  discussion  that  has
            arisen arises as a result of the  respondents  decision  to  use
            different wording in the Immigration Rules.  The  Supreme  Court
            have found that the definition of "insurmountable obstacles"  at
            EX.2 as meaning "very significant difficulties  which  would  be
            faced by the applicant or  their  partner  in  continuing  their
            family life together outside the  UK  and  which  could  not  be
            overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the applicant
            or their partner".   There  is  therefore  an  arguable  overlap
            between very significant obstacles and insurmountable obstacles.


        18. Having considered  the  findings  made  by  the  Judge  and  the
            arguments put to the Upper Tribunal I conclude the appellant has
            failed to make out legal  error  material  to  the  decision  to
            dismiss the appeal. Whilst the wording in [87] is  wrong,  which
            admits of finding of legal error, it has not been  made  out  to
            Judge applied an incorrect test or that that error is based on a
            misunderstanding of what that test should be for this is clearly
            set out in [86], or that the Judge having set  out  the  correct
            test then completely ignored it. The evidence as a whole clearly
            shows the Judge found there were no very  significant  obstacles
            to the appellant's integration into India on the  basis  of  the
            evidence relied upon before the First-tier Tribunal. This is  an
            arguably sustainable finding.


Decision

    19. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    20. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 24 October 2017












