
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA004772015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 April 2016                       |On 10 June 2016                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                            Muhammed Abdul Kuduse

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Shah of Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born on 29 June  1988.
    It is accepted that he entered the United Kingdom on 1 April 2001 (when
    he was 12 years of age) using a fraudulently obtained passport.   On  5
    August  2011,  he  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain.    That
    application  was  refused  on  24  October  2011  but  he  was  granted
    discretionary leave outside the Immigration Rules (HC 395  as  amended)
    until 23 October 2014.

 2. On 1 October 2014, the  appellant  applied  for  an  extension  of  his
    discretionary leave.  In that application, the appellant  set  out  his
    immigration  history  and  his  circumstances  including  his  on-going
    business activities.

 3. On 12 December 2014, the Secretary of State refused his application for
    further leave and made a decision to remove him by way of directions to
    Bangladesh under s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  Act
    2006.  The basis of that refusal, outside the  Immigration  Rules,  was
    that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not  satisfied  that  there  were
    "compelling circumstances".

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    dated 5 August 2014, Judge Britton dismissed the appellant's appeal  on
    the basis that the appellant had failed to establish a breach of Art  8
    of the ECHR.

 5. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    principally on the basis that the Secretary of State (and the judge  on
    appeal) had failed to consider  the  application  of  the  respondent's
    policy in respect  of  extensions  of  discretionary  leave  which,  at
    chapter 10 under the heading "Transitional Arrangements",  states  that
    the policy applied to applications to extend discretionary leave  which
    had been granted before 9 July 2012.

 6. On 30 November 2015, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge E B Grant)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal on the  basis  that  the  judge  had
    arguably erred in law by failing to consider whether  the  respondent's
    decision was not in accordance with the law because she had  failed  to
    apply her discretionary leave policy as applicable  by  virtue  of  the
    "Transitional Arrangements" provisions in Chapter 10.

 7. On 7th December 2015, the Secretary of State filed a Rule  24  response
    in which she, in effect, accepted that the discretionary  leave  policy
    was applicable in principle to the appellant but sought to  argue  that
    the outcome could be no different as  the  appellant  fell  within  the
    "criminality and exclusion" section as  a  result  of  his  immigration
    history.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me.

 9. I briefly heard submissions from both  Mr  Shah,  who  represented  the
    appellant and Mr Richards who  represented  the  respondent.   Mr  Shah
    maintained the  grounds  of  appeal  upon  which  permission  had  been
    granted.

10. Mr Richards accepted that the judge's decision could not stand  as  the
    Secretary of State had  failed  to  consider  the  application  of  the
    discretionary leave policy which applied to the  appellant  as  he  had
    been granted discretionary leave before 9  July  2012.   In  turn,  the
    judge had failed to consider whether the respondent's decision was  not
    in accordance with the law.  Mr Richards did not  seek  to  uphold  the
    judge's decision on the basis that any error was immaterial because the
    "criminality and exclusion" section would apply to the  appellant.   He
    acknowledged that that had not been  considered  by  the  Secretary  of
    State and he submitted that the appropriate course was  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision and substitute
    a decision that  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse  the
    appellant's further leave made on 9 December 2014 was not in accordance
    with the law.

11. Having taken instructions, Mr Shah was content that I should  determine
    the appeal on that basis.

Decision

12. For the reasons, conceded by the Secretary of State in this appeal, the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
    involved the making of an error of law.  That decision is set aside.

13. I remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal on the basis that
    the Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with the law.

14. The effect of that decision is that  the  appellant's  application  for
    further leave made on 1 October 2014  remains  outstanding  before  the
    Secretary of State awaiting a lawful  decision  applying  the  relevant
    discretionary leave policy.  Although there has been no excessive delay
    since the application was made in October 2014,  given  the  period  of
    time that has passed I simply express the hope that  the  Secretary  of
    State will be able to make a new decision on that application  as  soon
    as possible.




                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                         Date 10th June 2016

