
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00973/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th of February 2018             |On 21st  February 2018               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                                MR FAHAD ALI
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    The Appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 24th of April  1989.  He
    appeals against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Green
    sitting at Taylor House on 2nd of June 2017 which was  to  dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated  19th  of
    January 2016.  That decision was to refuse to  grant  the  Appellant  a
    residence card as an extended family member of an EEA national Sponsor.

 2. The application was refused by the Respondent pursuant to Regulation  8
    (extended family members) of the 2006 EEA Regulations.  The  Respondent
    indicated that she was not satisfied that the Appellant  was  dependent
    and/or residing with his EEA Sponsor.

 3. On appeal the Judge held that there was no right of appeal against  the
    Respondent's decision following the Upper Tribunal  authority  of  Sala
    [2016] UKUT 411. That decision held that where an applicant was  making
    an application for a residence card  under  Regulation  8  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006 as an extended family member the Regulations  did  not
    give a right of appeal because there was no entitlement to a  residence
    card by an  applicant  under  Regulation  8,  it  was  a  discretionary
    provision.

 4. Subsequently that decision was overturned by the Court of Appeal in the
    case of MK (Pakistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1755. The Court of  Appeal  found
    that on their true construction the 2006 Regulations did provide for  a
    right of appeal for those claiming under  Regulation  8.  Although  the
    judgement in MK was handed down on  9th  of  November  2017  some  five
    months after the First-tier Tribunal hearing in this case  because  the
    decision was to find that the 2006 Regulations had always provided  for
    a  right  of  appeal  the  First-tier  decision  in   this   case   was
    retrospectively invalidated.

 5. The Appellant  appealed  the  dismissal  of  his  appeal  for  want  of
    jurisdiction and permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Parkes on 13th of December  2017  on  the  basis  of  the
    clarification of the meaning of the 2006 Regulations in MK.

 6. When the matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  there  was  a
    material error  of  law  in  the  determination,  I  indicated  that  I
    considered there was because as a result of  the  decision  in  MK  the
    Judge's decision could not stand. Neither party disputed that.

 7. Both parties agreed that the correct course of action was to remit this
    appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings  preserved  for
    the matter to be re-determined. I therefore set aside the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal on the grounds of a material error of law and I
    remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal to be  reheard  with  no
    findings preserved. Any further evidence the Appellant wishes to adduce
    to support the claim for dependency and/or residence  should  be  filed
    and served at least 21 days before the First-tier rehearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it aside. I remit  the  appeal  back  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal, Taylor House to be reheard by any Judge other than Judge Green.

Appellant's appeal allowed to the extent stated

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 19th of February 2018

Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I set aside the decision not to make a fee award in this  case.  That  issue
will also have to be re-determined by the First-tier.


Signed this 19th of February 2018

Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

