
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/00048/2015
                                                               IA/00051/2015
                                                               IA/00190/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 October 2015                   |On 27 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                               Ms Hardeep Kaur
                               Mr Mohar Singh
                            Miss Milanpreet Sran
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Maqsood, Pride Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are all citizens of India.  I  shall  refer  to  Hardeep
    Kaur as the appellant. She  and  her  husband  Mohar  Singh  and  their
    daughter Milanpreet Sran are dependent on her application.

2.   The appellant made an application on 1 August 2014 to  vary  her  leave
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  This application  was  refused  by  the
    respondent in a decision of 14 November 2014.  The reason  for  refusal
    is that according to the respondent the sponsor Zaskin College wrote to
    UKBA indicating that they have withdrawn the offer of  sponsorship  and
    are no longer willing to sponsor the appellant.  The appellant appealed
    against the decision and her appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Fox in a decision that was promulgated  on  3  June  2015
    following a hearing  on  27  May  2015.  The  appellants  were  granted
    permission to appeal by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal R A Cox  in  a
    decision of 21 August 2015.

3.   At the hearing before the First-tier  the  appellant  was  represented.
    The respondent was not.  At the start of the  hearing  the  appellant's
    representative Mr Malik made an application to adjourn the  hearing  on
    the basis that the appellant was  unwell.   This  was  supported  by  a
    letter from her doctor.  The judge refused the application.  The reason
    for this was that in his view the appeal rests on documentary  evidence
    to demonstrate the existence  of  a  valid  CAS  at  the  date  of  the
    application.  He also stated that there was no evidence to  demonstrate
    that the appellant would be able to attend any future hearing and  that
    the appellant had been given adequate time to  prepare  a  bundle.   He
    went on to dismiss the appeal under the Rules and under Article 8.   4.
    There was a witness statement  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
    repeated what was asserted in the grounds of appeal,  namely  that  the
    sponsor cancelled the appellant's sponsorship due to non-payment of the
    registration fee and that the application was refused  because  of  the
    college's negligence.

4.   The grounds before the First-tier Tribunal are poorly drafted  but  are
    essentially a witness statement from the appellant. There  was  also  a
    separate witness statement from the appellant. It  is  clear  from  the
    grounds and the appellant's witness  statement  that  fairness  was  an
    issue as was whether or not  the  respondent  had  properly  applied  a
    policy (although no policy  was  identified  by  the  appellant).   The
    grounds seeking leave to appeal challenge the substantive decision  but
    also challenge the decision to refuse to adjourn the hearing.

5.   At the hearing before me I heard  oral  submissions.   Mr  Maqsood  had
    prepared a skeleton argument and  relied  on  fairness  and  Mr  Clarke
    conceded that the decision by the Secretary of State was  discretionary
    and that there was no indication in the decision letter that discretion
    had been considered by the respondent.  However, in his view  this  was
    not material because the appellant had conceded in  her  evidence  that
    she was responsible for the withdrawal of the CAS because she  had  not
    paid a registration fee which led to  the  withdrawal  of  sponsorship.
    She would not therefore benefit from  the  policy  referred  to  by  Mr
    Clarke at the hearing.

6.   The appellant through her representative argued  that  the  appellant's
    evidence as indicated in her witness statement was that the decision of
    the college to withdraw the CAS was erroneous.  She did not accept that
    she had not paid a registration fee and in any event she was  not  told
    about the withdrawal of the CAS. She had discovered this on receipt  of
    the Home Office's decision.

7.   Mr Clarke submitted that if I accepted  the  appellant's  argument  and
    the decision is set aside, it would be appropriate to conclude that  it
    is not in accordance with the law  because  the  policy  had  not  been
    applied.

8.   Whilst it is true that the judge  did  not  consider  fairness,  it  is
    clear from the Reasons for Refusal Letter that in fact  the  respondent
    had  not  properly  considered  whether  the  policy  applied  to   the
    appellant.  There was no reason given by the respondent in relation  to
    the decision of the sponsor to withdraw the licence and no reference to
    a policy.  Contrary to Mr Clarke's submission, it was  not  clear  that
    the appellant accepted that she had contributed towards the  withdrawal
    of the CAS which would perhaps entitle a  decision  maker  to  conclude
    that she would not benefit from the policy (referred to by  Mr  Clarke)
    which would otherwise entitled her to 60 days in order to find  another
    sponsor. It was not clear from the appellant's  evidence  exactly  what
    her position is in relation to the revocation of  the  CAS.   This  was
    unsatisfactory particularly in the light  of  the  fact  that  she  was
    represented. There is also the issue of when the appellant was notified
    of the withdrawal. Her evidence is that this was when she received  the
    respondent's decision. The judge did not make a finding on  this  issue
    or whether the appellant had  contributed  to  the  withdrawal  of  the
    sponsorship.

9.   The judge did not adequately reason the decision to refuse  to  adjourn
    the case, in the light of the appellant's health condition,  which  was
    supported by her doctor.  It is clear that the success  of  the  appeal
    was not solely determined by whether or not the appellant had submitted
    with her application a valid CAS as decided by the judge.  In  fact  it
    appears  that  the  CAS  was  valid  at  the  time  she  submitted  her
    application but was subsequently revoked by  the  sponsor  which  would
    potentially give rise to issues relating to fairness. However,  whether
    or not there are errors resulting from the failure to consider fairness
    and the adjournment decision, this  is  not  material  to  my  decision
    because I am satisfied that the decision not in accordance with the law
    and the judge materially erred in failing to consider this. I set aside
    the decision to dismiss the appeal and allow the appeal to the  limited
    extent that the decision is still outstanding.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to  the  limited  extent  that  the  decision  of  the
respondent was not in accordance with  the  law.  As  such  the  application
remains outstanding.

No anonymity direction is made.


                                                        Date 26 October 2015
Signed   Joanna McWilliam
Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
