
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00709/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 November 2016                            |On 15 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
Between

                            miss Beverley Hlophe
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONn NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S McTaggart, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S T Fox promulgated on 19 May 2016, dismissing  her
    appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 15 December  2014
    to refuse to issue her with a Derivative Residence Card as the  primary
    carer of a British citizen resident in the United Kingdom, pursuant  to
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA
    Regulations").

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who has  been  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom since 2003.  She has a son who is a British  citizen  as
    his  father,  WP,  is  a  British  citizen.   The  couple  were  in   a
    relationship which broke down after the birth of the child.  It is  the
    appellant's case that she is the primary carer of the child;  that  the
    child's father has had no contact with him  since  2013;  and  that  in
    consequence, as he is either unable or  unwilling  to  look  after  the
    child, the child will be compelled to leave the United Kingdom were she
    removed.

 3. The respondent's case as  set  out  in  the  refusal  letter  dated  15
    December 2014 is that as the child's father is a  British  citizen,  he
    equally shares responsibility for the son's care and that  he  had  not
    shown, absent proof that the father was no longer living in the  United
    Kingdom, that he could not assume the care responsibility for the child
    were the appellant forced to leave the United Kingdom  as  accordingly,
    she did not meet the requirements of Regulation 15(4A) (c) of  the  EEA
    Regulations.

 4. On appeal the judge concluded [11] that he was to determine whether the
    child would be "unable to leave the United Kingdom".  That he  was  not
    satisfied that she had no contact with the child's father given [13] to
    [17] inconsistencies in  the  evidence  as  to  when  the  relationship
    between the appellant and her partner had ceased.  He noted  also  that
    it  would  appear  that  the  appellant's  former  partner   had   been
    considerably involved with the process of obtaining a passport and  had
    been the informant on the birth certificate [17] also, that there  were
    no indications of attempts to seek maintenance from him either  through
    the courts or the Child Support Agency [18] to [20].

 5. The judge  then  went  on  to  consider  the  consequences  of  removal
    directing himself in accordance with regards to Sections 117A  to  117D
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

      i) The judge had misdirected himself at paragraph [11] in  asking  the
         wrong question;

     ii) had erred in making a series  of  factual  errors  undermining  the
         factual findings such that it was unsafe in particular  failing  to
         appreciate  the  proper  chronology  of   events   and   when   the
         relationship had ceased as set out in the appellant's statement [6]
         to [7] and thus the apparent inconsistencies were not justified  by
         the evidence;

    iii) that the judge appeared not in his  findings  to  have  taken  into
         account the appellant's witness statement properly or her  evidence
         and appears, contrary to the Home Office policy, that the appellant
         had an obligation to trace the father  for  her  child  [13];  that
         there was no justification for the finding that  she  had  come  to
         Northern Ireland with a view to make it more difficult to trace her
         former partner but again misdirecting himself as to the proper test
         [15];

     iv) again say the appellant's contention that there had been no contact
         with the child's father for considerably more than  twelve  months;
         the   respondent   failing   properly   to   undertake   obligatory
         investigations as set out in her guidance [18]; and

      v) the judge had at [29] to [31]  improperly  referred  to  Article  8
         balancing matters which were wholly  inappropriate  and  Derivative
         Residence Card application.

The Law

 7. Regulation 15A(4A) of the European Economic Area Regulations provides:

    (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -

    (a)  P is the primary carer of a British citizen ("the relevant British
    citizen");

    (b)  the relevant British citizen is residing in  the  United  Kingdom;
    and

    (c)  the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in  the  UK
         or in another EEA State if P were required to leave.

 8. I am satisfied that the judge did approach the  case  on  an  incorrect
    basis.  The question he should have asked is whether the child would be
    compelled to leave the United Kingdom, notwithstanding that  he  had  a
    British citizen father on account were the appellant to be removed.  He
    also erred in stating at [12] that it was for  the  appellant  to  show
    that she was the sole carer.  This again is a failure properly to apply
    the relevant Regulation.

 9. Mr Whitwell submitted that, notwithstanding these apparent errors,  the
    judge had properly reached conclusions open  to  him  with  respect  to
    credibility and that, as the onus had been on  the  appellant  to  show
    that the child would be  compelled  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom,  a
    question involving an assessment of whether the father was able to care
    for the child, he had concluded that she had not shown that the  father
    was unable to support the child.  He submitted that in this context the
    credibility findings were sustainable and were  properly  open  to  the
    judge on the material before him.

10. I am however not satisfied that the judge's conclusions with regard  to
    credibility  are  sustainable.   It  is  sufficiently  clear  from  the
    appellant's witness statement  at  paragraphs  [6]  and  [7]  that  the
    relationship broke down whilst the couple were living in Essex not long
    after the birth of the child.   The  judge  does  not  appear  to  have
    appreciated the chronology of  events  and  therefore  erred  at  [14].
    There is no reason why the GP would have known the  full  circumstances
    of this and I note that the letter in question does refer to a previous
    partner and loss of her financial support.  This is consistent with the
    account given of the father walking out not long after the birth but of
    course after the birth had been registered.

11. The appellant explains how she was able to contact him  after  this  in
    order for the child to get a passport.  There is no indication  in  the
    witness statement or otherwise there was any attempt at reconciliation.
     I considered further with the finding at [17] that  there  would  have
    been considerable input from the child's father in  making  a  passport
    application is  unwarranted  and  unsupported  by  any  evidence.   The
    observation that the paperwork would inextricably link him to the child
    and the child's mother is irrelevant given that there is no  indication
    the relationship broke down before the child was registered.

12. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the judge's assessment  of  a
    lack of credibility on the part of  the  appellant  was  reliant  to  a
    significant degree on a mistake of fact as  to  when  the  relationship
    broke down and the finding of  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence  when
    there were none.  I am therefore satisfied that the  findings  of  fact
    are therefore unsustainable.

13. On that basis alone, I considered the decision must be  set  aside.   I
    note, however, that there is no indication  why  the  judge  speculated
    about what steps could have been taken to trace the child's father  nor
    whether in fact these were matters put to her in part of the hearing.

14. I also note in passing that the judge erred in considering Section 117A
    to D of the 2002 Act which infected his approach to  the  situation  of
    the child; the judge also appears confused at [5] as  to  whether  this
    was a paper hearing or whether it was an oral hearing.

15. Given that there will need to be fresh findings of fact with regard  to
    the  credibility  and  the  circumstances  of  the  appellant's  former
    partner, indeed as to his whereabouts and suitability to care  for  the
    child, it is  appropriate  to  remit  this  matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh  determination  on  all  issues.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal which hears this  appellant  would,  I  consider,  be  greatly
    assisted if the parties were to furnish it,  well  in  advance  of  the
    hearing, with copies of the relevant policies in place both at the date
    of decision and subsequently as referred to in the grounds of appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law, and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for it to  be  remade  on
    all issues. For the avoidance of doubt, none of the findings  of  Judge
    Fox are preserved


Signed                                  Date:  13 December 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
