
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00050/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th July 2019                    |On 22nd July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                               Bilalwal Hameed
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Appeared in person with his wife, Ms K Gul
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Watson, promulgated on  25  March  2019,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the refusal of leave to remain as a student.

2.   The Appellant applied for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant on 4 October 2012.  His application was refused  on  30
    January 2018 on the grounds that  he  submitted  a  fraudulent  English
    language certificate. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    on the grounds that he had not used a proxy test taker and had attended
    the test hearing centre himself. Permission was granted by  the  First-
    tier by Tribunal Judge Simpson on 4 June 2019.

3.   Ms Gul  submitted  that  the  copy  of  the  voice  recording  was  not
    requested until one month before the  hearing.  This  was  because  the
    Appellant was not really  legally  represented  and  assumed  that  the
    Respondent would provide the voice recording at  the  hearing.  It  was
    only when they realised that was not in fact the case that they  sought
    to obtain the voice recording.

4.   Mr Jarvis asked the Appellant and his wife  some  questions  about  how
    they had gone about obtaining the voice recording. Ms Gul  referred  to
    an e-mail that was handed up to the judge at the  appeal  hearing.  The
    letter and e-mail showed that on 10 January 2019 the Appellant wrote to
    the post-decision casework unit stating that the e-mail address she had
    been given, in order to obtain the voice recording, had not worked  and
    requested confirmation of the correct e-mail address.  There  was  also
    evidence that the Appellant  had  sent  e-mails  requesting  the  voice
    recording and they had bounced back. Mr Jarvis stated that the  address
    to which the Appellant's wife had written was  the  incorrect  address,
    but she was not to know that. It would appear that the Appellant's wife
    had made efforts to obtain the voice recording but that  had  not  been
    possible.

5.    Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that  there  may  have  been  some   procedural
    unfairness because the Appellant had requested the voice  recording  in
    advance of the hearing but had been  given  an  incorrect  e-mail  and,
    through no fault of his own, had been unable to obtain a copy  of  that
    voice recording in order to contest whether it was  his  voice  on  the
    recording or someone else. Given the Appellant maintained he personally
    took the test, the voice  recording  was  crucial  to  determining  the
    appeal. The judge's failure to  consider  the  Appellant's  efforts  to
    obtain  the  voice  recording  had  arguably  amounted  to   procedural
    unfairness.


Conclusion and Reasons

6.   The judge concluded at paragraph 14: "I have  a  document  produced  by
    the Appellant which indicates that one month  before  this  hearing  he
    requested a copy of the voice recording.  He  has  been  aware  of  the
    problem with the test results since 30 January 2018 but did nothing  to
    approach either ETS or  the  college  until  very  shortly  before  the
    hearing.  His wife is British born and educated and  he  has  had  this
    assistance available to him throughout this  process  and  I  find  his
    inaction to tackle the  allegation  of  fraud  not  consistent  with  a
    genuine test taker."

7.   I am of the view that this finding has  led  to  procedural  unfairness
    because the Appellant was unrepresented at the hearing and his wife who
    assisted him has no legal training. Their  assumption  that  the  voice
    recording would be provided by the Respondent at the  hearing  was  not
    unreasonable. The burden was on the Respondent to prove  that  a  proxy
    test  taker  took  the  test  rather  than  the   Appellant.   In   the
    circumstances, it was not unreasonable for the Appellant and  his  wife
    to assume that the Respondent would have evidence  that  someone  other
    than the Appellant took that test.

8.   When the Appellant realised that  the  voice  recording  would  not  be
    produced by the Respondent his wife tried to obtain the voice recording
    and it is clear from the evidence before the judge that they were given
    an e-mail in order to request such a  recording  and  that  e-mail  had
    failed to work because the address was incorrect. Therefore, through no
    fault of their  own  they  had  not  been  able  to  obtain  the  voice
    recording. They had written, unfortunately to  the  wrong  address,  in
    order to clarify the correct e-mail address. There has been no response
    to their letter of 10 January 2019 from the Respondent.

9.   In the interests of  fairness,  the  Appellant  should  be  allowed  to
    ascertain whether his voice was on  the  recording  relied  on  by  the
    Respondent. This  was  factually  important  to  the  determination  of
    whether he had used a proxy test taker. In the circumstances there  has
    been procedural unfairness in this appeal.  The  Appellant  through  no
    fault of his own has been unable to obtain the voice recording in order
    to be able to challenge it and in that respect the Appellant  has  been
    denied a fair hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  I  am  satisfied
    that paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement of 25  September  2012  is
    met and the appeal should be remitted.

10.  There are other errors in the decision which also  give  me  cause  for
    concern and upon which permission to appeal was granted. However, it is
    not necessary to determine those issues given my findings above.

11.  Accordingly, I set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 25 March 2019 and I remit the matter to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing. None of the judge's findings are preserved.


Notice of decision

Appeal allowed

No anonymity direction is made.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 19 July 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.
The appeal is remitted and the matter remains outstanding.



             J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 19 July 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



