
[pic]
Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        IA/00819/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 27 June 2014        On 30 June 2014


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                            Albert Adjei Sarpong
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                   Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:            No appearance.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Aziz promulgated on  23  April  2014,  allowing  Mr  Sarpong's  appeal
      against the Secretary of State's decision dated  5  December  2013  to
      refuse to issue a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration  (European
      Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


   2. Although before me the Secretary of State  is  the  appellant  and  Mr
      Sarpong is the respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
      proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer  to
      Mr Sarpong as  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
      Respondent.


Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of Ghana born on 28 October  1973.  On  21
      June 2013 an application for a residence card  as  confirmation  of  a
      right to reside in the United Kingdom was  made  on  his  behalf.  The
      application was based on a Ghanaian customary marriage by proxy to  Ms
      Ama Gyamfua, a Belgian national, said to have taken place in Ghana, in
      the absence of the parties to the marriage, on 22 March 2013.


   4. The Appellant's application was refused  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
      'reasons for refusal' letter dated 5 December 2013, and  a  Notice  of
      Immigration Decision was issued on the same date. The  Respondent  was
      not satisfied that the marriage  was  valid,  and  was  not  otherwise
      satisfied that the Appellant was in a 'durable relationship'.


   5. The Appellant appealed to the IAC. He requested  that  his  appeal  be
      dealt with 'on the papers'. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed  the
      Appellant's appeal without a  hearing  for  reasons  set  out  in  his
      determination.


   6. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on 13 May 2014.


No appearance

   7. There was no appearance by or on behalf of the Appellant.


   8. I note that  an  application  for  an  adjournment  was  made  by  the
      Appellant's representatives by letter dated 26 June 2014 on the  basis
      that the Appellant was feeling dizzy and tired.  The  application  was
      rejected for want of supporting medical evidence, and because  in  any
      event, the error of law issue could be  resolved  in  the  Appellant's
      absence. The application was refused on the same date and the decision
      communicated   by   facsimile   transmission   to   the    Appellant's
      representative. As of the date of  hearing,  there  is  no  supporting
      medical evidence to suggest that the Appellant is unfit to attend  the
      hearing; moreover, there is no explanation before the Tribunal  as  to
      why either or both the Appellant's representative or spouse is not  in
      attendance.




   9. I am satisfied that there has been due service of Notice  of  Hearing:
      indeed as much is acknowledged in the adjournment  application.  I  am
      satisfied that the Appellant has had  an  opportunity  to  attend  the
      hearing of the appeal, either in person or by way of a representative,
      and I am not satisfied that any adequate explanation has been advanced
      for his non-attendance. I am  also  satisfied  that  he  has  had  the
      opportunity to send to the Tribunal any materials upon which he wishes
      to rely, including written submissions.  Indeed,  his  representatives
      have taken advantage of this opportunity and  forwarded  a  bundle  of
      documents under cover of letter dated 25 June 2014, which  includes  a
      document  headed  'Appellant's  Detailed  Grounds  of  Resistance   to
      Respondent's Application' which seeks to address the substance of  the
      Respondent's challenge to the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge, and also seeks to engage with the reasons given by Judge Colyer
      for granting permission to appeal.


  10. In all the circumstances I am satisfied  that  it  is  appropriate  to
      proceed with the appeal in the Appellant's absence.


Consideration

  11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the Appellant's  appeal  on  the
      basis that he was satisfied that the  Appellant's  marriage  was  duly
      registered and valid.


  12. The Respondent's grounds of appeal seek to challenge  that  conclusion
      with particular reference to the decision in Kareem (Proxy marriages -
      EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC) - promulgated on 16 January 2014,  and
      therefore before  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  consideration  of  this
      appeal. It is pleaded that the Judge erred in  not  having  regard  to
      Kareem. Moreover it is pleaded that if Kareem had  been  applied,  the
      First-tier Tribunal would have been bound to dismiss the appeal.


  13. I accept the substance of the Respondent's challenge.  The  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge  misdirected  himself  by  not  having  regard  to  the
      relevant case law, pursuant to which he should have  considered  as  a
      starting point the question  of  whether  a  marriage  was  contracted
      between the Appellant and Ms Gyamfua according to the national law  of
      Belgium. The Judge did not do so. Because the  Judge  disregarded  the
      relevant case law, he wrongly identified  the  central  issue  in  the
      appeal at paragraph 22 of his determination as being whether  a  valid
      proxy Ghanaian marriage had been conducted  and  properly  registered.
      The Judge focused on a consideration of the validity of  the  marriage
      in UK law, to the exclusion of a  consideration  of  its  validity  in
      Belgian law.


  14. There is nothing in the written submission by way of the  'Appellant's
      Detailed Grounds  of  Resistance  to  Respondent's  Application'  that
      addresses the substance of the Respondent's  challenge,  or  addresses
      Judge Colyer's  observations  in  granting  permission  to  appeal  in
      respect of  considering  whether  the  marriage  was  "compliant  with
      Belgian matrimonial law". Nor is  there  anything  in  the  supporting
      evidence filed in the Upper Tribunal or filed  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal that is on point.


  15. In all such circumstances I find that the decision of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge was flawed for material error  of  law  and  I  set  it
      aside.


  16. The decision in the appeal accordingly needs to be remade.


  17. Although the Appellant is not present,  essentially  for  the  reasons
      given at paragraphs 8 and 9 above, I am satisfied that he has had  the
      opportunity to attend either in person or by  way  of  representative,
      has not offered any adequate explanation for his  non-attendance,  and
      has had the opportunity of filing any further relevant  evidence  with
      the Tribunal. In this latter regard standard directions were issued to
      the Appellant requiring him to prepare  for  today's  hearing  on  the
      basis that if the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  was  set  aside
      the Upper Tribunal might proceed to remake the decision at the hearing
      without further adjournment. Accordingly, I consider it appropriate to
      proceed to remake the decision in the Appellant's absence.


  18. No relevant material has been provided, and  no  submission  made,  in
      respect of the validity of the Appellant's marriage under Belgian law.
      The written submissions fail  to  address  this  key  point.  In  such
      circumstances I find that the Appellant has failed  to  discharge  the
      burden of proof in establishing that he has contracted a marriage with
      Ms Gyamfua in accordance with the law of Belgium.


  19. Moreover, no material has been  filed  either  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal to demonstrate that the Appellant is in
      a durable relationship with Ms Gyamfua.


  20. Accordingly I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal.


Decision

  21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
      error of law and is set aside.


  22. I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal is dismissed.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     27 June 2014
