


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/00174/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : UT(IAC) Birmingham            |  Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 July 2017                          |  On 24 July 2017                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            shoaib imtiyaz patel
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Balroop, instructed by Bond Adams LLP
                    Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Watson  allowing  Mr
   Patel's appeal against the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  his  human
   rights claim.

2. For the purposes of  this  decision,  I  shall  hereafter  refer  to  the
   Secretary of State as the respondent  and  Mr  Patel  as  the  appellant,
   reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

3. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 29 August  1986.  He  entered
   the United Kingdom together with his parents, in May 1999,  as  visitors.
   He was 12 years of age at the time. Prior to the expiry of their  visitor
   visas, the appellant's father applied in form FLR(O)  for  leave  for  to
   remain as a businessperson. The application was refused  on  27  November
   2000 on the basis that switching  to  that  category  was  not  permitted
   within the UK. Further representations were refused and  the  appellant's
   father was advised to leave the UK and apply for  entry  clearance  under
   the relevant immigration rules. The appellant's father then completed and
   signed a SET(O)  Form  dated  17  January  2005  which  he  believed  was
   submitted to the Home Office as an application for leave to remain in the
   UK on human rights grounds. The Home Office claimed not to have  received
   such an application and, at an interview on 25 August  2005,  served  the
   appellant  and  his  father  and  mother  with  enforcement   papers   as
   overstayers.


4. On 25 July 2013 the appellant made  a  fresh  application  for  leave  to
   remain  on  family  and  private  life  grounds,  on  Form  FLR(O).  That
   application was refused by the respondent on 19 August 2103 with no right
   of appeal. The appellant made a further application on  Form  FLR(FP)  on
   private life grounds on 15 October 2014,  but  that  was  refused  on  17
   December 2014, with no right of  appeal.  Following  the  settlement,  by
   consent, of judicial review proceedings  challenging  that  decision  the
   respondent reconsidered the  application  and  refused  it  again  on  22
   December 2015, but with a right of appeal.


5. The appellant appealed against that decision. His  appeal  was  heard  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Watson on 27 October 2016 and was allowed in  a
   decision promulgated on 10 November 2016.  There  was  no  appearance  on
   behalf of the respondent at the hearing.  The  judge  accepted  that  the
   appellant had been in the UK since 1999 and that he had  attended  school
   and college and formed bonds with his  siblings  and  uncles  and  school
   friends without any knowledge that he was in the UK unlawfully. She noted
   that the appellant had been offered a job by his  uncle  if  he  obtained
   legal status and that he was therefore likely to be  self-supporting  and
   not a burden on the tax payer. The judge accepted that the appellant  had
   been reporting to the Home Office on a regular basis since 2006 up  until
   2016 and she noted that the respondent had not taken any steps to  remove
   him since the service of a removal notice in 2005.  She  considered  that
   the appellant or his parents had taken action through  solicitors  in  an
   attempt to obtain lawful status from 2005.


6. Judge Watson found that there were no very significant obstacles  to  the
   appellant's  integration  in  India  and  that  he  could  not  meet  the
   requirements of the immigration  rules.  She  went  on  to  consider  the
   position outside the rules and  concluded  that  his  circumstances  were
   exceptional, as he could not  be  held  responsible  for  any  breach  of
   immigration laws when he was a child and  was  not  responsible  for  the
   subsequent ten year delay in dealing with his situation, from 2006, as he
   relied upon his parents and believed that there was an application before
   the Home Office. The judge found that the Home Office was fully aware  of
   the appellant's presence in the UK and did nothing  to  remove  him  from
   2005 onwards, and that the  appellant  was  unaware  of  his  immigration
   problems until 2012. She therefore gave weight to his private life in the
   UK and found that the public interest in  his  removal  was  considerably
   lessened by the delay in  the  respondent's  steps  to  remove  him.  She
   concluded that the respondent's decision was disproportionate and allowed
   the appeal under Article 8.

7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   on the grounds that the failure to remove the appellant was, at  best,  a
   neutral factor and not one which reduced the weight to be  given  to  the
   public interest; and that judge  had  erred  by  failing  to  take  as  a
   negative  factor  the  fact  that  the  appellant  was  not   financially
   independent at the time of the hearing.

8. Permission to appeal was granted in the Upper Tribunal on 5 May  2017  on
   the grounds that it was arguable that the  judge's  Article  8  balancing
   exercise was unlawful because she gave weight to the respondent's inertia
   in removing the appellant without considering what the appellant had done
   to secure his own departure.

9. The appeal came before me on 18 July 2017.


10. Mr Mills accepted that the respondent's position  was  not  assisted  by
   the fact that there  was  no  representation  before  the  judge  but  he
   submitted that the judge had erred in law by speculating on the  question
   of the respondent's inertia, particularly when there was evidence  before
   her, at pages  153,  167  and  170  of  the  appellant's  appeal  bundle,
   suggesting that the respondent had made efforts to arrange the removal of
   the appellant and his family. Mr Balroop relied on the  evidence  in  the
   appellant's bundle showing that an  application  had  been  made  by  the
   appellant's father for leave to remain  in  January  2005  and  that  the
   family's solicitors had been  in  correspondence  with  the  Home  Office
   chasing up that application. He submitted that  the  appellant  had  been
   reporting to the Home Office and was  therefore  not  living  in  the  UK
   clandestinely. The Home Office could have detained the family with a view
   to removing them but did not do anything. The judge was entitled to  give
   that considerable weight and to allow the appeal on the  basis  that  she
   did.


Consideration and findings


11. Whilst, as Mr Mills submitted, the respondent did not assist matters  by
   failing to send a representative to the hearing,  it  is  the  case  that
   there was in fact evidence before the judge within the appellant's appeal
   bundle indicating that the respondent had not been completely inactive in
   resolving the appellant's and his family's  situation,  contrary  to  the
   judge's belief. There was a failure by the judge to give consideration to
   that evidence.

12. As Mr Mills submitted, the  appellant's  bundle  contained  evidence  at
   pages 153/154, 167 and 170 confirming that the respondent was  continuing
   to request information and documents from the  appellant's  father  about
   his Indian nationality and identity and his links to India, following the
   interview at which enforcement notices were served on the  family.  There
   was therefore an indication in the evidence  that  enquiries  were  being
   undertaken  with  the  Indian  authorities  in  order  to  document   the
   appellants. In the light of that evidence, to which no reference was made
   in the judge's decision, I find myself in agreement with  Mr  Mills  that
   the judge was unduly speculating that the respondent had failed  to  take
   any steps to seek to remove the family from 2001.


13. Furthermore, as Upper Tribunal Judge  Perkins  stated  in  his  decision
   granting permission, there was a failure by the judge  to  consider  what
   the appellant had done to secure his own departure. The judge,  at  [33],
   considered that the appellant bore no responsibility in the matter as  he
   was reporting as required and was relying on  his  parents  to  sort  out
   matters and thought that he had an  outstanding  application  before  the
   Home Office. However, as the judge acknowledged,  the  appellant  was  an
   adult from 2004 and there was therefore no  reason  why  he  should  have
   borne no responsibility for his own situation. Further,  with  regard  to
   the application of 17 January  2005,  the  evidence  in  the  appellant's
   bundle indicates that the  respondent  repeatedly  advised  the  family's
   solicitors that they had no record of such an application and noted  that
   no  further  action  would  be  taken  in  regard  to  investigating  the
   application as  the  solicitors  had  failed  to  produce  any  proof  of
   submission of the application (page 159, 161). No consideration was given
   by the judge to that evidence and to the fact that it was not until  some
   seven years later that the appellant then sought to regularise  his  stay
   by way of a further application for leave to remain.


14.  In the circumstances it seems to me  that  the  judge  failed  to  take
   account of relevant and material matters,  and  unduly  speculated,  when
   attributing weight to factors undermining  the  public  interest  in  the
   appellant's removal. Accordingly  I  agree  with  the  assertion  in  the
   grounds that the judge's assessment of proportionality  under  Article  8
   was vitiated by error and has to be set aside.


15. It seems to me that the appropriate course would be for  the  matter  to
   be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh. It may well be
   that the appellant's appeal ought to be linked with his parents'  appeal,
   which I understand is listed for hearing next month, in August.

DECISION

16. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The decision is set aside.

17. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  pursuant  to  section
   12(2)(b)(i) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
   Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge Watson.




Signed[pic]                                  Date: 19 July 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
