
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/00538/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 February 2016                   |On 5 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Imtiaz Khan Zico
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Mr R Ahmed, instructed by FDS Law
For the appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The claimant, Imtiaz Khan Zico, date of birth 13.5.89, is a citizen  of
    Bangladesh.

 2. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gibbs  promulgated  8.5.15,  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated
    9.12.14, to refuse his application for  an  EEA  Residence  Card  as  a
    family member (spouse) of an EEA national exercising Treaty  rights  in
    the UK, pursuant to the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  The  Judge
    heard the appeal on 20.4.15.

 3. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Chohan  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    13.7.15. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy granted permission to appeal on
    29.8.15.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 2.2.16 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  I heard submissions from both Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  and  Mr
    Ahmed and gave my decision, setting  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal aside and remaking it by dismissing the appeal,  reserving  my
    reasons which I now give.

Error of Law

 5. For the reasons set out below, I find that there was an error of law in
    the making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  such  that  the
    decision of Judge Gibbs should be set aside and  remade  by  dismissing
    the appeal.

 6. On 19.3.14 the claimant, who first entered the UK as a student in 2009,
    applied for an EEA Residence Card as confirmation of a right to  reside
    in the UK as the  family  member  (spouse)  of  Patricia  Maurerova,  a
    citizen of Slovakia. At the time of application he had no  valid  leave
    to remain in the UK.

 7. The application was refused in the Reasons  for  Refusal  letter  dated
    9.12.14. This explains that after  examining  his  application,  noting
    that he did not have leave to remain in the UK  and  that  he  and  his
    spouse are of different  cultural  backgrounds,  the  Home  Office  had
    reasonable doubt whether the claimant had a right to reside in the  UK,
    pursuant to regulation 20B(1)(a) and in  order  to  verify  eligibility
    invited both the claimant and his spouse  for  interview  on  27.11.14,
    pursuant to regulation 20B(2)(b).

 8. The refusal letter states that the claimant failed to cancel this first
    interview within 10 days and did not give good reason for this failure.
    They were then invited to a second interview  scheduled  for  17.12.14.
    The refusal decision states, "Again you failed to cancel the  interview
    in time and did not give the Home Office good reason for this failure."



 9. The Secretary of State relied on regulation 20B(2)(b) and 20B(4)  which
    states, "If,  without  good  reason,  A  or  B  fails  to  provide  the
    additional information requested or, fail to attend an interview on  at
    least two occasions if so invited, the Secretary of State may draw  any
    factual inferences about A's entitlement to a right to reside as appear
    appropriate in the circumstances." The Secretary  of  State  considered
    that the failures to attend two interviews, twice  failing  to  confirm
    attendance, implied that the claimant did not have a  right  to  reside
    under regulation 14(1) and thus refused his application.

10. At the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing, the claimant  and  his  wife
    gave evidence that they did attend for the  first  marriage  interview,
    but because their legal representative  failed  to  confirm  that  they
    would be attending, it could not proceed. It is  said  that  there  and
    then  they  re-arranged  the  interview  for  17.12.14,  but  when   he
    telephoned the Home Office to confirm  his  attendance  they  told  the
    claimant that a decision had already been made.  This  call  must  have
    been made after 9.12.14.

11. In the light of that evidence and the date  of  the  refusal  decision,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibbs considered that  the  refusal  decision
    was in error, pointing  out  that  it  pre-dates  the  second  marriage
    interview  arranged  for  17.12.14.  "I  consider  this  error  to   be
    significant and I find that it  undermines  the  respondent's  evidence
    which is that the appellant and his wife did not attend  the  interview
    on 27 November 2014.

12. However, as the grounds of application for permission to appeal assert,
    Judge Gibbs misunderstood the regulations and made a  material  mistake
    of fact.

13. The grounds submit that the judge failed to address the central  reason
    for refusal. The grounds submit, and I so find, that the  judge  failed
    to address whether, pursuant to Papajorgji [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC), the
    background  circumstances,  raising  reasonable  suspicion   that   the
    marriage is one of convenience, and  their  failure  twice  to  confirm
    attendance for interview were sufficient to shift the burden  from  the
    Secretary of State to the claimant to demonstrate that his  was  not  a
    marriage of convenience. The judge did not address whether  the  burden
    of proof had shifted and was distracted by his belief that the  refusal
    decision was issued in error in advance of the second interview. If the
    burden had shifted, the claimant had to demonstrate that he had a right
    to reside as the family member of an  EEA  national  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the UK and thus failed to qualify for a Residence  Card.  The
    judge failed to address this primary point and make clear  findings  as
    to whether the  claimant  was  entitled  to  a  residence  card.  I  am
    satisfied on the evidence that the  burden  had  shifted,  particularly
    given the failure twice to confirm attendance for interview.

14. Further, if the judge considered that the decision of the Secretary  of
    State was not in accordance with the law, the  correct  approach  would
    have been to allow the appeal to the limited extent  that  the  refusal
    decision was not in accordance with the law and that  it  remained  for
    the Secretary of State to make a decision in accordance with  the  law.
    In the circumstances, simply to allow the appeal was an error of law.

15. The application was refused because neither the claimant nor his  legal
    representative contacted the Home Office at least 10 days prior to  the
    re-arranged interview to  confirm  attendance,  as  was  required.  The
    letters of invitation sent to  the  claimant  and  his  wife  for  each
    interview explicitly required email confirmation, to a  specified  Home
    Office address, 10 working days before the date specified to  allow  an
    interpreter to be booked in advance.  The  letters  also  explain  that
    failure to confirm attendance could lead to  the  cancellation  of  the
    interview and the resulting refusal of the application. That is exactly
    what happened.

16. In essence, the First-tier Tribunal Judge misunderstood the Reason  for
    Refusal letter, The 17.12.14 interview was cancelled prior to that date
    due to the claimant's failure to confirm attendance 10 working days  in
    advance, which would have been by 3.12.14. The  interview  was  not  in
    fact cancelled until the date of the refusal decision, which the  judge
    considered to be 11.12.14, but the letter  is  dated  9.12.14.  As  the
    judge was aware from the evidence of the claimant  and  his  wife,  the
    first interview was  also  cancelled  because  of  failure  to  confirm
    attendance 10 days before the due  date.  The  claimant  repeated  that
    failure in respect  of  the  second  interview.  It  follows  that  the
    decision of the Secretary of State was not made in error. Having  drawn
    the inference she was entitled  to  do  under  regulation  20B(4),  the
    Secretary of State  was  entitled  to  exercise  her  discretion  under
    regulation 20B(5) to decide that the claimant did not have a  right  to
    reside in the UK.

17. In the circumstances, the refusal decision was entirely correct and the
    appeal should have been dismissed at the First-tier Tribunal.

18. It remains open to the claimant to make a fresh application as there is
    no removal decision and the issue of an EEA Residence Card is  no  more
    than confirmation of the right to reside.

Conclusions:

19. For the reasons set out above, I find that the making of  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of  an  error  on  a
    point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

                    I set aside the decision.

                    I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it




                    [pic]
                    Signed


                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions  were  made  on  the  issue.  Given  the
circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award     Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee award.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed and thus there can be no fee award.




                    [pic]
                    Signed


                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated


