
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/01366/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 October 2017                 |On 01 November 2017                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            CAROL ANNMARIE MILLER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms J Isherwood, Senior home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr J Waithe (counsel) instructed by Okafor & Co,
solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  to
avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the  First-tier
Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of
First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Majid,  promulgated  on  11  August  2017  which
allowed the Appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision  to  refuse
the appellant's application for leave to remain in the UK.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 18 November 1963 and is a national of  Jamaica.
On  25  February  2016  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for further leave to remain in the UK.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Majid ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 29 August 2017  Judge  Holmes
gave permission to appeal stating

      It is well arguable that the  Judge  has  failed  to  demonstrate  any
      adequate analysis of the disputed issues and the evidence relevant  to
      them that was placed before him, and,  has  failed  to  give  adequate
      reasons for his decision to allow the appeal.

The hearing

5. Ms Isherwood moved the grounds of appeal. Both  parties'  representatives
then told me that they agree that the  Judge's  decision  contains  material
errors of  law  because  it  does  not  contain  adequate  analysis  of  the
evidence, because the decision lacks findings in  fact,  and  because  there
are inadequate findings in law. On joint motion, I  was  asked  to  set  the
decision aside and remit the case to the  First-tier  to  be  determined  of
new. Parties agree that an entirely new fact-finding exercise is necessary.

Analysis

6. The Judge's decision is devoid  of  findings  of  fact  and  contains  no
analysis of the evidence presented. At  [18]  of  the  decision,  the  Judge
declares that he finds the appellant to be credible - but does not say  why.
In that same paragraph the Judge says that he is

         "... able to help ..."

the appellant.

7. In the final sentence of the 13 of the decision the Judge says

      "... I am happy to give her the benefit of my discretion."

It is not the Judge's role to extend help to an appellant. It is  not  clear
(from an holistic reading of the decision)  what  discretion  the  Judge  is
exercising. The Judge does not make any  meaningful  findings  of  fact,  so
that it is not clear how he reached his decision.

8. [16] to [25] of the decision all fall under  the  heading  "the  relevant
law", but it is hard to find reference to any law which is relevant to  this
appeal in any of part [16] to [25].

9.  In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

10. Because the Judge gives no reasons for finding  the  appellant  and  her
partner to be credible witnesses, and because there is no  analysis  of  the
evidence contained in the decision,  the  decision  creates  the  impression
that the evidence for the appellant has  not  been  analysed.  The  decision
contains lengthy reference to irrelevant considerations, and no analysis  of
the relevant law and immigration rules. I have to, find  that  the  decision
is tainted by material errors of law. I must set the decision aside.

11.  I have already  found  material  errors  of  law  in  the  fact-finding
process carried out by the First-tier in  the  decision  promulgated  on  11
August 2017. I therefore find that  I  cannot  substitute  my  own  decision
because of the extent of the fact-finding exercise required to reach a  just
decision in this appeal.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

12. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

13. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

14. I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Majid.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

16. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated  on  11  August  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 30 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

