
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/01436/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 August 2015                    |On 27 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                           SYED ASHOOR HASAN KAZMI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     no appearance
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cox, dismissing his appeal against refusal of  further  leave  to
    remain.

 2. The appellant was content for his case to be dealt with "on the papers"
    in the First-tier Tribunal.  Having been  issued  with  notice  of  the
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal, he did not appear, was not  represented,
    and had sent no communication to the UT.  The hearing proceeded in  his
    absence.

 3. The grounds amount only to disagreement with outcome in the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  They do not demonstrate that the making of the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of any error on a point  of
    law, such that its decision ought to be set aside.

 4. The specific point on which permission to appeal was granted is not  in
    the grounds.  Judge Fisher, granting permission,  thought  it  arguable
    that Judge Cox erred in  stating  that  failure  to  provide  biometric
    details led to mandatory rather than discretionary refusal.

 5. It is doubtful whether that point should be entertained  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal, not having been raised at any stage by the appellant.  In any
    event, even if the issue is only one on which leave  to  remain  should
    normally (not always) be  refused,  the  appellant  made  no  case  why
    discretion should be exercised in his favour.  His case properly failed
    on this issue alone.

 6. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

 7. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




                               [pic]
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                               25 August 2015
