
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01619/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25th February 2015                         |    On 11th March 2015       |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR BRAHIM SEDDAOUI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Christian Howells, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. In this document I will refer to the parties by  the  style  in  which
      they appeared before the First-Tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a male citizen of Algeria, born 12  March  1968.   He
      entered the United Kingdom as a visitor in August 1990  or  1993.   He
      has  remained  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  valid   leave.    He
      subsequently made application for leave to remain on the basis of  his
      relationship with his sponsor.  That application was refused  and  the
      respondent issued removal directions under Section 47 of the 2006 Act.
       The appellant appealed those decisions.

   3. The appellant's appeal came before Judge of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Walker sitting at Newport in August 2014.  There was an oral  hearing.
      Each party was represented.  Both the appellant and his  sponsor  gave
      evidence.

   4. In a determination dated 22 August  2014,  Judge  Walker  allowed  the
      appellant's appeal on human rights grounds, but dismissed it under the
      rules.  Paragraph 36 of her determination records the  view  that  the
      appellant could not succeed in the appeal other than "possibly"  under
      Article 8 ECHR.

   5. The respondent sought leave to appeal alleging a material misdirection
      of law.  In summary, the respondent alleges that Judge Walker erred in
      failing to properly deal with Article ECHR in the light of  then  case
      law and a failure on her part  to  properly  consider  the  effect  of
      Section 117B of "the Immigration Act 2014" (sic).  It is also  alleged
      that the determination contained incorrect facts with  regard  to  the
      failure to remove the appellant.  Finally, it  was  submitted  by  the
      respondent that the appellant's circumstances "are not exceptional and
      are merely an ordinary family life claim".

   6. The application for leave came before Judge Colyer of  the  First-Tier
      who granted leave for the following reasons:

         "3.  The respondent's Grounds and Reasons for Permission to  Appeal
      submit that the judge made a material misdirection in law, in summary:

         a.   The tribunal has erred in law in its approach to  the  article
8 assessment.
         b.   MF (Nigeria) [2013]  confirms  the  immigration  rules  are  a
             complete code and form the starting point.  In Gulshan  [2013]
             article 8 assessment should only be carried out when there are
             compelling circumstances not recognised  by  the  rules.   The
             tribunal did not identify such compelling circumstances.
         c.   The tribunal has not followed the approach in Nagre [2013].
         d.   The tribunal has failed to provide adequate  reasons  why  the
             appellant's   circumstances   are   either    compelling    or
             exceptional.  In view  of  the  appellant's  poor  immigration
             history, in accordance with section 117B  of  the  immigration
             act 2014 little weight should be given to any relationship the
             appellant has formed.
         e.   Paragraph 42 - the tribunal found  the  respondent  failed  to
             take action to enforce removal; this is factually incorrect.
         f.   Since 2008 the appellant has been fully aware that he  had  no
             basis  to  remain.   The  appellant's  circumstances  are  not
             exceptional and merely an ordinary family life claim.

      4.  When considering the determination it is arguable that  the  judge
      has made material errors of law in the determination.   Permission  to
      appeal is granted".

   7. Hence the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

   8. In his submission Mr Richards relied upon the grounds  seeking  leave.
      However he did draw my attention to the final words of paragraph 37 of
      Judge  Walker's  determination,  wherein  she   mentions   "compelling
      circumstances".  Mr Richards did submit that  the  findings  by  Judge
      Walker had been inadequately  reasoned,  especially  bearing  in  mind
      Judge Walker's statement that the appellants immigration  history  "is
      of  the  very  poorest  kind".   Mr  Richards   submitted   that   the
      requirements set out in the case of Nagre [2013] EWHC  720  Admin  had
      not been met.  There had been a misdirection at paragraph 42.  It  was
      not simply a case of the then Presenting Officer relying upon the 2014
      Act.  It is and was the law and the judge could not shy away from  its
      implications.  Mr Richards  when  onto  to  say  that  the  judge  was
      incorrect in finding that the Secretary of State had failed to  remove
      the appellant and to take that into account in the balancing act.  The
      judge was under a duty to give little weight and she  failed  to  meet
      that duty.

   9. Mr Howells in his submission indicated that Grounds 1  to  3  and  the
      first part of 4 indicated that the judge had not met the "Nagre test".
       He, Mr Howells, was unaware of anything that amounted to a test.

  10. As to Ground 2, at no time  could  any  of  the  steps  taken  by  the
      appellant have amounted to a bar to his removal.  Mr Howells indicated
      that the grounds were misconceived.  As to comments  by  Judge  Walker
      regarding the lack of removal action on the part of the  Secretary  of
      State, the judge had merely said "I also note".   That  indicates  the
      judge took nothing other than a note of the removal situation and that
      did not figure largely in her conclusions.

  11. Mr Richards responded to indicate that any reference to the  sponsor's
      father must of course be affected by the amendments  set  out  in  the
      2014 Immigration Act.

  12. At the conclusion of the hearing I indicated that I found no  material
      error of law.  I now give reasons.

  13. The issue before me is whether or not Judge Walker erred in law in the
      way she dealt with Article 8  considerations  having  found  that  the
      appellant could not succeed under  the  Immigration  Rules.   Did  she
      properly deal with the case in the light of such cases as MF (Nigeria)
      [2013], Gulshan [2013] and Nagre [2013]?  In addition did she fail  to
      properly take into account Section 117 of the Nationality  Immigration
      & Asylum Act 2002?  Throughout the determination and  grounds  seeking
      leave reference has incorrectly been made to this section being of the
      Immigration Act 2014.

  14. As indicated above I do not consider that Judge Walker made a material
      error of law in her determination.  Any  reference  to  the  2014  Act
      instead of the 2002 Act is of no consequence.  The determination shows
      that Judge Walker (at paragraph 14) quite properly reminded herself of
      the cases that she should take into account.  She was also fully aware
      of the requirements of Section 117 of the 2002 Act.  Indeed  she  sets
      out the requirements of that section in paragraph 35.

  15. Mr Richards very fairly noted the conclusion of paragraph  37  in  his
      submission.  Judge Walker had quite properly asked herself whether  or
      not  there  were  any  compelling   circumstances   not   sufficiently
      recognised under the rules.  It was appropriate for her  to  ask  that
      question of herself.

  16. Judge Walker clearly did not find the appellant to  be  an  impressive
      witness and she also recorded a poor  immigration  history.   That  of
      course cannot be the end of  the  story  when  looking  at  compelling
      circumstances.   Judge  Walker  properly   took   into   account   the
      appellant's relationship with the sponsor,  his  actions  towards  the
      sponsor's father  and  the  clear  difficulties  the  sponsor  had  to
      relocate to Algeria.  Judge  Walker  at  paragraph  39  made  specific
      findings  and   then   reached   a   conclusion   at   paragraph   41.
      Notwithstanding these findings the judge then went on at paragraph  42
      to consider the requirements of Section 117 and she clearly came to  a
      conclusion that whilst little weight could be given to  such  matters,
      sufficient weight existed that merited success for the appellant.

  17. The respondent has raised the question of the judge's comments on  the
      failure to remove the appellant.  I agree with Mr Howells  that  steps
      taken  by  the  appellant  would  not  have  frustrated  removal   and
      accordingly the judge's comments were well-founded.

  18. For these reasons, I conclude that the judge did not make any material
      error of law.

  19. The respondent's appeal is accordingly dismissed and the  decision  of
      Judge Walker must stand.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole


