
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01517/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2018                            |On 6 March 2018               |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                     AQ
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Awan, Counsel instructed by Mayfair Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  13  April
    1983.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision  of
    the respondent, dated 9 March 2016, refusing his application to  remain
    in  the  United  Kingdom  on  human  rights  grounds.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 5 April 2017, Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Kainth
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 2. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal, with permission  from  the
    Upper Tribunal, on the grounds that it was arguable that the judge  did
    not make a finding in respect of the  child's  best  interests  and  it
    followed that it was arguable that the proportionality  assessment  was
    flawed.

Error of Law - Discussion

 3. It was Mr Awan's submission that the  Tribunal  incorrectly  considered
    the child's best interests and that in line with relevant case  law  Mr
    Awan submitted that the judge's mind,  at  [24]  of  the  decision  and
    reasons, was not on Section 55 duty to safeguard the best interests  of
    the child.

 4. It was not in dispute before me that the Tribunal had a  duty  to  take
    into consideration the best interests  of  the  British  child  of  the
    relationship.  Mr Awan pointed to  the  seven  principles  outlined  in
    Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  UKSC  74,
    namely:

         "(1) The best interests of a child are  an  integral  part  of  the
             proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;

         (2)  In making that assessment, the best interests of a child  must
             be a primary  consideration,  although  not  always  the  only
             primary consideration; and the child's best interests  do  not
             of themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;

         ((3) Although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed  by
             the  cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,  no  other
             consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;

         (4)  While different judges might approach the question of the best
             interests of a child in different ways, it is important to ask
             oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in  order  to
             avoid the risk that the best interests of  a  child  might  be
             undervalued when other important considerations were in play;

         (5)   It  is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of   a   child's
             circumstances and of what  is  in  a  child's  best  interests
             before one asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed
             by the force of other considerations;

         (6)  To that end there is no substitute for a  careful  examination
             of all relevant factors when the  interests  of  a  child  are
             involved in an article 8 assessment; and

         (7)  A child must not be blamed for matters for which he/she is not
             responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."

 5. Mr  Awan  drew  my  attention  to  the  respondent's  guidance  in  the
    Immigration  Directorate  Instructions,  August  2015  in  relation  to
    whether it would be unreasonable to expect a British citizen  child  to
    leave the UK at 11.2.3.  It was also  Mr  Awan's  submission  that  the
    judge's findings, at  [24]  of  the  decision  and  reasons,  that  the
    appellant's best interests were served in remaining with  her  parents,
    were in contrast to the findings at [11].  At [11] of the decision  and
    reasons the Tribunal found as follows:

         "11. It is also a fact that the immigration decision  prevents  the
             appellant and his wife living together in the UK against their
             wishes.  Of itself, the failure to respect the couple's wishes
             does not have the potential to engage Article  8.   But  there
             are other factors.  It is far from obvious that his wife could
             be expected to relocate to Pakistan since  she  is  a  British
             citizen having been born in the United Kingdom.  She has lived
             here all her life.  Her centre of life is focused in  the  UK.
             They have a daughter from  their  relationship  born  on  15th
             August 2012.  It is possible that the  decision  may  have  an
             impact on their child's wellbeing because it could  result  in
             their daughter not having regular contact with her father.

         12.  In light  of  these  factors,  I  am  satisfied  the  decision
             refusing leave to remain may have consequences of such gravity
             as potentially to engage the operation of Article  8,  thereby
             disposing of the second Razgar question.

         13.  In light of the evidence and these comments, I find  that  the
             appellant enjoys family  life  with  his  wife  and  daughter,
             thereby disposing of the first Razgar question."

 6. As I indicated at the hearing, it is evident that the judge's  findings
    at [12] were very much in the  context  of  the  Razgar  questions  and
    whether or not family life existed and whether the decision potentially
    impacted to the extent that Article 8 was potentially engaged.   It  is
    evident from the wording at [11] that  the  judge  had  not  reached  a
    conclusion in relation to those key factors including that issues  were
    "far from obvious" and that "it is possible" in terms of the impact  of
    the decision.

 7. However, the Tribunal went on in its findings to consider first of  all
    that it had not been established that there was a  subsisting  marriage
    between the appellant and his  partner.   That  finding  has  not  been
    challenged.  The decision went on to find that the  appellant  was  the
    father of a British child and accepted, at [19], that the appellant had
    established the relevant relationship requirement and  therefore  could
    rely on a provision of Section 117B(6) which reverses the justification
    for exclusion that arises from other provisions of  Section  117B.   It
    was not disputed that the Tribunal correctly directed itself as to  the
    relevant test and the judge set out the case law relied on including MA
    (Pakistan and Others) v SSHD and Another [2016] EWCA Civ 705, R (on the
    application of) Agyarko (appellant) v SSHD [2017] UKSC 11.   The  judge
    went on, at [24], to find as follows:

         "The appellant's daughter is a qualifying child by virtue that  she
         is a British citizen.  I  have  made  findings  of  fact  that  the
         appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  with
         her.  The second test poses the question of  whether  it  would  be
         reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United  Kingdom.   The
         appellant lives with  his  daughter  and  wife.   They  have  daily
         interaction.  The second stage of  the  test  is  the  question  of
         reasonableness - would it be unreasonable to  expect  his  daughter
         and wife to leave the UK.  AM (Pakistan) & Ors v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 180, 22  March  2017  -  in
         considering whether children who had lived in the UK for over seven
         years could be removed, it was inherent in the reasonableness  test
         in section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
         2002 and paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Immigration Rules  HC  395  (as
         amended) that the Court should have regard to wider public interest
         considerations, particularly the  need  for  effective  immigration
         control.  Applying the guidance in AM it  would  be  reasonable  to
         expect the family as a whole to relocate.  Their daughter  is  very
         young and she is reliant upon her parents.  She  is  too  young  to
         have developed and formed her own associations  with  others.   Her
         best interests are served with her remaining with her parents."

 8. The Tribunal went on to find, at  [25],  that  the  appellant's  spouse
    could relocate and I do not agree with Mr Awan's submission  that  this
    contradicts his finding at  [11]  in  determining  whether  Razgar  was
    engaged that 'it was far from obvious' that she  could  relocate.   The
    judge went on to consider all the factors including at  [25]  and  [26]
    where the Tribunal was not satisfied that the settled spouse had  shown
    that it would be more than inconvenient to relocate.

 9. Mr Awan submitted that the appellant was not someone who was unlawfully
    in the UK and at the time of  the  appeal  he  had  Section  3C  leave.
    Although Mr Awan initially argued that as the  appellant's  application
    was made before 5 February 2015 the old grounds of appeal under Section
    84 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  prior  to
    amendment applied and it was his argument that the  Tribunal  ought  to
    have  considered  whether,  for  example,  the  decision  was  not   in
    accordance with the law; he did not pursue that argument as he conceded
    that the only ground of appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  in
    relation to the provisions of Article 8 and it was  not  argued  before
    the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant could meet the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.

10. Although Mr Awan relied on paragraphs 51 and 52 of  the  Supreme  Court
    decision in Agyarko including that it was relevant whether an applicant
    was in the UK lawfully and whether there might be any  public  interest
    in their removal, paragraphs 51 and 52 of the Supreme Court in Agyarko,
    whilst discussing the issue  of  precariousness,  was  considering  the
    position of where an applicant might be certain to be granted leave  to
    enter such as the circumstances outlined in Chikwamba  v  Secretary  of
    State  for  the  Home  Department  [2008]  UKHL  40.    That  was   not
    established to be the case in this appeal.

11. Mr Avery submitted that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    sustainable and that the judge had correctly directed himself as to the
    appropriate case law.  Whilst ideally the judge might  have  structured
    the approach to the best interests differently, [24]  of  the  decision
    was clear in the conclusion as to the child's best interests.

12. In relation to Section 117B(6) the appellant's wife and  British  child
    are not being expected or forced to leave  the  United  Kingdom  and  I
    considered VM (Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 255 including paragraph 60  and
    FZ (China) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ
    550.  The crucial question is whether there is an  'entire  dependency'
    of the relevant child on the person  who  is  refused  residence.   The
    approach in Agyarko v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]
    UKSC 11 at paragraphs 61 to 67 is relevant in such cases.  As was  held
    in VM (Jamaica) and FZ (China) the possibility of  children  relocating
    does not violate the fundamental precepts of EU law.  The  child  could
    alternatively remain in the UK with her mother.  There  is  no  'entire
    dependency'.

13. It is difficult to see how the Tribunal erred in its assessment of best
    interests which I am satisfied were properly assessed in isolation from
    the wider concerns which the Tribunal then took into consideration  and
    the judge was properly aware  and  made  findings  as  to  the  child's
    British citizenship but nevertheless found, for the sustainable reasons
    given, that it was reasonable for the child and her mother to accompany
    the appellant.

Conclusion

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Dated:  2 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  Therefore no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Dated:  2 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

