
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01977/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 9th October 2013                             |On 23rd October 2013       |
|Extempore Judgement                             |                           |


                                   Before
                   MISS E E ARFON-JONES DL, VICE PRESIDENT
                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                              Mr Vikram Vashist
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not Present or Represented
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the  Appellant  against  the
    Decision of First-tier Tribunal (Judge Blackford) who heard the  matter
    at Taylor House on 12th July 2013.  By a determination  promulgated  on
    31st July he dismissed the appeal.  The appeal was  in  relation  to  a
    refusal to vary leave as a Tier 4 student  and  to  remove  by  way  of
    directions.  The Tribunal dismissed the appeal but did  not  deal  with
    the decision to remove  the  Appellant  pursuant  to  s47  Immigration,
    Nationality and Asylum Act 2006.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by a  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant had requested that the Upper Tribunal decide  the  appeal
    on the basis of the papers and thus there was no attendance  by  or  on
    behalf of the Appellant.

 4. The first ground on which permission was sought was that the First-tier
    Tribunal should have adjourned the case and that it was unfair  not  to
    have done so given the Appellant's ill health.  The Tribunal noted that
    there had been an application for an adjournment on the  basis  of  his
    ill-health which had been refused prior to  the  hearing.   They  noted
    that there had been a previous application for an adjournment which had
    been allowed on the basis  that  any  further  application  to  adjourn
    should  be  supported  by  medical  evidence.   In  relation   to   the
    application for an adjournment there was a note from a doctor referring
    to back pain but no indication that the Appellant was unable to  attend
    the hearing and in those  circumstances  the  adjournment  application,
    which did not comply with the previous directions, the Tribunal refused
    to adjourn.  That was perfectly proper and there is no error of law  in
    failing to adjourn.

 5. The next criticism is that the First-tier Tribunal failed to deal  with
    Article 8. Although Article 8 is pleaded  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,
    there was no evidence adduced in relation to Article 8 and therefore no
    evidence on which the Judge could possibly have allowed the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.  Thus while failing to deal with a pleaded ground of
    an appeal is an error of law it could not have affected the outcome and
    thus the error is not material.

 6. The ground which does have merit is the assertion that the Judge  erred
    in failing to find the removal  decision  unlawful.  The  Secretary  of
    State had made  a  removal  decision  under  s47  of  the  Immigration,
    Nationality and Asylum Act 2006 which we now  know,  on  the  basis  of
    Ahmadi [2012] UKUT 147 (IAC) she had no power to do.   Insofar  as  the
    Tribunal failed to make that finding it made an error of law and we re-
    decide the appeal in that  regard  only.   The  substantive  appeal  in
    relation to the refusal to vary leave shall stand.

 7. In re-deciding the  matter  we  find  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to remove the Appellant from the UK was unlawful and therefore
    the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the limited extent  that
    there is  no  extant  removal  decision.   The  substantive  appeal  in
    relation to the refusal to vary leave remains dismissed.


Signed                              Date 9th October 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

