
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01894/2016
                                                               IA/01896/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 29.01.18                                |On 07.02.18                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                           (1) Mr sarcyz shrestha
                           (2) mrs durga shrestha
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:              Mr D. Coleman, Counsel
For the Respondent:             Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Rourke sitting at  Newport  on  8  May
    2017) dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse to grant him leave to remain outside the Rules in order
    to enable him to find a sponsor and to obtain a CAS so  that  he  could
    complete his education the UK, which he said had not been completed for
    reasons beyond his control, including illness.  The  second  appellant,
    his wife, joins in his appeal as his dependent. The First-tier Tribunal
    did not make an anonymity direction, and I do not consider that such  a
    direction is warranted for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for Refusal

 2. On 31 March 2016 the Secretary of State gave her  reasons  for  holding
    that there were  not  exceptional  circumstances.   There  was  no  set
    timescale or guarantee  that  he  would  be  ultimately  successful  in
    obtaining a sponsor. The fact that he  had  been  unable  to  secure  a
    sponsor prior to his application was testament to this.  He  could  re-
    apply for a student visa from Nepal, "once you are  in  a  position  to
    actually make a student application".

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appeals were heard in  the  absence  of  the  appellants,  who  had
    written to the Tribunal shortly before the scheduled oral hearing  with
    a request that their appeals be decided on the papers. As they had  not
    written to the respondent, a Presenting Officer attended the hearing.

 4. In her closing submissions, the Presenting Officer submitted  that  the
    first appellant could have had no legitimate expectation  of  remaining
    in the UK, once his last leave was curtailed. For much of his  time  in
    the UK, his immigration status had either been illegal  or  precarious;
    and there were no compelling circumstances that justified consideration
    of Article 8 outside the Rules.

 5. The Judge's findings of fact were set out in paragraphs [25] to [30] of
    his subsequent decision. At paragraph [26] he observed that, while  not
    strictly relevant to the issues in the appeal, the first appellant "did
    not comply with the terms of his student visa". He had  overstayed  for
    two years between 2011 and 2013. After being granted short  periods  of
    leave to remain in October 2013 and February 2014, "he failed to comply
    with the requirements of that leave, as the college  he  attended  lost
    its licence".  It did not matter that it was not his fault. He had  not
    provided evidence of any attendance at any college, nor any evidence of
    efforts to approach other colleges and their stated responses  that  he
    needed a valid visa. "Nor has he attended to  give  evidence  today  at
    this hearing, indicating to me  that  he  has  probably  never  been  a
    legitimate student during his time in the UK."

 6. At paragraph [28] the Judge held that there  was  no  evidence  of  any
    particular private life in the UK that might be worthy  of  protection,
    or could not be replicated in Nepal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 7. On 27 November  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mailer  granted  the
    appellants permission to appeal as it was arguable that his findings on
    the first appellant's immigration history were factually incorrect, and
    "this may have affected the proper  assessment  of  Article  8  private
    life".

Discussion

 8. Some of the findings of fact referred to in paragraph  [5]  above  were
    not reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence that was  before  him.
    It was not the respondent's case in the refusal letter that  the  first
    appellant had been an overstayer or that he had breached the  terms  of
    his student visa.

 9. It appears that the first appellant had section 3C leave  between  2011
    and 2013.  In July 2011 he was refused leave to remain as  he  had  not
    been assigned a CAS.  On  15  September  2011  Judge  Katherine  Gordon
    allowed an appeal by him and his wife on, in effect, Article 8  grounds
    outside the Rules. She found that his leave had  expired  by  the  time
    that he had provided the necessary evidence to the college to obtain  a
    CAS. But she held that the college ought not to have refused him a  CAS
    on the ground that his leave had expired.

10. The decision of Judge Gordon does not disclose a finding of common  law
    unfairness on the part of the respondent. This may  explain  why  there
    was a two year delay before the first appellant was granted 60 days  to
    find a new sponsor and to obtain a CAS, which he managed to  do.  Hence
    he was not present in the UK illegally between 2011 and 2013.

11. The first appellant was granted leave to remain until 19 February 2015,
    but his leave was curtailed on 24 November 2014 to expire on 27 January
    2015 as his college had its licence revoked.  There  is  no  suggestion
    that he was implicated in the reasons for revocation. The reason why he
    applied for leave to remain outside the Rules on 27  January  2015  was
    that he had not been able to obtain a new CAS within 60 days.

12. Mr Coleman informed me that the appellants asked for their appeal to be
    decided on  the  papers  because  of  the  cost  and  inconvenience  of
    travelling from London to Newport, and back, with a small child in tow.
    The Judge was not aware of this explanation. Nonetheless, there was  no
    proper evidential basis for him drawing the adverse inference that  the
    first appellant's non-attendance arose from the fact that he had  never
    been a genuine student.

13. In opposing the appeal, Ms Everett has a strong  case  on  materiality.
    There were, and are, formidable  difficulties  in  an  appeal  of  this
    nature succeeding, when there is no discernible common  law  unfairness
    and when due note is taken of the relevant  domestic  jurisprudence  on
    Article 8 claims by students, of which Nasim  and  Others  (Article  8)
    [2014] UKUT 0025 (IAC) is the most pertinent.  At paragraphs  [14]  and
    [15] of Nasim, the Tribunal observed that the concept of a private life
    for the purposes of Article 8 is inherently less clear.  At one end  of
    the continuum stands the concept of moral and physical integrity as  to
    which, in extreme circumstances, even the State's interest in  removing
    foreign  criminals  might  not  constitute  a  proportionate  response.
    However, as one moves down the continuum,  one  encounters  aspects  of
    private life which, even if engaging Article 8(1), are so  far  removed
    from the core of Article  8  as  to  be  readily  defeasible  by  State
    interests, such  as  the  importance  of  maintaining  a  credible  and
    coherent system of immigration control. On this point on the continuum,
    the essential elements of the private life relied upon will normally be
    transposable, in the sense of being capable  of  replication  in  their
    essential respects, following a person's return to their home  country.
    A student here on a temporary basis has no expectation of  a  right  to
    remain in order to further his social ties and relationships in the  UK
    if the criteria of the points-based system are not met.

14. The Tribunal went on  in  paragraph  [16]  to  cite  with  approval  MG
    (assessing interference of private life) Serbia Montenegro [2005] UKAIT
    00113 as follows:

         A person's job and precise programme of studies may be different in
         the country to which he is  to  be  returned  and  his  network  of
         friendships and other acquaintances is likely to be different  too,
         but his private life will continue in respect of all its  essential
         elements.

15. The Tribunal at paragraph [20] reached the following conclusion:

         We therefore agree with Mr Jarvis that [57] of Patel and Others  is
         a  significant  exhortation  from  the  Supreme  Court  to  refocus
         attention  on  the  nature  and  purpose  of  Article  8  and,   in
         particular, to recognise its limited utility to an individual where
         one has moved along the continuum, from that Article's core area of
         operation towards what might be described as  its  fuzzy  penumbra.
         The limitation arises, both from what will at that  point  normally
         be  the  tangential  effect  on  the  individual  of  the  proposed
         interference and the fact that, unless there are particular reasons
         to reduce the public interest of  enforcing  immigration  controls,
         that  interest  will   consequently   prevail   in   striking   the
         proportionality balance (even assuming that stage is reached).

16. The Tribunal went on to address the scope of CDS (Brazil)  [2010]  UKUT
    305 (IAC).  At paragraph [41], they declined Mr Jarvis's invitation  to
    find that the obiter remarks in CDS regarding Article 8 were no  longer
    good law in the light of Patel and Others.  But the Tribunal in CDS did
    however expressly knowledge that it was unlikely a person would be able
    to show an Article  8  right  by  coming  to  the  United  Kingdom  for
    temporary purposes:

         The chances that such a  right  will  prevail  have,  we  consider,
         further diminished, in the light of  the  judgments  in  Patel  and
         Others.  It would, however, be wrong to say that the point has been
         reached where an adverse immigration decision  in  the  case  of  a
         person was here for study or other temporary purposes can never  be
         found to be disproportionate.  What is clear is that, on the  state
         of the present law, there is no  justification  for  extending  the
         obiter findings in CDS, so as to equate a person  whose  course  of
         study has not yet ended with a person who,  having  finished  their
         course, is precluded by the Immigration Rules from staying on to do
         something else.

17. However, the fact that the Judge could have  crafted  his  decision  in
    such a way that his conclusions on the merits were unimpeachable is not
    determinative. Justice must not only be done, but must be  seen  to  be
    done. The Judge's erroneous findings  of  fact  appear  to  affect  his
    assessment of Article 8 private life. He failed to carry out a detailed
    assessment of the first appellant's particular circumstances as set out
    in paragraphs 12 to 14 of his witness statement, because his  erroneous
    starting point was that nothing which the first appellant said in  this
    witness statement had any prima facie credibility.

18. Accordingly, the appellants were deprived of  a  fair  hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal, and the decision is thereby vitiated by a material
    error of law, such that it must  be  set  aside  in  its  entirety  and
    remade.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the decision is set aside.

Directions

As agreed by the representatives  at  the  hearing,  this  appeal  shall  be
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal Taylor House for a  fresh  oral  hearing
(Judge O'Rourke not compatible), with none of the findings of  fact  of  the
previous Tribunal being preserved.

The agreed time estimate is 2 hours.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson


