
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01449/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice -   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On 26 October 2015                   |On 30 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           mrs Tetyana Gordiyenko
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M O'Brian-Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In Person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings  is  the  Secretary  of  State.  For
    convenience however, I refer to the parties as  they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Ukraine born  on  9  October  1984.   She
    applied on 2 August 2013 for a residence card on the basis that she  is
    the family member of an EEA national  exercising  Treaty  rights.   The
    appellant's husband is the EEA national.

 3. The respondent refused the application because of a question that arose
    about the validity of the appellant's Ukrainian passport.  That  was  a
    matter that went to the question of the validity of  the  appeal  under
    regulation 26 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 ("the EEA Regulations"), specifically regulation 26(2).

 4. The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Kempton at  a  hearing
    on 10 February 2015.  At [10] of his decision he said that the issue to
    be decided was the preliminary issue  of  whether  there  was  a  valid
    appeal.   That  preliminary  issue  related  to  the  validity  of  the
    Ukrainian passport.  The judge resolved the matter of the  validity  of
    the passport in the appellant's  favour.   At  [16]  he  said  that  he
    allowed the appeal "only on the preliminary  point  of  validity".   At
    [18] the same was repeated stating that the appeal was allowed  on  the
    preliminary point of  validity  and  in  the  concluding  part  of  the
    decision under  the  subheading  "Notice  of  Decision"  he  stated  as
    follows:

           "The appeal is allowed only on  the  preliminary  issue  of  the
           validity of the appeal.  The respondent will now  require  (sic)
           to issue a fresh decision."

 5. Incidentally, under the heading of "Fee award" it was said that as  the
    appeal had been allowed no fee award would be made and  the  merits  of
    the appeal had yet to be determined.

 6. There is on the face of the judge's  decision  ambiguity  in  terms  of
    whether he was dealing with a  preliminary  issue  or  whether  he  was
    deciding the appeal itself. It nevertheless seems clear to me, and  was
    accepted on behalf of the respondent, that in fact this was a  decision
    made only on the question of the validity of the appeal and not on  its
    merits.

 7. The  other  matters  that  needed  to  be  resolved  in  terms  of  the
    requirements to be satisfied for the issue of a residence card were not
    dealt with by the judge because the matter  before  him  was  only  the
    validity of the appeal.

 8. The respondent sought, and was obviously granted, permission to  appeal
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. The grounds on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State complain about the judge's conclusions as  to
    the validity of the document produced, the judge concluding that it was
    a valid (international) passport.

 9. Under section 11 of the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007
    subparagraph (1) provides that for the purposes of subsection  (2)  the
    reference to a right of appeal is to a right to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on any point of law arising from a decision made by the First-
    tier Tribunal other than an excluded decision.  In order to decide what
    is an excluded decision one needs to  turn  to  the  Appeals  (Excluded
    Decisions) Order 2009.  Article 3(m) of  that  Order  includes  in  the
    definition of excluded decisions:

         "Any procedural, ancillary or preliminary decision made in relation
         to an appeal against a decision under Section 40A  of  the  British
         Nationality Act 1981, section 82, 83 or  83A  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  or  Regulation  26   of   the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006."

10. It is accepted on behalf of the respondent that  in  fact  this  was  a
    preliminary issue.  It follows that the respondent was not entitled  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal in relation to that decision which was  an
    excluded decision.

11. Accordingly,  the  judge  who  granted  permission  to  appeal  had  no
    jurisdiction to do so. It  follows  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  no
    jurisdiction to deal with any appeal against the preliminary  issue  of
    the validity of the appeal.  The consequence of all that is that  there
    remains outstanding before the First-tier Tribunal  an  appeal  against
    the refusal of a residence card.   That  is  because  First-tier  Judge
    Kempton decided the validity of appeal point in the appellant's favour.
     The Upper Tribunal  therefore  has  no  jurisdiction  and  the  appeal
    remains outstanding before the First-tier Tribunal.

12. The appeal should be listed for hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
    before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Kempton.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  26/11/15

