
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/01347/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 January 2016                   |On 3 February 2016                   |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Baines, counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State pursues this appeal against the decision of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal to allow an  appeal  against  the  cancellation  of
    leave.

 2. I maintain the descriptions of the parties as they were in  the  First-
    Tier Tribunal,  for  ease  of  reference,  notwithstanding  it  is  the
    Secretary of State who pursues this appeal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of India who appealed against  the  decision
    to cancel her leave to enter on 28 December 2014.  Her  appeal  against
    that decision was allowed by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Povey
    ("the FTTJ") in a decision promulgated on 3 August 2015.

 4. An anonymity direction was not made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    given my references to the appellant's account of physical abuse by her
    former partner, she is entitled to anonymity in these proceedings.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge E B  Grant  on
    19 November 2015 in the following terms:

         "The grounds submit the FtTJ erred  in  law  by  asking  the  wrong
         question when finding that the decision to cancel leave  to  remain
         was substantively unfair to the appellant when the  question  which
         should have  been  considered  was  whether  the  cancellation  was
         procedurally unfair."

 6. Thus the appeal has come before me.

 7. In the grounds of appeal it was submitted for the respondent  that  the
    FTTJ ought to have taken into account that the Immigration Officer  was
    aware that the cancellation would have the  effect  of  preventing  the
    appellant from lodging an application under appendix FM; the IO had had
    regard to the change of circumstances  but  also  to  the  question  of
    whether or not factors militated against this (a  matter  of  relevance
    only to whether or not to  curtail  leave  which  was  a  discretionary
    matter). It was submitted that reasons were given for the decision  not
    to curtail leave but  to  cancel  it,  those  reasons  being  that  the
    appellant had not applied for leave as a victim of domestic violence in
    the six month between her previous relationship breaking down  and  her
    attempt to re-enter the UK and that she had not  brought  to  the  IO's
    attention the  change  of  circumstances  until  she  was  specifically
    questioned  further.   It  was  submitted  that,  relying  on   Marghia
    (procedural fairness) [2014] 00366 (IAC) the decision was  procedurally
    fair and that the FTTJ  had  erred  in  not  considering  the  evidence
    against the  correct  question.   Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  also  drew  my
    attention to Fiaz (cancellation of leave to remain -  fairness)  [2012]
    UKUT 00057 (IAC), paragraph 34. She submitted that  the  decision-maker
    was alert to the facts of the appellant's case.

 8. Ms Baines, for the appellant, relied  on  her  skeleton  argument  (for
    which I am grateful).  She submitted that the FTTJ had directed himself
    to the correct question  and  made  an  appropriate  finding  that  the
    respondent's decision "was procedurally flawed".  The FTTJ  had  relied
    on the guidance in Fiaz, which was  cited  in  the  decision.   It  was
    relevant that the appellant had a prima facie claim to remain  in  this
    country on grounds of domestic violence in her  previous  relationship.
    No consideration had been given by the respondent's decision  maker  to
    the existence of domestic violence in  the  relationship.  The  further
    interview with the appellant did not form part o  the  decision  making
    process regarding the cancellation of leave. It was procedurally unfair
    not to await the outcome of the respondent's own investigation into the
    existence of evidence of domestic violence, before making  a  decision.
    It was submitted that the grounds of appeal amounted to no more than  a
    disagreement with the FTTJ's decision.  The  FTTJ  had  given  adequate
    reasons for his decision  and  those  reasons  were  supported  by  the
    evidence.  The FTTJ found that the appellant was a victim  of  domestic
    violence and that she and her current partner had attempted to  contact
    the respondent.  The FTTJ also accepted the appellant's explanation for
    failing to tell the Immigration Officer at the point of entry that  her
    former relationship was abusive: contact had been in a public place.

 9. Ms Baines also noted that there was no reference to domestic  abuse  in
    the  respondent's  decision  to  cancel  the  appellant's  leave  which
    suggested that it had not been taken into account.  Even  the  document
    prepared  for  the  appeal  hearing  (IS  125)  made  no  reference  to
    consideration by the decision maker of the option of curtailment of the
    appellant's leave. Thus, she submitted, it could not be said  that  the
    respondent had considered all the relevant issues.

10. Ms Baines submitted that, in any  event,  any  error  of  law  was  not
    material: the appellant had not misrepresented her position because the
    FTTJ accepted her evidence on this issues; the decision to  cancel  had
    been made in ignorance of the relevant  fact  that  the  appellant  had
    attempted to contact the respondent to notify  her  of  her  change  of
    circumstances (as found by  the  FTTJ);  and  the  respondent  attached
    insufficient weight to relevant facts, eg that the  appellant  was  not
    responsible for the abuse in her relationship with her  former  partner
    and the fact she had a prima facie ground for the  grant  of  leave  to
    remain on domestic violence grounds.  Ms Baines also relied on Fiaz but
    distinguished the facts of this case in  that  the  appellant  had  not
    sought to mislead the respondent, nor had she been responsible for  her
    change of circumstances.

Discussion and findings

11. Whilst the respondent has produced a document which  seeks  to  justify
    her decision-making (the IS 125) both parties agreed that this had been
    produced after receipt of the notice of appeal and in readiness for the
    hearing. It is not therefore a contemporaneous document.  It  has  been
    prepared with the benefit of hindsight and to contest the appeal in the
    First-tier Tribunal.

12. I consider my starting point to be those documents which were available
    to the respondent at the date of decision. In particular,  I  note  the
    Immigration Officer's (IO's) handwritten notes, the record of interview
    on 27 December 2014 and the decision notice itself (which sets out,  in
    brief, the reasons for the decision).  There is no witness statement by
    the decision-maker.

13. The IO's note records the name of the appellant's current  partner  and
    his date of birth, together with the name  of  the  appellant's  former
    partner and his date of birth. There is also a  telephone  number,  the
    words "lodger, OCCUPANTANT [sic]" and an address (which is  illegible).
    The record of interview on 27 December 2014 shows  that  the  appellant
    had told the IO the date on which she last saw her former partner, that
    she had been in a  common  law  relationship  with  him  and  that  the
    relationship had ended because he was physically  abusive  and  "has  a
    brutish manner" (the handwriting is difficult to read but this is  what
    is appears to record).  In any event, I am satisfied that it would have
    been clear to the IO  that  the  appellant  reported  that  her  former
    relationship had broken down as a result of physical domestic abuse.

14. In the notice of decision dated 28 December 2014, it is stated:

         "On  25/2/14  you  were  issued  with  a  UK  Resident  Permit  ...
         conferring Leave to Enter until 25/8/16 as  the  Spouse/Partner  of
         [the appellant's former partner]. I am  satisfied  that  there  has
         been a change of circumstances in your case  since  the  leave  was
         granted and that it should be cancelled. This is because you are no
         longer, since July 2014 in a  common  law  relationship  with  [the
         appellant's former partner]  and  have  established  a  common  law
         relationship with [the appellant's boyfriend].

         I consider that this constitutes a significant and material  change
         of circumstances  and  that  the  leave  conferred  by  your  entry
         clearance should be cancelled. I therefore cancel your leave  under
         Section 2A(8) of  Schedule  2  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971  and
         paragraph 321A(1) of the Immigration Rules (HC395)."

         You have  not  sought  entry  under  any  other  provision  of  the
         immigration rules."

15. The appellant  and  her  boyfriend  gave  evidence  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The FTTJ found their evidence credible and  this  finding  is
    not challenged by the respondent before me.  Nor is  it  submitted  for
    the respondent that the FTTJ took into account irrelevant evidence when
    making his decision.

16. The FTTJ's starting point was that it  was  not  in  dispute  that  the
    appellant's circumstances had changed  since  the  grant  of  leave  in
    February 2014 (paragraph 30).

17. The unchallenged  evidence  of  the  appellant  is  that,  having  been
    threatened by her former partner that he would report their  separation
    to the respondent, she had tried to telephone the  respondent,  without
    success. As a result, towards the end of  June  2014,  the  appellant's
    boyfriend  then  sent  an  email  on  the  appellant's  behalf  to  the
    respondent seeking advice on what the appellant could or should  do  in
    the face of this threat regarding her immigration status.  As the  FTTJ
    found "questions were asked as to what the Appellant's options were and
    whether there was another visa she could or should apply for".

18. The FTTJ also accepted that the appellant  was  a  victim  of  domestic
    violence. He found that it was reasonable for the appellant not to have
    volunteered the reason her relationship with  her  former  partner  had
    broken down when being first interviewed by the  IO  at  the  point  of
    entry, ie at the airport immigration desk. He noted  that  this  was  a
    public place and, further, that the IO had not asked the reason for the
    breakdown of the relationship.

19. The FTTJ also took into account that the appellant's relationship  with
    her former partner had broken down for reasons outside her control; she
    was the victim of domestic violence. Whilst the FTTJ does not state  as
    much, this is a claim which was known to the respondent at the date  of
    decision, the appellant having reported as much to the IO in  interview
    prior to the decision being taken. The FTTJ found  that  the  appellant
    had not sought to misrepresent her position to the  respondent  at  any
    time. He  found  it  relevant  (and  this  is  not  challenged  by  the
    respondent either) that the appellant had "an arguable claim for  leave
    to remain on the grounds of domestic violence" and  that  this  was  "a
    factor that should properly be  considered  when  deciding  whether  to
    exercise discretion and [sic] curtail rather than cancel leave" because
    "if her leave were curtailed rather than cancelled, the Appellant would
    be afforded the opportunity to make an application under Section  DVILR
    [sic]".

20. It is submitted by the respondent that the FTTJ "ought  to  have  taken
    into account that the IO was aware that the cancellation would have the
    effect of preventing the appellant from lodging  an  application  under
    Appx FM (see Document IS 125 - explanatory statement in  R's  bundle)".
    However, this document was prepared for the appeal hearing and  not  at
    the date of decision.  There is no evdience to suggest that the IO  was
    so aware at the date of decision.  The IS125 has been prepared with the
    benefit of hindsight and with knowledge of the grounds of  appeal.   It
    does not appear to have been drafted by the IO who made the immigration
    decision and cannot therefore be  taken  to  be  the  evidence  of  the
    decision-maker as to what he knew about the impact  of  cancelling  the
    appellant's leave. Nor can it be taken, as is submitted before  me,  to
    be evidence that the IO "had regard to the change of circumstances  but
    also to the question of whether or not factors militated against this";
    there is no such evidence that those "mitigating  factors"  were  taken
    into account by the IO when he made his decision. I reiterate that  the
    IS 125 was  prepared  after  for  the  appeal  hearing;  it  is  not  a
    contemporaneous document or a witness statement.

21. I do not accept the submission before me that the immigration  decision
    "was taken in light of all the facts provided by the appellant and that
    reasons were given for the decision not to curtail leave but to  cancel
    it".  The respondent, in making this submission,  has  failed  to  take
    into  account  the  findings  of  fact  of  the  FTTJ  (which  are  not
    challenged) to the effect that the appellant was the victim of domestic
    violence, that her separation from her former partner was  outside  her
    control and that she had sought advice from the respondent  as  to  her
    immigration position.  There is no evidence that the IO had  taken  any
    of these factors into  account.  Indeed  the  immigration  decision  is
    silent on all these matters, merely citing the material change  in  the
    appellant's circumstances.  This is surprising, given that the  IO  had
    been told in interview, the day before making the immigration decision,
    that the relationship had broken down as a result of domestic abuse.

22. The FTTJ cited the guidance in Fiaz.  He considered  all  the  evidence
    and made findings of fact which are not challenged by  the  respondent.
    Nor is it disputed by the respondent that  the  power  to  curtail  was
    available to the IO.  The FTTJ made the following additional findings:

         "35.     The above factors support a conclusion that  the  duty  of
         fairness required leave to be curtailed. The Respondent's  decision
         was procedurally flawed. It was founded on a  mistake  as  to  fact
         (that the Appellant misrepresented her position). The decision  was
         taken in ignorance of a  relevant  fact  (that  the  Appellant  had
         contacted the Respondent  in  June  2014).  The  decision  attached
         insufficient weight to relevant facts (that the Appellant  was  not
         responsible for the change in her circumstances and  that  she  had
         prima facie grounds for succeeding in any application under Section
         DVILR of the Appendix FM).

         36.      Further, whilst the Respondent has  provided  reasons  for
         why she cancelled the Appellant's  leave  to  remain,  it  is  less
         clear, in my judgment, whether she considered her power to  curtail
         leave and, if she did, why  she  concluded  its  exercise  was  not
         justified on the facts of this case. The Respondent has a  duty  to
         consider whether to exercise a power available to her and,  if  she
         decides not to do so, to provide clear and  cogent  reasons  as  to
         why. In my judgement, the power to curtail  was  available  to  the
         Respondent in this case. There was an overlap between her power  to
         cancel and her  power  to  curtail  leave.  She  has  not  provided
         sufficient reasons as to why she did not choose the latter. This is
         particularly apposite when, as here, the facts support an  argument
         for curtailment over cancellation."

23. The respondent, before me, relies  on  the  guidance  in  Marghia,  the
    headnote to which is as follows:

         "The common law duty of fairness is  essentially  about  procedural
         fairness. There is no absolute duty at common law to make decisions
         which are substantively "fair". The Court will not  interfere  with
         decisions which are objected  to  as  being  substantively  unfair,
         except the decision in question falls foul of the  Wednesbury  test
         i.e. that no reasonable decision-maker or public  body  could  have
         arrived at such a decision.

         It is a matter for the Secretary of State whether she exercises her
         residual discretion. The  exercise  of  such  residual  discretion,
         which does not appear in the Immigration  Rules,  is  absolutely  a
         matter for the Secretary of State and nobody  else,  including  the
         Tribunal - Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148."

24. The FTTJ's findings  of  fact  are  sustainable  on  the  evidence  and
    unchallenged.  Taking the decision as a whole, it  is  clear  that  the
    FTTJ has addressed the issue of procedural fairness.  He has found  the
    decision-maker failed to take into account matters  of  relevance  when
    making the immigration decision. He gives full reasons for that finding
    and those reasons are sustainable on the evidence.  This appeal  is  no
    more than a disagreement with the FTTJ's decision.

25. For these reasons, there is no material error  of  law  in  the  FTTJ's
    decision.

Decision

26. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

27. I do not set aside the decision.


Signed      A M Black  Date 1 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      A M Black  Date 1 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

