
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/01630/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 August 2018                             |On 10 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                        Ms sasanthi udara jayasekara
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kannangara, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Faulkes-Jones  who,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  7
    February 2017, allowed the appellant's appeal against a decision of the
    Secretary of State to refuse her application for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri  Lanka  who  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 29 February 2004 with entry clearance as a student.  She was
    granted further leave to enter in that capacity until 28 February  2005
    and remained in the United  Kingdom  as  a  student,  her  leave  being
    extended on various periods,  her  most  recent  application  being  an
    application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student  granted  until  29
    December 2014.

 3. On 2 December  the  appellant  made  a  human  rights  application  for
    indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  based  on  long
    residence and she was interviewed in connection with  that  application
    on 5 October 2015, the respondent being concerned  that  the  appellant
    may have obtained a TOEIC certificate from ETS by deception.

 4. The respondent refused the application on general grounds, pursuant  to
    paragraph 322(2) of the Immigration Rules on  the  basis  that  in  her
    current application , at Section D11, she had said  she  had  not  used
    deception when seeking leave to remain, the respondent concluding  that
    this statement was false because she had in an application made  on  20
    September 2012 submitted a TOEIC certificate from ETS which related  to
    a test taken on 21 June 2012 at London College of Media and  Technology
    which had been cancelled by ETS, the respondent  being  satisfied  from
    the  information  provided  by  ETS  that  the  certificate  had   been
    fraudulently obtained; and, that she had therefore  used  deception  in
    her application made relying on that on 20 September 2012.   For  these
    reasons the Secretary of State  refused  the  application  pursuant  to
    paragraph 322(1A) and pursuant to paragraph  276B  on  the  basis  that
    although she  had  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  continuously  and
    lawfully during the period from her arrival after 29 February 2004  she
    had used deception in an attempt to obtain leave in the United  Kingdom
    and thus the application fell to be  dismissed  pursuant  to  paragraph
    276B(ii).

 5. The respondent also refused the  application  on  family  life  grounds
    under the Appendix FM parent rules.

 6. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal on 12 January  2018
    the appellant gave evidence.  It was accepted between the parties  that
    there was no available copy of the interview record of 5 October  2015,
    an interview in which the appellant was asked about her  attendance  at
    the ETS testing centre.  It was also  accepted  the  only  issues  were
    Rules 322(1A), 322(2) and 276B(ii) and (iii).

 7. It was recorded that the appellant had said that she  had  not  used  a
    proxy test taker and taken the test herself, providing two  IELTS  test
    certificates dated 31 March 2011 and 13 October 2014.

 8. The judge directed herself [5.3] to [5.5] in respect of SM and Qadir  v
    SSHD (ETS - evidence - burden of proof) [2016] UKUT  229  noting  [5.6]
    the evidence of Professor French that  errors  may  have  occurred  and
    concluding that the respondent had  not  passed  the  first  evidential
    burden in that he had not produced  sufficient  evidence  to  raise  an
    issue as to the existence of fraud.  She therefore allowed the appeal.

 9. The respondent appealed on the grounds that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    reversing the burden of proof, failing to follow the guidance given  in
    SSHD v Shehzad and Another [2016] EWCA Civ 615 and SM  and  Qadir.  The
    headnote of the latter provides:
         (i)  The Secretary of State's generic evidence, combined  with  her
         evidence particular to these two appellants, sufficed to  discharge
         the evidential burden of proving that their TOEIC certificates  had
         been procured by dishonesty.


         (ii) However, given the multiple frailties from which this  generic
         evidence was considered to suffer and, in the light of the evidence
         adduced by  the  appellants,  the  Secretary  of  State  failed  to
         discharge the legal burden of proving dishonesty on their part.

10. After hearing submissions from the parties I concluded that  the  judge
    had failed properly to direct herself in light  of  SM  and  Qadir  and
    Shehzad and Others in failing to note the guidance  that  the  material
    provided  showed  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  satisfied   the
    evidential burden.

11. I heard evidence from the appellant who said that  she  had  taken  the
    test in East London at the London Media and  Technology  College.   She
    said that the test was taken in two parts over two days.  She said that
    she recalled going to the college by train, the college  had  not  been
    that far from Bow and they had checked her passport and the details  on
    arrival.  She said the test was computer-based  and  she  could  recall
    reading out passages describing what was in photographs, she  had  done
    this herself.  She said it took one to one and a half weeks to get  the
    result and that TOEIC tests were quicker than others which is  why  she
    had chosen them and they are approved by the Home Office.  She said she
    was not sure when she realised there was a problem  and  that  she  had
    done this to be on the safe side in case the certificate had  run  out.
    She had not heard anything until she got the Home  Office  refusal  and
    that she was surprised by this.  She said she  could  not  do  anything
    when she found out about it other than appeal and that she had  emailed
    ETS to get details about what happened but  not  received  a  response.
    She said a lot of people were in the same position.  Copies  of  emails
    were produced.  She denied having used a proxy test taker and  she  was
    confident she would have passed.  Asked if she could explain the result
    she said that she did not have a clue.

12. The appellant confirmed that her son is  still  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom and has now acquired British citizenship.  She  said  that  she
    now lived with her partner who is a British citizen.

13. Mr Tarlow submitted, relying on the refusal letter, that the respondent
    had met the evidential threshold and it was therefore for the appellant
    now to provide an innocent explanation which she had not done.  On that
    basis the appeal should be dismissed.

14. Mr Kannangara submitted that the appellant had  given  a  truthful  and
    honest account and that she had no need to obtain a  false  test  given
    her earlier good IELTS test result.  She had done this only to obtain a
    sense of security.  He submitted that it was telling that there was  no
    interview record provided and the appellant had done all she  could  to
    try to find out what happened with her test result.

15. There is no challenge directly to the appellant's credibility,  despite
    extensive cross-examination.  I am satisfied  following  SM  and  Qadir
    that the Secretary of State has satisfied the evidential burden.  It is
    therefore for the appellant to provide an innocent  explanation  as  to
    why her result has been invalidated, not least  in  the  light  of  the
    evidence of Professor French.

16. It is worrying that the record of the appellant's interview  which  was
    nearer in time to the alleged use of a proxy test-taker, have been lost
    and accordingly, the result of that interview cannot be relied upon  by
    the Secretary  of  State.   There  are  inherent  difficulties  in  the
    appellant having to recall some six years after the event the taking of
    an English language test but it has not been suggested that her account
    of what happened during the test which was detailed as to  how  it  was
    conducted or how she travelled there are in any way  inconsistent  with
    what is known.  It was not suggested that she could have  learned  this
    information, nor that she had  taken  several  ETS  tests  and  so  the
    knowledge was not related to the one test she took.   Viewing  all  the
    evidence as a whole, and in the round, I  am  satisfied  that  she  has
    given an accurate account of what occurred but that is not  in  and  of
    itself an indication that she did not  cheat  by  using  a  proxy  test
    taker.

17. It is of note in this case that the appellant had obtained IELTS  tests
    before and  after  the  ETS  test.   Her  explanation,  which  was  not
    challenged by Mr Tarlow, was that  she  had  obtained  the  TOEIC  test
    results as she was concerned that a test certificate, and they are time
    limited, might run out before she needed to renew  it  and  to  prevent
    there being difficulties in renewing  a  visa,  due  to  the  time  lag
    between taking the test and obtaining the certificate, she had obtained
    a TOEIC certificate as this was the quickest to obtain. I am  satisfied
    again, that this is a plausible response and explains why she took  the
    test at the time.

18. I note also in this case that the appellant did seek to obtain from ETS
    details as to why her result had been invalidated, and that  there  has
    been no response. I bear in mind that the chance of error  is  low,  as
    indicated in the evidence  of  Professor  French,  but  that  does  not
    eliminate it. Equally, the error rate is an average, and  I  must  view
    the evidence in the round as a whole.

19. I found the appellant to be a candid and truthful  witness.   I  accept
    that she simply does not know how she could have got  an  invalid  test
    result and it is difficult to see  what  other  steps  she  could  have
    taken, nor were any put to her.  I accept that in her  evidence  before
    me she spoke in clear, confident and fluent  English  but  equally  she
    lives with a native English speaker and has done for many years  and  I
    attach little weight to her current fluency in English.  I do, however,
    consider that it is noteworthy  that  her  English  test  results  both
    before and after the impugned test results were such that there appears
    to be no need for her to have taken  the  test  result  other  than  to
    secure her position.

20. Taking all of the evidence as a whole and  bearing  in  mind  that  the
    appellant faces a difficult burden to provide an innocent  explanation,
    having heard her give evidence and be subject to  cross-examination,  I
    am satisfied that she has told me the truth and am satisfied that  this
    is one of the few occasions in which it has been shown that  there  had
    in fact been no dishonesty, albeit that this is a finely balanced case.

21. I am satisfied that the appellant has,  contrary  to  the  respondent's
    submissions, provided an innocent explanation and has therefore shifted
    the evidential burden imposed on her,  and  shown  that  there  was  no
    deception.  Accordingly, the Secretary of State cannot properly rely on
    paragraph 322(2) or 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.  Similarly, it is
    not suggested that the appellant does  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276B(ii) on any other basis and I allow the appeal under  the
    Immigration Rules for these reasons,

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by allowing  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules on a different factual basis


Signed                                  Date 1 October 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



