
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01788/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25 July 2014                                 |On 6 August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                                     NV
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss C H Bexson
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  He applied for indefinite leave
    to remain as the spouse of a person present and settled in  the  United
    Kingdom but that application was refused.  The respondent found that on
    balance there was insufficient evidence to show that the  appellant  is
    in a subsisting relationship.  There was also insufficient evidence  to
    show intention to live together with his spouse.

 2. The appellant appealed that decision.  In a  determination  promulgated
    on 16 May 2014 a First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 3. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  that  decision  on  three
    grounds.  Firstly, that the judge failed to accede to an application to
    adjourn the hearing of the appeal; secondly, the judge erred in law  by
    failing  to  direct  himself  properly  as  to  paragraph  287  of  the
    Immigration Rules; thirdly that he erred in misdirecting himself as  to
    the standard of proof applicable in this appeal.

The Grant of Permission

 4. In granting partial permission to appeal the judge doing so found  that
    the second and third grounds were not justified when  the  totality  of
    the assessment of the evidence, credibility  findings  and  "comparison
    with the law" is taken into account.  She found, however, that  it  was
    arguable that the adjournment was wrongly refused because the appellant
    had had inadequate notice of the Secretary of  State's  fresh  evidence
    which had not been served in  accordance  with  the  directions  given.
    Although Counsel was offered time to take instructions at  court  there
    was no opportunity to consider the evidence as a  whole,  to  ascertain
    whether other evidence could be called for by the  appellant  to  rebut
    the new evidence or whether the person at the appellant's home when the
    Immigration Officer called could be a pertinent witness.  The appellant
    was therefore  possibly  deprived  of  the  opportunity  to  rebut  the
    implications of the new evidence or to  enhance  his  own  evidence  by
    other material.  The interests of justice demand the appellant be given
    the means to present his case.  The respondent should not be  permitted
    to ambush the appellant on the day of hearing with new evidence that he
    could not rebut for want of witnesses.

 5. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response which argued that  the  judge's
    decision should be upheld, giving reasons.

The Error of Law Hearing

 6. I sought clarification from both representatives at  the  hearing  that
    they agreed that the only live issue before me was in relation  to  the
    arguable error concerning the adjournment application, the reasons  for
    it, and the rejection of it.  Both representatives agreed that this was
    indeed the only issue.

 7. The judge at paragraphs 1-4 of the determination  records  the  history
    concerning missing evidence from the respondent,  the  application  for
    the adjournment made before him and his reasons for  not  granting  it.
    He noted that two adjournments were granted to the respondent to enable
    the respondent's representative to secure copies of two documents.  The
    first was the record of a  marriage  interview  of  the  appellant  and
    sponsor.  The second document  was  the  statement  of  an  Immigration
    Officer who undertook an operational visit to the  appellant's  address
    in 2012.

 8. The judge goes on to record the reasons for seeking an  adjournment  at
    the hearing before him.  The first ground was that an  adjournment  was
    required to consider properly the two aforementioned documents  and  to
    prepare statements of the appellant and sponsor  in  response  to  them
    because they were served only on the day of the  hearing.   The  second
    and more important ground was that  while  it  was  a  matter  for  the
    respondent as to how he [sic]  presented  his  case  nonetheless  there
    should be  produced  the  notes  on  which  the  Immigration  Officer's
    statement was based  and  the  IS126  report  prepared.   Further,  the
    Immigration Officer should be produced for cross-examination.

 9. The judge records that he refused the adjournment firstly on the  basis
    that the appellant and the sponsor could in  oral  examination-in-chief
    give evidence  as  to  the  marriage  interview  record.  Secondly,  as
    acknowledged by the appellant's Counsel, the respondent's decision  not
    to produce the Immigration Officer and make her  available  for  cross-
    examination went to the weight to be attached to  her  statement.   The
    same consideration related to the respondent's decision not to  produce
    that officer's notes and her IS126 report.

10. The judge  records  that  he  offered  an  adjournment  to  enable  the
    appellant's Counsel to take any further instructions that  he  required
    in respect of the documents produced on behalf of the appellant and was
    informed that no further time was sought.

11. Before me it became apparent that the  documents  to  which  the  judge
    referred and  which  were  produced  at  the  hearing  consisted  of  a
    completed marriage interview record form and a witness  statement  from
    the said Immigration  Officer.   Miss  Bexson  did  not  represent  the
    appellant at the earlier hearing and appears to  have  been  instructed
    only very shortly before the hearing before me.  Miss Bexson based  her
    submissions upon the grounds seeking permission to appeal.  One of  the
    main points raised is that the  adjournment  application  was  made  in
    order to  obtain  detailed  evidence  "in  response  to  the  interview
    transcript and that given in the statement  of  the  named  Immigration
    Officer".

12. The witness statement of the Immigration Officer is  dated  5  November
    2013 and refers to an operational visit  having  taken  place  some  22
    months earlier in January 2012.  Questions from the officer and replies
    appear to indicate that the appellant was not  "at  the  moment  living
    with his partner" and in answer to a question  whether  they  had  ever
    lived together since the ceremony the recorded response is  "no".   The
    appellant asserts  that  the  words  attributed  to  him  were  wrongly
    recorded.  He deals with this issue  in  paragraph  6  of  his  witness
    statement and puts an entirely different spin on the conversation.  His
    version is to the effect that his partner was living with him and  they
    were not together at that moment  because  they  had  agreed  that  his
    partner should spend more time with his father who was in the UK at the
    time, had had  surgery  and  needed  his  care.   His  partner  in  his
    statement gave evidence confirming the position of the relationship  to
    the appellant and to his own parents at the time.

13. However, upon looking at  the  statements  of  the  appellant  and  his
    partner which were both signed some three months prior to  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Judge it is wholly  apparent  that  the  marriage
    interview record had already been served before  the  making  of  those
    statements. There is reference in them to specific paragraph numbers of
    the interview record and explanations given about various answers  that
    were given - for instance see paragraph 12 of the appellant's statement
    where he refers to question 83 of the interview record.

14. This appears to have gone  completely  unnoticed  until  I  raised  the
    matter at the hearing before me.  I gave Miss Bexson some time to  take
    instructions from her client as a result of which I  gathered  that  it
    was accepted that  the  marriage  interview  record  had  been  in  her
    client's possession as indeed  it  must  have  been  for  him  to  have
    commented upon it.

15. The only parts missing from the marriage interview record form were the
    completed  formal  details  regarding  the  appellant's   spouse,   the
    signatures of the applicant and his spouse and the concluding questions
    and final page of that interview that contain formal details also.  The
    only important concluding question is  as  to  whether  there  are  any
    reasons other than those told to the interviewing  officer  during  the
    interview why the appellant and his spouse would wish to remain in  the
    United Kingdom.  The responses are to the effect that  there  would  be
    problems or worse for them in Nigeria because of their sexuality.

16. I conclude from this therefore that so far as  the  marriage  interview
    record form is concerned there was no  good  reason  whatever  for  the
    judge to accede to a request to adjourn so that further evidence  could
    be obtained on matters contained within it. Only the  formal  parts  of
    the marriage interview record form had not been  served  prior  to  the
    hearing day and dealing with those formal parts,  even  supposing  that
    anything of importance  arose  out  of  them,  should  have  caused  no
    difficulty for the appellant or his representative. Clearly  the  judge
    thought this as well and made a decision accordingly.

17. As far  as  the  witness  statement  of  the  interviewing  officer  is
    concerned the appellant gave his version of events in his statement. If
    the appellant did not already have the statement prior to  the  hearing
    he was nevertheless challenged  at  the  interview  about  why  he  had
    answered "no" to the question "have you ever lived together" with  your
    partner - a clear reference to the Immigration Officer's record of  the
    events that took place in January  2012.  He  did  not  deny  that  the
    officer had come to his premises and found the  appellant's  friend  in
    his bedroom and he gave his version of events both in his statement and
    in oral evidence.

18. The judge had the benefit of hearing from the appellant and his partner
    and although it may have  been  interesting  to  have  heard  from  the
    Immigration Officer it is not at all clear that it was necessary to  do
    so in the interests of justice. The overriding objective is  to  secure
    that proceedings before the Tribunal are handled as fairly, quickly and
    efficiently as possible and members of the Tribunal have responsibility
    for ensuring this in the interests of the parties  to  the  proceedings
    and in the wider public interest.  The appellant is  a  long  way  from
    showing that the judge erred in deciding as he did not to  adjourn  the
    appeal and although it is not now a live challenge I would  venture  to
    add that on the evidence before him the judge  was  fully  entitled  to
    conclude that the appeal should be dismissed for the reasons given.

Decision

19. It follows from what is said above that the challenge to  the  decision
    of  the  judge  is  unsuccessful  and  the  appeal  therefore   remains
    dismissed.

20. I was addressed on the matter of anonymity.  I was just persuaded  that
    an anonymity direction should be granted in this appeal as I  was  told
    that the appellant has not "gone public" about his  sexuality  and  his
    partner's parents would be devastated if they  were  to  find  out  his
    sexuality also.  I bear in mind that the appellant's  future  may  well
    lie in returning to Nigeria and a concern would be that he might be  in
    danger in certain parts of the  country  if  his  true  sexuality  were
    known.

21. An anonymity direction is therefore made in those circumstances.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

