
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01451/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th October 2015                 |On 19th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                               maris drosprats
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representation
For the Respondent:    Miss A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal O R Williams (the Judge) promulgated on 25th March 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male Latvian citizen born 1st April 1982.   On  30th
    December 2014 the Respondent decided to make  a  deportation  order  on
    grounds of public policy in accordance with regulations 19(3)(b) and 21
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the  2006
    regulations).

 3. The Respondent noted that there was  no  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    lawful entry to the United Kingdom and he had provided no  evidence  of
    having exercised treaty rights.  The  Respondent  had  written  to  the
    Appellant on 11th December 2014  notifying  him  that  because  of  his
    criminal convictions and  behaviour  in  the  United  Kingdom,  it  was
    intended to make a deportation order against  him  on  the  grounds  of
    public policy.  There had been no response from the Appellant  to  that
    letter.

 4. The Respondent noted that on 16th April 2014 the  Appellant  was  fined
    for theft from a shop and racially/religiously  aggravated  harassment,
    alarm or distress.

 5. On 25th November 2014 the Appellant was sentenced for a further offence
    of theft, by receiving one day's detention at court and ordered to  pay
    costs.  He had also committed an offence of  failing  to  surrender  to
    custody at an appointed time.

 6. The Respondent noted that the Appellant had been convicted  of  robbery
    at Bauska District Court Latvia on 20th May  2009,  and  received  four
    years' imprisonment and a  probation  order  for  one  year.   On  16th
    September 2009 the Appellant was  convicted  of  robbery  at  Jekabpils
    District Court Latvia of an offence of robbery and received four years'
    imprisonment and a probation order for one year.

 7. The Respondent  considered  in  the  light  of  these  convictions,  in
    accordance with regulation 21 of the 2006  regulations,  the  Appellant
    would pose a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  the
    interests of public policy if he was allowed to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and that his deportation was justified under regulation 21.

 8. The Respondent did not consider that there  were  any  very  compelling
    circumstances which  would  mean  that  the  Appellant  should  not  be
    deported and there was no satisfactory evidence of the Appellant having
    family life with a spouse or child, and  therefore  it  was  considered
    that deportation would not breach Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

 9. The Appellant's case was certified under regulation 24AA  of  the  2006
    regulations on the basis that he  could  be  returned  to  Latvia  even
    though his appeal had not been concluded, because he would not  face  a
    real risk of serious irreversible  harm  if  removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

10. The Appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  summary  he
    explained that he came to the United Kingdom on 15th December 2013  and
    had worked for a number of factories and agencies.  He  contended  that
    as a citizen of an EEA country he had the right of free movement within
    the EEA.  The Appellant explained he wanted to start a new life in this
    country, and be a useful member of society and work hard.

11. The appeal was heard by the Judge on 18th March  2015.   The  Appellant
    was produced from detention, but excluded from the hearing  because  of
    his threatening and disruptive behaviour.  The appeal proceeded in  his
    absence.  He was not legally represented.

12. The Judge considered that the Appellant was  not  entitled  to  asylum.
    This had not been raised in the Grounds of Appeal,  but  the  Appellant
    had subsequently claimed that he was  going  to  be  threatened  if  he
    returned to Latvia.  The Appellant claimed to have spent sixteen  years
    in prison in Latvia.  The Judge analysed the evidence  and  found  that
    the Appellant would not be at risk if removed to Latvia  and  therefore
    dismissed the appeal with reference to asylum, humanitarian protection,
    and Articles 2 and 3 of the 1950 Convention.

13. The Judge considered separately the decision to deport pursuant to  the
    2006 regulations and concluded the Respondent's decision was lawful and
    proportionate and the appeal was dismissed on that ground.

14. The Judge then considered Article 8 and concluded that the decision  to
    deport the Appellant was proportionate and would not breach Article 8.

15. This caused the Appellant to apply for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper  Tribunal.   In  his  initial  application  for   permission   he
    apologised for his behaviour at the hearing centre and  contended  that
    the Judge erred in law by not allowing him to give evidence in  person.
    The Appellant contended that he has a long term partner in the  UK  and
    they intend to marry.  He also contended that he would be  at  risk  if
    returned to Latvia, and he feared ex-prisoners, gangs,  Latvian  Prison
    Service officers, and the Latvian Police Force.

16. Permission to appeal was refused by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Ford on 21st April 2015, on the basis that  the  grounds  disclosed  no
    arguable material error of law.

17. The Appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper tribunal, contending that the  error  was  to  proceed  with  the
    appeal in his absence.

18. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  on
    15th July 2015 in the following terms;

         "Although  the  Appellant  was  and  is  unrepresented,  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge O R Williams excluded the Appellant from the hearing
         and proceeded in his absence.  It is arguable that he did not  give
         adequate reasons for doing so, given the interest in  an  Appellant
         being able to put his case and be heard, and given the findings  at
         [35].  It is noted that the direction as to the burden of proof  at
         [13] may be an error."

19. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending, in  summary,  that  the  Judge  had  directed  himself
    appropriately and his decision disclosed no error of law.

20. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal  to  decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

21. There was no attendance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.   Miss
    Fijiwala advised that the Appellant had been  deported  on  4th  August
    2015, and submitted a Notification of Removal of that date,  confirming
    the deportation.

22.  Miss  Fijiwala  confirmed  that  there  was  no  indication   in   the
    Respondent's file that the Appellant had made any application  pursuant
    to regulation 29AA of the 2006 regulations, to be temporarily  admitted
    to the United Kingdom in order to make submissions  in  person  to  the
    Tribunal.

23. I considered rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, which provides that if a party fails to  attend  a  hearing,  the
    Upper Tribunal may proceed with the hearing if satisfied that the party
    has been notified of the hearing or that  reasonable  steps  have  been
    taken to notify the party of the hearing, and considers that it  is  in
    the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing.

24. The Tribunal file revealed that the grant of permission to  appeal  had
    been sent to the Appellant at the  Morton  Hall  Immigration  Detention
    Centre on 3rd August 2015, the day before the Appellant  was  deported.
    The Appellant had not communicated further with the Tribunal  since  he
    submitted his application for permission to appeal which was granted on
    15th July 2015.  The Appellant had not provided the  Tribunal  with  an
    address in Latvia.

25. The notice of hearing, indicating that the appeal would be heard by the
    Upper Tribunal on 13th October 2015, was sent on 17th September 2015 to
    Morton Hall Immigration Detention Centre.  At that  time  the  Tribunal
    was not aware that the Appellant had been deported, and therefore  that
    was the last known address for the Appellant, and the address  that  he
    had used when he submitted his application for permission to appeal.

26. In view of the fact that the Appellant has not  communicated  with  the
    Tribunal, and not provided an up-to-date address, and the Tribunal  had
    not been advised  that  he  had  been  deported,  I  decided  that  all
    reasonable steps possible had been taken to notify the Appellant of the
    hearing.  In the absence of any communication from the  Appellant,  the
    Tribunal had no address for him, other than the  immigration  detention
    centre.

27. I therefore decided that it was in the interests of justice to  proceed
    with the hearing.

28. I heard oral submissions from Miss Fijiwala who relied upon the rule 24
    response.  I was asked to find that the judge gave  clear  reasons  for
    excluding the Appellant and was entitled  to  do  so  in  view  of  the
    Appellant's behaviour.

29. I was asked to find that the Judge had not erred  in  relation  to  the
    burden of proof, and had correctly analysed the  evidence  and  carried
    out a balancing exercise, and had not erred in law.

My Conclusions and Reasons

30. The Judge granting permission has raised two issues.  The first relates
    to a question of whether the Judge gave adequate reasons for  excluding
    the Appellant from  the  hearing,  taking  into  account  that  he  was
    unrepresented.  I set out below the head note  to  Budhathoki  (reasons
    for decision) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) which  I  regard  as  a  relevant
    authority in relation to adequacy of reasoning;

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

31. In this case it was incumbent upon the judge  to  explain  why  he  had
    taken the decision to exclude the  Appellant  from  the  hearing.   The
    Judge has set out his reasons in paragraph 5 of his decision, and in my
    view they are adequate and sustainable, and  clearly  indicate  to  the
    Appellant why he was excluded from the hearing.

32. I note that  the  Appellant  in  making  his  initial  application  for
    permission to appeal stated in relation to his behaviour "I  completely
    accept my fault and again, please accept my apologies".

33. The Judge reminded himself of the overriding objective to deal with the
    case fairly and justly, and  has  explained  that  when  the  case  was
    initially called on it was not possible  to  proceed  because  the  two
    security officers could not control the Appellant.

34. The Record of Proceedings indicates that the case was initially  called
    on at 11.00am and put back, then called on again at 12.06.   The  Judge
    explains in paragraph 5 of his decision, that he spoke to the Appellant
    with the assistance of an interpreter, telling him that he had  fifteen
    minutes to calm down, and if he did not, then the case would proceed in
    his absence.

35. When the case was called on again, it is clear from the  decision  that
    the Appellant did not calm down and was not willing to cooperate.  What
    paragraph 5 does not show, but the Record of Proceedings does, is  that
    the Appellant indicated that he was not willing to go into the  hearing
    room.

36. The Judge correctly had regard to rule 27  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules  2014  in
    particular 27(4)(a) which enables the  Tribunal  to  give  a  direction
    excluding from the  hearing  any  person  whose  conduct  the  Tribunal
    considers is disrupting or is likely to disrupt the hearing.

37. The Judge has given adequate  reasons  explaining  why  he  decided  to
    proceed in the Appellant's absence, and explained  that  the  Appellant
    was given the opportunity to reflect and calm down but did not  do  so.
    I find no error on this issue.

38. The second issue raised by the Judge granting permission relates  to  a
    direction in paragraph 13 as to the burden of proof.

39. I have considered the decision as a whole, and conclude that the  Judge
    did not materially err.  It is clear that the Judge correctly  set  out
    the burden of proof in paragraphs 7, 8 and 9.  I do not find  that  the
    Judge erred in his consideration of regulations 19 and 21 of  the  2006
    regulations.   The  Judge  reminded  himself  of  the   provisions   of
    regulation 21(5) and those provisions are set out in paragraph 12,  and
    in the same paragraph regulation 21(6) is summarised.

40. The judge in paragraph  32  set  out  the  factors  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant not being deported, and then set out the factors in favour of
    deportation in paragraphs 33-36.   The  judge  took  into  account  the
    factors set out in regulation 21(6) in paragraph 37.

41.  In  paragraph  38  the  Judge  conducted  a  balancing  exercise,  and
    concluded, in relation to the 2006 regulations,  that  the  Appellant's
    removal was proportionate.  In my view he did not err by so doing.

42. I have considered all the matters raised in the Appellant's application
    for permission to  appeal.   In  my  view,  the  judge  considered  all
    material matters, did not consider any  immaterial  matters,  and  made
    findings that were open to him on the evidence, and gave  adequate  and
    sustainable reasons for those findings.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that  the  decision  must  be  set
aside.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  see  no
reason to make an anonymity order.


Signed   Date: 14th October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and  therefore  so  does  the
decision to make no fee award.


Signed   Date: 14th October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
