
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01576/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th May 2016                      |On 27th May 2016                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                muhammad asif
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Mustafa, instructed by Rana & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 1st November 1976.  His
    appeal, against the Respondent's decision to refuse leave to remain  on
    human rights grounds and the decision to remove him under Section 47 of
    the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006,  was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Callow in  a  decision  promulgated  on  14th
    October 2015.

2.   The Appellant came to the UK, aged 38 years old, on a Tier 4  (General)
    Student Migrant visa in 2010. He was granted further  leave  to  remain
    and in fact was awarded his ABP Post Graduate  Diploma  in  Information
    Systems in August 2014.  The Appellant  applied  for  leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules. He wished to study for a masters  degree
    but had suffered from hepatitis C and heart disease and was  unable  to
    continue his studies. The Appellant sought leave to remain outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

3.   The Respondent refused the application on the basis that  variation  of
    leave was being sought for a purpose not  covered  by  the  Rules.  The
    Secretary of State found that there  were  no  particularly  compelling
    circumstances in the Appellant's case.  Although he had a chronic liver
    condition and heart disease,  treatment  for  his  condition  would  be
    available in Pakistan.  His application was refused.

4.   The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  who  dismissed  the
    appeal for the following reasons:

         "12. In the present appeal it has not been established that all  of
         the circumstances of the Appellant's return are exceptional and are
         not sufficient to reach the high threshold under Article 3.


         13. Turning to Article 8 I refer to paragraph 23 of  MM  (Zimbabwe)
         [2012] EWCA Civ 279 cited with approval by Laws LJ in GS (India) at
         para 87:


             'The only cases I can foresee where the  absence  of  adequate
             medical treatment in the country to which a person  is  to  be
             deported will be relevant to Article 8,  is  where  it  is  an
             additional factor to be weighted in  the  balance  with  other
             factors which by themselves engage  Article  8.   Suppose,  in
             this case, the Appellant had established firm family  ties  in
             this country, then  the  availability  of  continuing  medical
             treatment here, coupled with his dependence on the family here
             for support, together establish 'private life'  under  Article
             8.  That conclusion would not  involve  a  comparison  between
             medical facilities here and those in Zimbabwe.  Such a finding
             will not offend the principle expressed above that the  United
             Kingdom is under no Convention obligation to  provide  medical
             treatment here when it is not  available  in  the  country  to
             which the Appellant is to be deported.


         14.  A specific case has not been made out  under  Article  8.  The
         facts do not establish the rigour of the D exception, and the  fact
         of having come to the UK as a student to obtain qualifications does
         not of itself engage Article 8.  There is no private  right  to  be
         educated in the UK: Patel and Others [2013] UKSC 72;  at  paragraph
         57 which states:


              'It is important to remember that Article 8 is not a  general
             dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the Secretary
             of State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the
             rules, which may be unrelated to any  protected  human  right.
             The merits of a decision not to depart from the rules are  not
             reviewable on appeal: section 86(6). One may  sympathise  with
             Lord Justice Sedley's call in Pankina for  'common  sense'  in
             the application of  the  rules  to  graduates  who  have  been
             studying  in  the   UK   for   some   years.   However,   such
             considerations do not by themselves provide grounds of  appeal
             under Article 8, which is concerned  with  private  or  family
             life, not education as such. The opportunity for  a  promising
             student to  complete  his  course  in  this  country,  however
             desirable in general terms, is not in itself a right protected
             under article 8'."

5.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth on the grounds that it was arguable  the  judge's  finding
    that the fact of  having  come  to  the  UK  as  a  student  to  obtain
    qualifications did not of itself engage Article 8, was insufficient  in
    considering the totality of the factors in the case, given the evidence
    presented to the judge, as to the course of events after the  Appellant
    had arrived in the UK in relation to his medical history.

6.   In submissions, Mr Mustafa submitted that the judge had not  considered
    Article 8.  He accepted that there was no violation of  Article  3  but
    that the judge should have looked at Article 8 in  more  detail  rather
    than just discounting it. He relied  on  the  case  of  MM  and  Akhalu
    (health claim: ECHR: Article 8) [2013] UKUT 400 (IAC).

7.   The judge erred in finding that the Appellant had failed  to  establish
    private  life  in  the  UK  and  in  failing  to  go  on  to   consider
    proportionality. The Appellant's medical condition gave rise to private
    life in the UK. He had finished his course and was unable to embark  on
    a masters degree because he was ill. There  were  serious  consequences
    giving rise to an interference because  the  Appellant  would  have  to
    return to Pakistan  and  start  the  investigations  into  his  medical
    condition all over again.

8.   The Appellant's private life did engage Article 8  and  the  judge  had
    failed to consider  his  medical  circumstances  in  assessing  such  a
    private life. This case  was  similar  to  that  of  Akhalu  which  had
    succeeded on Article 8 grounds. In this case the judge should have gone
    on to assess proportionality but he never did.

9.   Mr Tufan submitted that the Appellant relied on two limbs  in  relation
    to his private life.  Firstly that he had been unable to  complete  his
    education and secondly his medical condition.  He relied on the case of
    GS (India) and Others v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2015] EWCA Civ 40, in particular the last sentence  of  paragraph  111
    which states: "it is not easy to think of  a  foreign  healthcare  case
    which would fail under Article 3 but  succeed  under  Article  8".  The
    absence of inadequacy of medical treatment could not be relied on as  a
    factor engaging Article 8.
10.  The Appellant's circumstances were nowhere near as serious as those  in
    DS and all cases were dismissed.  Further Article 8 cases  in  relation
    to students did not engage Article 8. CDS has  been  disgraced  by  the
    Supreme Court in Patel at paragraph 57.  The Appellant had no right  to
    continue or complete his education in the UK.  There  was  no  arguable
    error of law because Article 8 was not engaged in this case.

11.  Mr Mustafa submitted that, had the  judge  considered  the  Appellant's
    studies and his medical condition, taken together, they were sufficient
    to show that he had established  private  life  in  the  UK  such  that
    Article 8 was engaged. Had  the  judge  considered  proportionality  he
    would have decided it in the Appellant's favour because  the  Appellant
    had come to the UK to study but had been unable to do so because of his
    medical condition. The Appellant had a right  to  stay  in  the  UK  to
    complete his health treatment and his  study.  When  all  factors  were
    considered together they came down in the Appellant's favour who should
    have been granted leave to remain.


Discussion and Conclusions

12.  The Appellant came to the UK as a student in 2010.   He  completed  his
    postgraduate diploma and it was his ambition to do a masters degree but
    he was unable to start it because he  suffered  from  hepatitis  C  and
    heart disease. The Appellant's student leave expired and he applied for
    discretionary leave because he wished to  continue  his  studies  after
    completion of his treatment.

13.  It was accepted that the Appellant's removal and the refusal  of  leave
    did not breach Article 3 and there was no challenge on those grounds. I
    am of the view that the Appellant's ability  to  continue  his  studies
    does not engage Article 8. He had completed his post  graduate  diploma
    and was seeking further leave to remain to embark on a further  course,
    a masters degree. This is insufficient to engage Article 8.

14.  The Appellant's right to remain in the UK to receive medical  treatment
    also failed to engage Article 8 because it was  quite  clear  from  the
    case law relied on by the judge, namely MM (Zimbabwe) [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    279 and GS (India) that there had to be  other  factors  to  take  into
    account.  In this case there was not an  absence  of  adequate  medical
    treatment  in  Pakistan,  although  there  was  medical  evidence  that
    treatment was  not  readily  available,  and  the  Appellant  would  be
    returning there to the support of his family. Article 8  did  not  give
    the Appellant a right to study or a right to receive medical  treatment
    in the UK.

15.  It would appear from the grounds of appeal, at paragraph  5,  that  the
    submission is being made that it was in the public interest to find out
    why the Appellant's medical treatment had  caused  his  heart  disease.
    This evidential situation had simply not been  made  out  and  did  not
    engage Article 8 in any event.


16.  Although  the  judge's  decision  was  brief,  he  had  given  adequate
    reasons. The circumstances that the Appellant  finds  himself  in  were
    insufficient to show that interference with his private life would have
    consequences of such gravity so as to engage Article 8.

17.  The Appellant wished to remain in the UK to continue medical  treatment
    and undergo investigation into his condition.  His application was  not
    covered by the Immigration Rules and did not engage Articles  3  or  8.
    Treatment was available in Pakistan and the Appellant had completed his
    post graduate diploma.

18.  The interference with the Appellant's  studies  and  medical  condition
    were insufficient to prevent the Appellant from continuing his  private
    life in Pakistan. I find that there was no material error of law.

19.  The Appellant's claim was not sufficient to engage Article 8, but  even
    if it was then the public interest outweighed the Appellant's Article 8
    rights. In Akhalu, the Tribunal held, "The consequences of removal  for
    the health of a claimant who would not be  able  to  access  equivalent
    health care in the country of nationality  as  was  available  in  this
    country are plainly relevant to the question of  proportionality.  But,
    when weighed against  the  public  interest  in  ensuring  the  limited
    resources of this country's health service are used to the best  effect
    for the benefit of those for whom they are intended, those consequences
    do not weigh heavily in the claimant's favour  but  speak  cogently  in
    support of the public interest."

20.  The Appellant's medication and investigation  into  his  condition  did
    not add weight to the public interest as submitted at  paragraph  5  of
    the grounds of appeal.  The Appellant had a  hereditary  condition  and
    hepatitis medication may well have exacerbated  that  condition.  There
    was insufficient evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to  show  that
    the Appellant's presence in the UK required him to remain  to  continue
    investigations for the benefit of others and therefore his presence was
    not relevant to the public interest.  The evidence before the judge did
    not support the submission and the judge's failure to consider  it  was
    not material.

21.  I find that  there  was  no  arguable  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    conclusion that a specific case had not been made out under Article  8.
    The Appellant's private life in the UK was limited and the interference
    with his private life did not give rise to consequences of such gravity
    so as to engage Article 8. He could return and study  in  Pakistan  and
    return and receive treatment in Pakistan. He had  the  support  of  his
    family and was not in a situation which  would  warrant  the  grant  of
    leave on Article 8 grounds.

22.  Further, there  was  no  material  error  in  the  judge's  failure  to
    consider proportionality because on any assessment  of  proportionality
    the public interest in the Appellant's removal  and  refusal  of  leave
    outweighed his right to family and private life.

23.  Accordingly,  I  find  there  is  no  error  of  law  in  the  decision
    promulgated on 14th October 2015 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 26th May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 26th May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
