
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/01127/2015
                                                               IA/01273/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 October 2015                   |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                             Mrs SOUMYA SAYINI &
                            Mr ANIL KUMAR SAYINI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn made )
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H. Kannangara, counsel instructed by Legend
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fujiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The first Appellant is a national of India, born on 28 February  1991.
The second Appellant is her husband, born on 12 March 1984. On 23  September
2013, the first Appellant applied for Tier  4  (General)  student  leave  in
order to do an MBA at Anglia Ruskin University. She was granted leave  until
15 July 2014 and the second Appellant was granted leave  as  her  dependent.
On 20 March 2014, the first Appellant applied for further Tier 4  leave  but
this application was refused on 16 May 2014. On  19  June  2014,  the  first
Appellant took an English language test and made a further  application  for
leave to remain on 14 July 2014. She was interviewed on 26 August  2014  and
her application was refused on 19 November 2014. She appealed  against  this
decision with her husband as her dependent and the  appeal  was  listed  for
hearing on 14 May 2015. In a decision dated 18 May 2015 and  promulgated  on
26 May 2015, First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rodger  dismissed  the  appeal  in
respect of the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

2.    On 10 June 2015, the Appellants' solicitors made  an  application  for
permission to appeal out of time. The grounds in support of the  application
asserted that the Judge failed to consider the principles  of  fairness  cf.
Mushtaq IJR [2015] UKUT 224 (IAC) and the Judge  made  the  finding  against
the first Appellant based  solely  on  the  questions  and  answers  in  the
interview and the finding that she is not credible is  based  on  minor  and
insignificant matters. There was no case to show that  the  first  Appellant
is unfit to study the proposed course.

3.    In a decision dated 10 August 2015, permission to appeal  was  granted
by First Tier Tribunal Judge White on the basis that the Judge had  arguably
made an error of law in  finding  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a  genuine
student [33] and in so doing failed to apply the guidance  in  Mushtaq  with
regard to the interview of 26 August  2014  and  it  was  notable  that  the
interviewer did  not  indicate  that  he  or  she  doubted  that  the  First
Appellant genuinely intended to study but rather that the Appellant was  not
of sufficient or claimed standard of English. It was also  notable  that  at
the time of the interview  the  First  Appellant  had  already  started  her
course and was continuing to study at the time of the appeal hearing.  Judge
White also extended time for permission to appeal as  he  was  satisfied  it
was in the interests of justice to do so.

Hearing

4.    At the hearing before me, Mr Kannangara sought to rely on the  grounds
of appeal. He drew my attention to the interview with  the  first  Appellant
on 26 August 2014 at page 50 of 77 and the fact that the question: 'Was  the
customer credible at interview?" was answered "yes." He submitted  that  the
box had not been ticked with regard to the question  of  the  Applicant  not
genuinely intending to study the course and that the crucial factor is  that
concern was raised only with regard to the standard of English language.  In
respect of the interview, he submitted that there was a mistake  as  to  the
date the course started. At the date of the hearing she had embarked on  the
course and has now completed it and obtained  a  certificate.  He  confirmed
that the interview had taken place on 28 August 2014 and  the  course  began
on 28 July 2014 and finished in July 2015.

5.    He submitted that the Judge, she was relying on certain issues in  the
interview at Q's 17, 18 and 30, which relate  to  why  the  First  Appellant
chose the course, how it related to her previous course and her  long  terms
aims.  The  first  Appellant  had  already  given  her  reasons:  from   her
perspective Meridian Business college was highly trusted; she wanted  to  do
the Level 7 diploma as it is relevant to her previous studies  and  then  do
the MBA. She scored 5.5. for both listening and writing. The  issue  of  her
genuineness did not arise out of the interview as the  interviewing  officer
did not have an issue about her genuineness, but the caseworker  came  to  a
different conclusion. The  Judge  should  have  found  the  purpose  of  the
interview was to test her genuineness.

6.    Mr Kannangara also pointed out that the  MBA  was  also  Level  7  and
there was nothing to say that the First Appellant was not in a  position  to
do an MBA and she had been granted entry clearance to do this  and  the  ECO
had no issue with her qualifications. She did not change her path after  she
came to the United Kingdom because what she is doing  is  relevant  and  the
Judge's finding at [32] (i) was wrong. He submitted that the CAS  would  not
have been issued if the first Appellant's English  had  not  been  not  good
enough, however, she obtained 5.5. in  the  IELTS.  He  submitted  that  the
Judge had not followed the principles in Mushtaq where  the  Upper  Tribunal
gave clear guidance as to how interviews should be conducted and in  failing
to follow that guidance the Judge made a material error of law.

7.    In reply, Ms Fijiwala sought to rely on  the  rule  24  response.  She
submitted that the grounds amounted to no more than a disagreement with  the
Judge's findings of fact and Mr Kannangara had  sought  to  attempt  to  re-
argue the case today. It was clear that the interview record was before  the
Judge. Upon being shown the interview record, which was not in  her  papers,
Ms Fijiwala accepted that at the last  page  of  the  interview  record  the
interviewing officer did not check the "not genuine"  box, but it  was  open
to the caseworker to refuse the application.

8.    Ms Fijiwala submitted that the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  was
misconceived. The  maintenance  issue  had  been  conceded.  In  respect  of
paragraph 3c of the grant of permission, she submitted  that  the  Appellant
was studying at the time of interview and at the time of the appeal  hearing
but the Judge was precluded from considering this by virtue of  section  85A
of the NIAA 2002. The Judge was aware that she had  started  the  course  on
28.7.14 [17].  She submitted that the decision  in  Mushtaq  was  irrelevant
because the Judge was considering both pieces of evidence together. At  [31]
the Judge found that taking  all  the  evidence  together  as  a  whole  the
Appellant was not credible. He considered the start date of the  course  and
the oral evidence, which differed: [31] and [32].  This  did  not  sit  well
with the decision that she came to the  UK  to  study.  It  was  a  relevant
consideration for the Judge that the first Appellant was  pregnant  and  due
to give birth without family in UK or care arrangements for  the  child  and
these were not actions that would be taken by  a  genuine  student.  It  had
clearly been open to him to make these findings based on oral  evidence  and
there were no errors in the determination.

9.    Mr Kannangara then responded submitting that with  regard  to  section
85A(4) of the NIAA 2002 the Judge can consider evidence at the time  of  the
hearing as this was not relevant to the points scoring aspect  of  the  case
and thus he could have looked at her studies at the  date  of  hearing.  The
fact that there was a  mistake  as  to  when  she  started  the  course  was
irrelevant given that she was 10 months into  the  course  at  the  date  of
hearing.  In  respect  of  the  English  language  requirements,  the  first
Appellant had failed  the  pre-sessional  course.  She  had  5.5.  for  each
component which was B2 but she needed to do degree level or above.  She  had
the BTEC requirement even though she failed  the  pre-sessional  course.  In
respect of the finding at 32(g) the Appellant was still a student.  She  has
not started her  professional  career  yet.  She  applied  for  an  extended
diploma. Because of pregnancy related issues and the fact  that  she  failed
pre-sessional English, she studied for an extended  diploma  instead  of  an
MBA. He submitted that he was not seeking to re-argue the case  but  setting
out the undisputed facts.

Decision

10.   I reserved my decision which I now make, with my reasons. I find  that
First Tier Tribunal Judge Lamb erred materially in  law  in  dismissing  the
first Appellant's appeal and by extension that  of  her  dependent  husband,
the second Appellant. One of the bases of refusal, that of maintenance,  was
conceded by the Presenting Officer before the First  Tier  and  Ms  Fijiwala
did not seek to resile from that concession. Therefore, the only  issue  was
whether the first Appellant is a  genuine  student.  The  First  Tier  Judge
found against the first Appellant for reasons set out at [31]  and  [32]  of
his decision. The Judge himself acknowledged at [31] that the "examples"  he
gave for not accepting the first Appellant as a  credible  witness  "may  in
themselves seem minor and insignificant" and I find that that is  so.  I  do
not consider that in respect of [31](a) that the fact that at interview  the
first Appellant gave a start date for her course 1 week later than the  date
she had given in her application form is  material,  given  that  the  first
week may have been an induction week and in any  event,  the  difference  is
very slight. [31](b) and (d) concern the pre-sessional English  course.  The
Judge found that the first Appellant had been  inconsistent  in  respect  of
whether or not she had passed the course and as to the  writing  element  of
the course but I find that, whilst  the  first  Appellant  failed  the  pre-
sessional English course she passed the IELTS English  language  course  and
scored 5.5. in writing and I  consider  the  Judge  rather  than  the  first
Appellant has merged the two and become confused. I  do  not  consider  that
[31](c) regarding the inconsistency between the  first  Appellant's  witness
statement and her oral evidence as to why she did not start her  MBA  course
in March 2015 is sufficient to found a  negative  credibility  finding,  not
least because, given her child was born on 10 February 2014,  her  pregnancy
cannot be the reason why she was unable to begin her MBA in March  2015  and
her witness statement is in accurate in this respect.

11.   Judge Rodger at [32]  provided  14  reasons  as  to  why  he  was  not
satisfied the first Appellant was a genuine student. Out of those reasons  I
do not consider that (a) her age (b) her lack  of  previous  employment  (c)
the nature of an MBA course (d) the fact she had married  and  had  a  child
and (g) her personality are materially relevant to a  finding  that  she  is
not a genuine student. The remainder of the points raised against the  first
Appellant essentially relate to the interview record but I find that  at  no
time does the Judge consider the  first  Appellant's  answers  at  interview
alongside the fact that  at  the  end  of  the  interview  the  interviewing
officer found that she was credible and thus a  genuine  student.  In  those
circumstances I find that compelling reasons needed to  have  been  provided
by the decision-maker,  who  did  not  interview  the  first  Appellant,  to
justify refusing the application on the basis that the first  Appellant  was
not a genuine  student.  I  further  find  that  the  fact  that  the  first
Appellant was granted entry clearance was indicative of the  fact  that  the
Entry Clearance Officer also accepted that she was a genuine  student.  Much
of the focus of the Judge at [32](h)-(n) was  on  the  Appellant's  proposed
study for an MBA whereas in fact the decision under appeal  related  to  her
application for a BTEC Level 7 Extended Diploma in Strategic Management  and
Leadership and it was this course that should have been  the  focus  of  the
Judge's consideration and not the MBA. Thus the only remaining criticism  of
the first Appellant was that she was vague. This is  an  insufficient  basis
to find that she is not credible.

12.   I have had regard to the  decision  of  the  President  of  the  Upper
Tribunal in R (on the application of Mushtaq) v Entry Clearance  Officer  of
Islamabad, Pakistan (ECO - procedural fairness) IJR [2015] UKUT 00224  (IAC)
however, it is not of particular relevance to  this  case,  given  that  the
refusal decision of 19 November 2014 was, unlike in Mushtaq,  based  on  the
responses of the first Appellant at interview. I have found at  [11]  above,
that decision is in itself flawed because it fails  to  take  account  of  a
material consideration viz the fact that the interviewing officer found  the
first Appellant to be credible and thus a genuine student. I have  also  had
regard to section 85A of the NIAA 2002,  which  precludes  consideration  of
evidence adduced by the Appellant unless it was adduced in  support  of  and
at the time of  the  application,  however,  given  that  the  evidence  and
submissions focused on the interview  with  the  first  Appellant  which  is
relied upon by the Respondent in  her  refusal  decision,  the  section  85A
principle did not arise. Whilst at the time of  the  application  the  first
Appellant had not started the BTEC Level  7  diploma  course  this  was  the
reason for her making an  application  to  extend  her  leave  and  was  the
subject of the refusal decision of 10  November  2014,  at  which  time  the
Respondent was aware that she had commenced the  course  because  this  post
dated her interview on 28 August 2014. The first Appellant  has  not  sought
to adduce new evidence that was not before the decision-maker cf. Ahmed  and
Another (PBS: admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 00365 (IAC) at  [5]  but  was
simply relying on the fact that she was studying on  the  course  for  which
she had applied to extend her leave.

13.   For the reasons set out above, I find that First Tier  Tribunal  Judge
Rodger erred materially in law in dismissing the appeal on  the  basis  that
the first Appellant was not a genuine student.

Notice of Decision

14.   The appeal by the Appellants is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

3 December 2015

