
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/01721/2014
      IA/01922/2014
      IA/01923/2014
      IA/01924/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15th  September 2014                       |On 16th September 2014       |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                           Justin Mohanlal Parera
                            Paulomi Justin Parera
                                Carron Parera
                            Aarnav Justin Parera
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms D Qureshi instructed by Malik Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of India and appeal against the decision of
    the respondent dated 16th December 2013 to refuse them leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom on under Paragraph 276ADE, compassionate  grounds
    outside the Immigration Rules, and  on  Article  8  grounds  under  the
    European Convention.

 2. The first appellant arrived in  the  UK  on  a  student  visa  on  26th
    September 2010 and the remaining appellants  (his  wife  and  children)
    arrived as dependents on 10th October 2010.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Prior dismissed the appellants' appeals in  a
    determination promulgated on 30th May 2014.

 4. Application for permission to appeal was made by the appellants stating
    the First Tier Tribunal Judge had erred in law.  The decision could not
    be justified as necessary in the interests of a democratic society with
    a legitimate aim and proportionality was not adequately considered. The
    decision of the Secretary of State was not in accordance with the  law.
    The appellants had been in  the  UK  lawfully  and  cumulative  factors
    should be considered such as the  family  members.   This  was  a  case
    falling outside the new rules. The Judge should have given  independent
    consideration to the factors  in  the  case  and  should  have  applied
    fairness.  Also the decision was insufficiently reasoned.

 5. Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Zucker  granted  permission
    to appeal but it would appear this was an error because notwithstanding
    the grant in the title of the permission, the body  of  the  permission
    rejected that there was an arguable error  of  law.   I  conclude  this
    because the judge stated

      'The grounds which run to 26 paragraphs, with numerous sub-paragraphs,
      take issue with the Judge's approach to the issue of human rights  and
      in particular that the Judge failed to  have  any  or  any  sufficient
      regard to the wider application of Article 8 ECHR having regard to the
      guidance in a number of cited cases.

      Though the grounds amount to something of an  essay  on  the  approach
      that should be taken by the Tribunal in relation  to  Article  8  ECHR
      claims generally, what the grounds do not adequately  address  is  the
      fact that the Judge found the  Appellant's  evidence  unreliable;  see
      paragraph 13.  The reasons for so finding by the Judge are  adequately
      reasoned and in those circumstances the Judge was entitled to take the
      approach that was taken and find that there was no  sufficient  reason
      to look outside the rules.

      The grounds point to no arguable material error of law'.

 6. I was invited to set this decision aside further  to  Rule  60  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal Procedure  Rules  2005.   This  however
    applies to the First Tier Tribunal.  Part 7 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 with reference to setting aside  refers  to
    decisions of the Upper Tribunal.

 7. I have proceeded to consider whether there was an error  of  law.   The
    judge recorded at [12] that the first appellant had been an educational
    consultant in India and therefore had the skills to set up  a  business
    there which would assist the family in reintegrating in India.

 8. The judge made an assessment of the  evidence  and  was  clear  in  his
    making of an adverse finding  of  credibility  against  the  first  and
    second appellant.  He found that the first  appellant  was  'thoroughly
    discredited' and, for example, noted that the first  appellant's  claim
    to be unable to practise his religion in India, was undermined  by  the
    lack of reference to him in a letter from the Pastor at St Joseph's and
    St Edmund's Catholic Church.

 9. The judge also recorded that the appellants had family  ties  in  India
    and had made no  meaningful  attempt  to  rely  on  sub  paragraph  276
    ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules.

10. Although brief the judge gave his reasons for  dismissing  the  appeal.
    He had recorded the brief time in which the appellants had been in  the
    UK and that they had exaggerated their integration by way  of  business
    in the UK. He clearly [14] did not accept the appellants  would  endure
    severe hardship on their return and at [15]  asserted  that  the  first
    three appellants could speak or understand  Gujurati,  the  state  from
    whence they came.

11. The determination of Judge Prior concluded after consideration  of  the
    elements  of  the  appeal  that  there  were  no   good   grounds   for
    consideration of the appellants' application outside the Rules  and  he
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

12. Patel v SSHD  UKSC  72  confirms  that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
    dispensing power  and  considerations  such  as  education  do  not  by
    themselves provide grounds of appeal under Article 8 and  this  can  be
    extended to running a business.  As indicated by the  Judge  the  first
    appellant has always known that his leave was limited and he can resume
    business activities in  India.  The  Immigration  Rules  incorporate  a
    consideration of the best interests of the child.

13.  Judge  Zucker  in  fact  found  no  arguable  error  of  law  in   the
    determination and nor do I.

14. I find that there was no error of law in  the  determination  of  First
    Tier Tribunal Judge Prior and the determination shall stand.

Signed                                             Date 15th September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
