
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/01791/2015
                                                               IA/01810/2015
                                                               IA/01805/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th September 2016               |On 09th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                              Varinder [P] (1)
                               Mandeep [P] (2)
                             [a s] (a minor) (3)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Aslam, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of India.  The first Appellant was born  on
    3rd January 1989 and the second Appellant on 19th November  1986.   The
    third Appellant is their minor child born on 4th January 2012.

 2. On 27th June 2014 the first Appellant made  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the grounds of family and private life.
     The second and third Appellants are his dependants.   The  application
    was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State  on  17th  December   2014.
    Consideration was given to the Appellant's family life under Article  8
    which  from  9th  July  2012  had  fallen  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The third Appellant's application was considered as
    the dependant child of the first  Appellant.   All  three  applications
    were refused.

 3. The Appellants appealed and the appeal came before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal O'Brien sitting at Newport on  11th  March  2016.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 22nd  March  2016  the  Appellants'
    appeals were dismissed under the Immigration Rules and on human  rights
    grounds.

 4. On 30th March 2016 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal.
     On 11th August 2016 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Keane  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Keane noted  that  the  grounds  varyingly
    expressed a single proposition  namely  that  the  judge  had  made  an
    arguable error of law in considering where the best  interests  of  the
    third Appellant lay.  He noted that the judge's assessment of the  best
    interests question was to be found at paragraph 33 of his decision  and
    that the judge had made an arguable error of law in  failing  correctly
    to direct himself to the test which he was to apply.  He noted that the
    judge had to decide where the best interests of the third Appellant lay
    and instead approached his assessment by stating as the paramount issue
    which he was to resolve whether it would be unreasonable to expect  the
    third Appellant to leave the United Kingdom.  In a  detailed  grant  of
    permission set out at paragraph 2 Judge Keane concluded that the  judge
    arguably applied the wrong test in considering paramountly  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect the third Appellant to leave the  UK  and
    not to assess the issue as to where his best interests lay.

 5. On 18th August 2016 a detailed response to the Grounds  of  Appeal  was
    filed by the Secretary of State under Rule 24.  The  Rule  24  response
    indicates that there is a complaint made that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had not considered the third Appellant's  best  interests.   They
    submit that the judge at paragraph 40 of the determination clearly  had
    considered his best interests and applied  the  ratio  of  the  guiding
    authority of Zoumbas.  Authorities were referred to at paragraphs 5 and
    6 therein and that the judge had considered the correct approach.   The
    Rule 24 response sought dismissal of the appeal.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellants appear by  their  instructed
    Counsel Mr Aslam.  The Secretary of State appears by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Ms Ahmad.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. Mr Aslam submits that a proposition in law that a case like this cannot
    succeed outside the "seven year Rule" is a flawed proposition and  that
    each case is different.  He submits that the starting point has  to  be
    in the making of a proper assessment of the facts  and  that  the  only
    assessment carried out is to be found at paragraphs 33 and  34  of  the
    decision  and  what  the  judge  has  considered  therein   is   either
    insufficient or reflects a failure to apply the facts of the case.   He
    submits that the test is not one of reasonableness and that  the  judge
    has equated the test that he has applied to one of best  interests  and
    submits that this is the wrong approach.  He contends that paragraph 34
    of the decision is insufficient and that the judge should  have  looked
    at  the  Rules  and  as  to  whether  or  not  there   are   compelling
    circumstances.  He  contends  that  the  judge  has  set  out  the  law
    perfectly properly but has then failed to apply it.  He submits that if
    the assessment had been carried out properly then the judge would  have
    found that is was disproportionate to remove the child and the  family.
    He asked me to find that there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and to remit the matter back to the
    Tribunal for rehearing before a freshly constituted court.

 8. Ms Ahmad submits that the judge  has  carried  out  an  assessment  and
    considered the best interests of the child which he was entitled to do.
     She refers me to paragraph 30 of the decision which sets out  the  law
    and that the judge has  then  gone  on  at  paragraph  33  to  consider
    different factors of the  child's  life.   She  acknowledges  that  the
    relevant paragraphs could have been worded better but  that  the  judge
    was right in finding that it was in the best  interests  of  the  third
    Appellant to return with his parents as a family unit.  She  emphasises
    that I have to be satisfied that a different decision would be  reached
    if the matter were to be reheard.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. The submission of the Appellants' representative is that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge made a decision without having had proper regard to  the
    need to safeguard and promote the  welfare  of  the  child,  failed  to
    identify what the best interests of the child were  in  this  case  and
    thereafter failed to form his own view as to the third Appellant's best
    interests and failed  to  properly  factor  those  interests  into  its
    consideration.

12. The issue herein is whether or note the judge has materially  erred  in
    law in  his  decision  or  whether  in  fact  the  submissions  of  the
    Appellants' legal representatives merely amount  to  disagreement  with
    the judge's findings.  Ms Ahmad has indicated she acknowledges that the
    findings of the judge could have been worded better.  I agree with that
    analysis.  However that does not mean firstly that the judge has  erred
    in law or secondly that if the matter were to be reheard that  a  judge
    would come to a different conclusion.

13. It is appropriate to consider what the judge has done.  The  judge  has
    set out the evidence in some detail at paragraphs 12 to 16.  The  judge
    has then set out in considerable detail at paragraphs 17 to 30 the law.
     He has addressed paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
    requirement of paragraph E-LTRP.1.2  and  E-LTRC.1.6.   Thereafter  the
    judge has analysed the position regarding Article 8 outside  the  Rules
    including giving due consideration to the lead authority of SSHD  v  SS
    (Congo) and Others [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387,  the  considerations  to  be
    addressed under Section 117B of the 2002  Act  and  the  considerations
    pursuant to Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
    2009 including the conclusions reached, and the guidance given, in  the
    authority of Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74.

14. It is against this background that the judge has made his findings.  He
    has gone on in the conclusions  to  consider  the  position  under  the
    Immigration Rules and  made  findings  at  paragraph  32  that  he  was
    entitled to.  Thereafter the position of the third Appellant  has  been
    addressed and the judge has considered whether there are any compelling
    circumstances justifying a grant of leave to remain outside the  Rules.
    The judge has again made findings that he  was  entitled  to.   A  more
    detailed set of findings may have led to  a  different  decision  being
    reached by the  judge  granting  permission.   However  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge has addressed the issues, has considered  the  facts  of
    this matter and has made findings which ultimately he was  entitled  to
    and whilst he has only given scant reasons I am satisfied that they are
    sufficient to show he has considered all the relevant factors and  that
    the decision consequently discloses no material error of law.  In  such
    circumstances the Appellants' appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

