
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01546/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th January 2015                           |On 28th January 2015          |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                        MR ADEDEKO ADESIYAN OGUNSOLA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Frederico Singarajah (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Carroll,  promulgated  on  18th  September  2014,  following  the
    hearing at Taylor House on 28th August 2014.  In the determination, the
    judge dismissed the appeal of Adedeji Adesiyan Ogunsola.  The Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nigeria, who  was  born  on  28th
    February 1981.  He appeals against the refusal of  his  application  to
    remain in the UK as a Tier 1  (General)  Migrant,  the  refusal  letter
    being dated 10th December 2013.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's Claim is that he  had  provided  evidence  such  as  to
    enable him to succeed in his application.   He  could  show  sufficient
    income.  This is because he was the sole director  and  shareholder  of
    his company.  A dividend was declared to the required amount such as to
    enable him to satisfy the financial requirements under the Rules.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed how the Appellant came to the UK in  September  2008
    as a student.  He was granted various extensions of leave to remain  as
    a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant until 21st February 2012.  On 28th August
    2013, he submitted an application for leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (General)  Migrant.   The  application  was  refused  by  reference  to
    paragraph 245CA(B) and (C) and Appendix A of HC 395 under  the  heading
    "previous earnings".  The Respondent stated that  the  Appellant  could
    not claim 30 points for earnings of �50,226.  He was  an  employee  and
    was entitled only  to  earnings  paid  to  him  by  the  company.   The
    accountant's  letter,  invoices  and  HSBC  Bank  statements  had  been
    provided to support the "retained profit" for which he was  seeking  to
    claim points, but as a company director he was not  entitled  to  claim
    for any company profit, only for money paid  to  him  in  the  form  of
    dividends or wages.

 5. At the  hearing,  the  Appellant  argued  that  under  the  "evidential
    flexibility" policy enquiries could have been made of him  so  that  he
    could show that he could indeed satisfy the Rules.  At the hearing also
    there was additional evidence.  The  judge  held  that,  the  appellant
    could not blame his accountants for being negligent in the advice  that
    they gave him, because it was incumbent upon every applicant to  ensure
    that they had satisfied the Rules themselves.  Secondly,  although  the
    Appellant now sought to rely upon a large amount of documentation which
    was not submitted in support of the  application,  this  could  not  be
    considered under Section 85A(4), as it was postdecision.

 6. Finally, the judge gave consideration  to  the  Appellant's  Article  8
    rights.  The judge held that the Appellant had only  ever  had  limited
    leave to remain in the UK.   There  was  no  expectation  of  any  more
    permanent grant of leave to remain.  His wife had leave to remain in an
    independent capacity until 28th December 2015.   At  the  time  of  the
    appeal before this Tribunal, that meant just under a period  of  twelve
    months' leave until the end of the year 2015.  The judge observed that,



         "it is claimed also that the Appellant and his wife are the parents
         of two small children.  There is, however, no evidence to show  any
         exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances  such  as   to   require
         consideration of the application by reference to Article 8  of  the
         1950 Convention" (paragraph 8).

    The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge did  not  consider  the
    Appellant's Article 8 rights and that paragraph 8 of the  determination
    was inadequate in its analysis.  In any event, the  judge  should  have
    considered the Respondent's failure to consider Article 8.

 8. On 11th November 2014, permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis
    that it was arguable that full and proper consideration  had  not  been
    given to the circumstances of the Appellant's family  or  that  of  his
    wife and children.

 9. On 19th November 2014, a Rule 24 response was entered by the Respondent
    Secretary of  State  to  the  effect  that  no  adequate  evidence  was
    presented to demonstrate that  there  was  a  good  arguable  case  for
    Article 8 and so the judge could not have erred in law.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 6th January 2015, Mr Singarajah,  appearing
    on the Appellant, made extensive legal submissions.  He said  that  the
    nub of his challenge was with respect to what the  judge  had  held  at
    paragraphs 7 and 8 of the determination, because  these  dealt  with  a
    failure  to  give  proper  consideration  to  Article  8.    A   proper
    consideration in this regard was vital because if the  Appellant  could
    show that he qualified under Tier 1, then although  this  was  not  the
    present application that he was making, this would  show  that  he  had
    been in the UK lawfully, and this in  turn  would  go  to  the  "public
    interest" consideration under the Immigration Act 2014, such  that  the
    Appellant could then stand a chance  of  succeeding  under  Article  8.
    This was not a case of an applicant with a poor immigration record.  He
    submitted that a "near-miss" under the Rules can provide substance to a
    human rights case which does have merit in and of itself.  He relied on
    the case of Zhang, (at paragraph 77 and paragraph 78).

11. Second, Mr Singarajah submitted that  Article  8  was  engaged  in  any
    event.  He relied on JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402.  Here  Laws  LJ
    considered the argument

         "that Section 84(1)(c), ... suffices to allow a right of appeal  on
         human rights grounds in every case where the  immigration  decision
         in question would give rise to an imminent threat  of  removal  and
         thus an imminent potential violation  of  ECHR  rights".   This  is
         because "the reference to the Human Rights Act in Section 84(1)(g),
         if it is in truth to have independent application, must be held  to
         contemplate a broader or remote contingency.  There  is,  I  think,
         some force in that" (see paragraph 24).

    Laws LJ also stated that,

         "The short, but important, position is that  once  a  human  rights
         point is properly before the AIT, they are obliged to deal with it.
          That is consonant with the general jurisprudence relating  to  the
         obligations of public bodies under the Human Rights Act  and  seems
         to me to be the proper result of the construction of  the  relevant
         provisions".  (Paragraph 28).

    On this basis, the  judge  should  have,  in  the  final  paragraph  at
    paragraph 8, applied the Razgar principles.  The failure to do so meant
    that the judge did not consider the human rights point properly as  she
    should have done.

12. Third, the jurisprudence on Article 8  had  considerably  developed  in
    recent times.  There was now even further clarification in the case  of
    Ganesabalan [2014] EWHC 2712.  The conventional position had been  that
    where the Rules do not comprehensively cover a situation  (such  as  in
    Beoku-Betts, where there are wider family rights, or in EB (Kosovo)  or
    in  VW  (Uganda),  where  consideration  has  to  be   given   to   the
    reasonableness of return) it is necessary to consider the second  limb,
    so that one enters freestanding  Article  8  Strasbourg  jurisprudence.
    This is explained by Mr Michael Fordham  QC,  sitting  as  Deputy  High
    Court Judge, in Ganesabalan.  He states that, "unlike other Rules which
    have built-in discretion based on exceptional  circumstances,  Appendix
    FM and Rule 276ADE are not a  'complete  code'  so  far  as  Article  8
    compatibility is concerned" (see paragraph 10).  He states that this is
    established under MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWHC 720 (at paragraph 44) and it
    is established in Halleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558,  at  paragraph  43.
    Mr Fordham explains that

         "these Immigration Rules operate alongside important guidance which
         is itself a part of the relevant overall code  and  which  guidance
         recognises the discretion outside the Rules and  the  duty  of  the
         Secretary of State to consider exercising that  discretion  in  the
         individual case" (see paragraph 12(2)).

    The judge in that  case  also  explains  that  "the  duty  to  consider
    exercising the  discretion  is  recognised  in  the  authorities"  (see
    paragraph 16(iii)).  He refers to Nagre [2013] EWHC  720,  which  reads
    (at paragraph 14),

         "with reference to the relevant officials, that quote ...  if  they
         come across a case falling outside the new Rules ... nonetheless  I
         have to consider whether it is a case where, on the material facts,
         there would be a breach of Article 8 rights if the application  for
         leave to remain were refused".

13. Furthermore, in the same case (at paragraph 34) it is made  clear  that
    "in cases were consideration of the new Rules does not fully dispose of
    a claim based on Article 8, the Secretary of State would be obliged  to
    consider granting leave to remain outside the Rules".

14. Mr Fordham QC then refers to the principle that

         "the discretion described variously by  reference  to  'exceptional
         circumstances' or 'unjustifiable hardship' involves  the  Secretary
         of State applying a proportionality test and asking whether removal
         would be disproportionate by reference to Article 8 standards" (see
         paragraph 19(iv).

15. In drawing my attention to this, Mr Singarajah submitted that the judge
    below in this case had failed to do this.  The  judge  identifies  that
    the Appellant's wife has leave until the end of  2015,  she  identifies
    that the Appellant is a father with two small children,  but  she  does
    not  identify that this engages family life, and does not then go on to
    consider the implications of such a matter.

16. In Ganesabalan, Mr Michael Fordham QC had also stated that

         "there is no prior threshold which dictates whether the exercise of
         discretion  should  be  considered:  rather  the  nature   of   the
         assessment and the reasoning which are called for are  informed  by
         threshold considerations, those threshold circumstances include (a)
         whether an arguable basis for the exercise of  the  discretion  has
         been put forward; (b) whether the  relevant  factors  have  already
         been assessed; (c) whether a repeat evaluation is unnecessary" (see
         paragraph 21(v)).

    Mr Michael Fordham QC continues to state that

         "features, aspects of features and combinations of features already
         addressed, whether  in  full  or  in  part,  by  reference  to  the
         Immigration Rules do not in  principle  become  irrelevant  to  the
         discretion and the evaluation  of  proportionality  for  Article  8
         purposes" (see paragraph 30(vi)).

17. Ganesabalan finally concludes with the statement by Deputy  High  Court
    Judge Mr Michael Fordham QC, stating that,




         "It follows from the factual premise in this case and the  analysis
         of the law which I have set about  above  that  there  was,  in  my
         judgment, an error of law in the decision letter in this case.  The
         decision letter and notice contained  no  indication  or  reasoning
         which demonstrates that the Secretary of State has  considered  the
         exercise of discretion or the question of exceptional circumstances
         or the question of proportionality.  The Claimant does not  submit,
         and I do not find, that the Secretary  of  State  was  required  to
         undertake  any  particular  review  or   assessment   or   parallel
         assessment.   However,  in  order  to  be  a  lawful  decision  the
         Secretary of State was, in my judgment,  required  to  address  her
         mind to the question of the discretion  and  was  required  in  her
         reasons to demonstrate that she had done so  and  what  conclusions
         she had reached" (paragraph 36).

18. Mr Singarajah submitted that, just as with the Secretary of  State,  so
    also with a Tribunal Judge.  The Tribunal Judge must also, in order for
    there to be lawful decision, address her mind to the  question  of  the
    discretion and state in her reasons why she had reached the conclusions
    that she had done.

19. This had not occurred in this case.  As a matter of a lawful  decision,
    this decision could not, therefore, stand.

20. Fourth, Mr Singarajah directed my  attention  to  the  recent  case  of
    Oludoyi, where Upper Tribunal Judge Gill had also considered the latest
    position under Article 8,  summarising  all  the  previous  cases,  and
    taking them fully into account.  He submitted that  the  judge  had  to
    consider the so-called "second limb" and was  wrong  to  refer  to  the
    absence of any "exceptional or compelling circumstances" (at  paragraph
    8) before this could be done.  This is  because  UTJ  Gill  in  Oludoyi
    states that,

         "There is nothing in Nagre, Gulshan or Shahzad that suggests that a
         threshold test was being suggested as opposed to  making  it  clear
         that there is a need to look at the evidence to see  if  there  was
         anything which has not already been adequately  considered  in  the
         context of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  which  could  lead  to  a
         successful Article 8 claim ... these authorities must not  be  read
         as seeking to qualify or fetter the assessment of Article  8.   The
         guidance must be read in  context  and  not  construed  as  if  the
         judgments are pieces of legislation" (see paragraph 20).

21. UTJ Gill also went on to say, that, consistently with paragraph 128  of
    MN  (Lebanon),  "that  there  is  no  utility  in  imposing  a  further
    intermediate test as a preliminary to a consideration of an  Article  8
    claim beyond the relevant criterion based Rule" (paragraph 22).

22. Mr Singarajah submitted that, what this meant accordingly was, that the
    "two limbs are a fallacy",  and  should  no  longer  be  adopted.   The
    judge's adoption in this  case  of  the  structure  made  the  decision
    unlawful.

23. Fifth, Mr Singarajah directed my attention to the case  of  Azmi-Moayed
    [2013] UKUT 00197 when Blake J., as president of the Tribunal, set  out
    the relevant principles as follows:

         "(i)  In  any  administrative  action,  including  any  immigration
             decision to remove a child or a carer  of  a  child  from  the
             jurisdiction, the best interests of that child are  a  primary
             consideration, to which regard must be had.

         (ii) The duty under the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child is
             a critical part of any Article 8 ECHR  evaluation  of  a  case
             where an immigration action is challenged on appeal.

         (iii)    There is a parallel statutory duty that the  discharge  of
             any immigration function has regard to the need  to  safeguard
             and promote the  welfare  of  children  while  in  the  United
             Kingdom (Section 55 BCIA 2009).

         (iv) These duties are so well-established that a judge should  take
             the point for him  or  herself  as  an  obvious  point  to  be
             considered,  wherever  the  issue  arises  on  the   evidence,
             irrespective of whether the Appellants or the  advocates  have
             done so."

    Mr  Singarajah  submitted  that  the  last  point  above  meant,   that
    regardless of how well the Article 8 position had been put  before  the
    Tribunal in terms of the position of the children,  the  judge  had  to
    give  them  a  proper  consideration  "irrespective  of   whether   the
    Appellants or the advocates have done so".  The failure to do so  meant
    that the Section 55 BCIA duty had not been properly  complied  with  by
    the judge.

24. Fifth, in Jo (Nigeria) [2014] UKUT 00517, McCluskey  J.  more  recently
    emphasised the importance of the Section 55  obligation  upon  decision
    makers.  He stated that,

         "Section 55 has been considered by the United Kingdom Supreme Court
         in  two  cases.   These  decisions  demonstrate,  inter  alia,  the
         interaction between Section 55 and Article  8  ECHR.   While  these
         provisions have separate juridical  identities,  they  are  clearly
         associative.   Thus  where  the  Article  8  family  life  equation
         involves children,  Section  55  is  immediately  engaged.   In  ZH
         (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4, Baroness Hale emphasised  that  the  best
         interests of the children must be considered first - see  paragraph
         26 - where  Lord  Kerr  stated,  'primacy  of  importance  must  be
         accorded to his or her best interests'.  This is not, it is agreed,
         a fact of limitless importance in the sense that  it  will  prevail
         over all other considerations.  It is a factor, however, that  must
         rank higher than any other".

25. McCloskey J. went on to refer to the second case before the UK  Supreme
    Court, that of Zumbas [2013] 1WLR 3690, where Lord Hodge  stated  seven
    principles of application, the first  of  which  was  that,  "the  best
    interests of a child  are  an  integral  part  of  the  proportionality
    assessment under Article 8 ECHR" and the last of which were  that,  "it
    is important to ask oneself the right questions in an orderly manner in
    order to avoid the risk that the best interests of the child  might  be
    undervalued when other important considerations were in play".

26. Mr Singarajah submitted that this was a case where such  undervaluation
    had taken place in the manner in which the judge at first instance  had
    disposed of this appeal.  McCloskey J. had ended the  consideration  in
    JO (Nigeria) with the statement that,

         "properly analysed, there are two guiding principles,  each  rooted
         in duty.  The first is that the decision  maker  must  be  properly
         informed.  The second is that, thus equipped,  the  decision  maker
         must conduct a careful examination of all relevant information  and
         factors.  These principles have a simple logical attraction,  since
         it is difficult to conceive how a  decision  maker  could  properly
         have regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of the
         child or children concerned otherwise" (paragraph 11).

    In the instant case, Mr Singarajah submitted, this had not been done.

27. Mr Singarajah ended his submissions by emphasising that this was a case
    where the Appellant was not an overstayer.  He  had  a  lawful  Section
    3(C) leave.  He had always been lawfully in the UK.   The  cases  above
    were couched in the language of "must have regard"  and  there  was  no
    room for avoiding such considerations.  If these matters  had  properly
    been considered, they would then directly have come into operation with
    respect to Article 8 considered broadly.  If the Appellant was  not  an
    overstayer, but was lawfully  in  this  country,  then  the  legitimate
    interest in removing him, in circumstances where his wife  had  another
    year's leave, could not be demonstrated.

28. Mr Singarajah emphasised again what was said in Zhang [2013] EWHC  891,
    by Mr Justice Turner, namely, that,

         "I, therefore, come to the clear view  that  saving  in  particular
         cases (such as those involving poor  immigration  record  -  as  in
         Akinci [2003] EWCA Civ 765 or where the engagement of Article 8  is
         very tenuous - in R (Molvu) [2008] EWHC  2089)  it  would  be  rare
         indeed that the immigration priorities of the state are such as  to
         give rise to a proportionate answer to Article 8 rights  to  family
         life where requirement H(1) is engaged."  (See paragraph 77).

    Mr Justice Turner continued that,

         "It must follow from this  that  the  application  of  the  blanket
         requirement to leave the country imposed by paragraph  319C(H)1  of
         the  Immigration  Rules  is  unsustainable.   It  is   simply   not
         consistent with the ratio of the decision in  Chikwamba  that  this
         paragraph, as presently worded, should continue to form part of the
         Rules" (paragraph 78).

29. Mr Singarajah submitted that given the failings of the  Tribunal  Judge
    below, the only proper course of action was to make  a  finding  of  an
    error of law, and to remit the matter back to a First-tier Tribunal for
    a de novo consideration.

30. For his part, Mr Tufan submitted that the Grounds of Appeal (at page 3)
    draw no attention to the best interests of the child.   The  references
    to matters raised today, are only made in passing  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  Secondly, the Appellant's witness  statement  and  his  wife's
    witness statement add nothing more to the Article 8 matters  that  have
    today been raised.  It was well-established that the best interests  of
    a child are to be with their parents.

31. In this case the children were  under  2  years  of  age.   Their  best
    interests would not suffer by returning with their parents to  Nigeria.
    It was open to the Appellant to make  another  in-country  application.
    He would not even have to return back to Nigeria  to  do  this.   Given
    that the change of the Rules on 8th July 2012, brought in the  language
    of  "exceptional  circumstances"  or  "compelling  circumstances"  some
    meaning and  importance  should  be  attached  to  these  requirements.
    Finally, even Oludoyi sees the upholding of the two limbs  of  approach
    in Article 8 cases.

32. In his reply, Mr Singarajah submitted that one must  not  overlook  the
    declaration by Blake J. in Azmi-Moayad, that, "these duties are so well-
    established that a judge should take the point for him or herself as an
    obvious point to be  considered,  wherever  the  issue  arises  on  the
    evidence, irrespective of whether the Appellants or the advocates  have
    done so."  There was a witness statement of the wife which referred  to
    her children.  If it arose as a matter of evidence,  then  it  mattered
    not that the advocates had not emphasised it or the grounds  of  appeal
    did not expressly elaborate it.

33. Furthermore, the case  of  Ganesabalan,  sees  Mr  Michael  Fordham  QC
    emphasise that, "in order to be a lawful  decision"  the  proper  steps
    must be followed (see paragraph  36).   The  two-pronged  approach  was
    wrongfully adopted here, as was made clear by UTJ Gill in Oludoyi,  who
    had said that, "there is nothing in Nagre,  Gulshan,  or  Shahzad  that
    suggests that a threshold test was being suggested ..." (paragraph 20).
     Yet, this is how the judge below had approached the matter.

Error of Law

34. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law  (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  This is a case where the  judge  has  indeed  approached  the
    Article 8 assessment on the basis of a two-stage  process.   Her  words
    that, "there is, however,  no  evidence  to  show  any  exceptional  or
    compelling circumstances  such  as  to  require  consideration  of  the
    application by reference to Article 8  of  the  1950  Convention"  (see
    paragraph 8) is evidence of this.

35. That approach, whilst it was good at one time, is now  discredited,  to
    the extent that where there is an arguable case, the judge is  required
    to consider  the  matter  as  a  whole  under  Article  8  freestanding
    jurisprudence, and that there is no threshold test being imposed by the
    established authorities.  It is clear that in order for  this  to  have
    been a lawful decision the judge was required to address  her  mind  to
    the question of the discretion and to demonstrate that she had done so,
    which was available to her.  It is significant that  this  was  a  case
    where the Appellant had lawful leave.

36. It did not automatically follow  that  the  balance  of  considerations
    would be against him, especially given that his wife has another year's
    leave to remain in the UK, such  that  she  cannot  herself  return  to
    Nigeria with him.  If she stays, the children stay with her.  This  was
    a case where a Section 47 removal decision had been  made.   These  are
    matters that needed proper consideration.

37. At the same time, the evidence requires  a  much  fuller  consideration
    before a decision can be made.  In the circumstances, whilst I  make  a
    finding of an error of law, this matter cannot be substantially decided
    in this Tribunal, and must be remitted under Practice Statement 7.2  to
    another judge at Taylor House for a First-tier Tribunal  determination.



Notice of Decision

38. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed to the extent that it is remitted back to a judge,  other  than
    Judge Carroll, to be determined de novo at Taylor House.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th January 2015


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable (adjusted where full  award
not justified).



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th January 2015
