
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01365/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 April 2018                             |On 4 May 2018                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                       Mohammad Jahangir Hossain miah
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Aitken, Counsel instructed by Novells Legal
Practice
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal from the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Rahman promulgated  on  1  September  2017.   The  appellant  is  a
         national of Bangladesh born on 10 February  1972.  He  entered  the
         United Kingdom on 10 February 2004 with a visitor visa valid  until
         11 July 2004, after which time he became an over-stayer. He applied
         for leave to remain on human rights grounds on 7 January 2009.


      2. The  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse  the  appellant's
         application was communicated on 1 March 2016. His appeal from  that
         refusal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  under  the
         Immigration Rules (276ADE), and under Article 8  ECHR  outside  the
         rules.


      3. The decision in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  covers  the  procedural
         history, the appellant's immigration history, a  brief  summary  of
         the Secretary of  State's  reasons  for  refusal  and  the  witness
         evidence of the appellant and his cousin.  There is then a  summary
         of  the  submissions  made  by  the  party's  representatives.  The
         findings begin at paragraph 62.


      4. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Birrell on 21 March 2018, on the basis that there was  arguably  no
         engagement in the First-tier Tribunal with  an  apparent  delay  of
         seven years between the application to the Secretary of  State  and
         her decision.  It was recorded that the  other  grounds  have  less
         merit and are largely an attempt to re-litigate the case.  However,
         all grounds may be argued.


      5. On 10 April 2018 a short Rule 24 statement  was  served  indicating
         that in the Secretary of State's submission the First-tier Tribunal
         Judge directed himself appropriately and that there was an adequate
         consideration of all matters including the issue of delay.


      6. Mr Aitken, who appears before me today, as he did for the appellant
         in the First-tier Tribunal, has advanced with skill and economy the
         written grounds which he settled. He addressed the various  grounds
         in numerical number and I propose to do likewise.


      7. Although not abandoning the issue  of  the  judge's  assessment  of
         credibility in Ground 1, he has  not  pursued  it  with  any  great
         vigour.  I consider that to have been an appropriate stance because
         issues of credibility are  for  first  instance  judges  to  decide
         having heard live evidence. Looking at this case in the  round,  it
         is difficult to fault the judge for the way in which he  approached
         the evidence and the assessment he made of credibility.


      8. Ground 2 alleges a failure to give adequate reasons for the finding
         that family life does not exist. The grounds rehearse the  material
         that was before the judge, which it is  said  was  not  dealt  with
         adequately.


      9. This is, by  any  account,  a  full  and  detailed  decision.   The
         relevant passage is paragraph 89 which reads as follows:

             "I find the elements of dependency involve no  more  than  the
             normal emotional ties between the appellant  and  his  cousin,
             his cousin's wife, and their  children.  I  am  therefore  not
             satisfied of the existence  of  a  'family  life'  within  the
             meaning of article 8 of the ECHR."

     10. I accept, as Mr Aitken submits, that this  is  a  relatively  brief
         disposal of the issue, but mere brevity does not amount to an error
         of law. It is clear from  the  context  that  the  judge  took  all
         evidential matters into consideration and came to a conclusion that
         was open to him on the facts as he found them.  What is alleged  in
         the grounds amounts to no more than a disagreement with the judge's
         findings.


     11. The third Ground is derivative  on  the  second.  It  concerns  the
         judge's finding  that  the  appellant's  removal  from  the  United
         Kingdom would not have consequences of sufficient gravity so as  to
         engage Article 8. The judge's comments are to be found at paragraph
         90 and they read as follows:

             "If I am wrong as to the existence of  family  life,  I  would
             find that removal would cause an interference. However, I find
             that removal would not have consequences of such gravity so as
             to engage the operation of article 8.  The appellant's claimed
             family life is with his adult  cousin  whom  he  met  for  the
             second time in the UK in 2004 having previously met  him  only
             once when aged about 7, and with his cousin's wife  and  three
             children now aged 17, 19, and 22, since 2004."

         The  judge   deals   with   this   matter   in   the   alternative,
         notwithstanding his primary finding that Article 8 was not  engaged
         at all. The point is purely academic.  In  any  event,  I  can  see
         nothing wrong in the judge's assessment.

     12. Ground 4 concerns proportionality. This was the principal ground on
         which permission to appeal was granted. It is a matter  of  record,
         recited by the judge in paragraph 5 of his decision, that there was
         a delay of more  than  seven  years  between  the  lodging  of  the
         application  for  leave  to  remain  on  7  January  2009  and  its
         determination on 1 March 2016.  The judge  says  the  following  at
         paragraph 94:

             "I note the delay in dealing with the appellant's application.
             However, any delay is simply  one  factor  to  be  taken  into
             account and I do not find it of significance  in  this  appeal
             due to the nature and quality of the claimed family  life.  In
             all the circumstances, I  would  find  that  the  decision  to
             require the appellant to leave is proportionate."

     13. In a further passage, this time under the sub-heading  of  "Private
         life", the judge says:

             "... through the weight of years the appellant has established
             private life and the delay on the part of the respondent is  a
             factor that needs to be taken into  account  when  considering
             whether  removal  was  necessary  for   the   maintenance   of
             immigration  control  and  when  considering  proportionality.
             However, delay is simply one factor to be taken into  account,
             which I have. Nevertheless, when considering all  the  matters
             before  me,  I  find  that   the   decision   to   remove   is
             proportionate."

     14. It is clear from those two passages that the issue of delay was  in
         the forefront of the judge's mind throughout.  The  fact  that  the
         judge dealt with his conclusions in a brief manner does not  amount
         to an error of law. The judicial function is to balance  and  weigh
         all relevant factors. The judge evidently  did  this  and  came  to
         conclusions which are clear,  intelligible  and  supported  by  the
         evidence. I do not consider there  to  be  any  substance  in  this
         ground of appeal.


     15. Finally, I come to Ground 5 which alleges  a  failure  to  consider
         family relationships as an aspect of private life. I  have  already
         cited in a different context certain parts of  the  decision  where
         private life is expressly addressed. Mr Aitken criticises the judge
         for not factoring into the private life assessment the relationship
         he built up with his cousin and nephews,  particularly  during  the
         seven years while his application was under consideration. I do not
         consider this to be a legitimate criticism  of  the  judge.  It  is
         clear in the context of the decision as a whole that the judge  had
         in his consideration all possible  aspects  of  private  life.  His
         conclusion in that regard cannot be faulted. Repeating his  earlier
         findings would have been  mere  surplusage  within  a  sufficiently
         detailed decision.


     16.  The  matters  raised  in  the  grounds,  whether  individually  or
         cumulatively, do not serve to undermine the decision of the  First-
         tier Tribunal. I can find no error of law, and in the circumstances
         I dismiss this appeal.



Notice of decision

   1) Appeal dismissed;
   2) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill                  Date         1 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
