
[pic]
IAC-CH-AP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01285/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st September 2015                |On 17th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           mr aman esmatullah aman
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Graham, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  appeals  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lal  in  which  he  allowed  the
    claimant's appeal on Article  8  grounds  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 2. The Secretary of State's grounds complain that the judge:

      i) failed to give  an  adequate  explanation  as  to  why  this  adult
         Appellant's relationship with his  adult  siblings  in  the  United
         Kingdom engaged Article 8,

     ii)  failed  to  take  as  the  starting  point  in  an  assessment  of
         proportionality that the Appellant did not meet the dependent adult
         relative  requirements  of  Appendix  FM,  or  the   private   life
         requirements  at  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  so  as   to   attach   the
         appropriate weight  to  the  Immigration  Rules  as  particularised
         within Section 117 of the 2002 Act.

 3. Mr Graham for the claimant submitted that it was implicit in  the  fact
    that the judge only considered Article 8 outside of the Rules that  the
    judge fully appreciated why the claimant did not meet the  requirements
    of the Rules.  The claimant's Article 8  Grounds  of  Appeal  had  been
    remitted for consideration by the first Tribunal because the judge  who
    had heard the asylum Grounds of Appeal had simply  failed  to  consider
    Article 8. There was ample evidence before the  judge  to  justify  the
    finding that the removal decision was disproportionate bearing in  mind
    the age of the claimant, the  fact  that  he  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom as an unaccompanied minor in November 2011 and had  lived  with
    his brother and his family with limited leave pursuant to the Secretary
    of State's policy until adulthood.  There was no need for the judge  to
    particularise the impact of separation on the claimant or on his family
    members here in the United Kingdom.  The position  in  Afghanistan  was
    difficult.  The safety of an individual depended on the  network  which
    was around them.  The claimant had been here for some time and would be
    considered as westernised on return.  Not surprisingly the claimant  is
    frightened of  the  Taliban.   Although  technically  an  adult  he  is
    immature,  ill-equipped  to  survive  in  the  hostile  environment  of
    Afghanistan and whilst it could not be said that there would definitely
    be animosity if he was recognised as having spent time in, and returned
    from, the west, it was a reasonable fear.

 4. Both representatives were of the view that in the event that I found an
    error I was in a position to remake the decision on the  basis  of  the
    documentary bundles before the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. In the context of this claimant's Article 8  private  and  family  life
    that includes a recognition that on return to Afghanistan he would not,
    in the context of paragraph 276ADE(vi) face very significant  obstacles
    to   integration.   Further   arguments   concerning   the   claimant's
    vulnerability on return to Afghanistan were dealt with  in  his  asylum
    appeal when it was found that he was not at any real risk as part of  a
    particular social group based on his youth and vulnerability.

 6. The remittal to the First-tier made it plain to the claimant  that  his
    case was being remitted to give him the opportunity  of  fully  arguing
    his Article 8 case and producing his evidence.

 7.  In  the  event  the  only  evidence  the  claimant  provided  was  the
    documentary evidence of the application,  namely  a  few  letters  from
    fellow students of the time attesting  to  his  personable  nature  and
    sporting endeavours, and a letter in similar form from his  ESOL  16-18
    programme course tutor.  At the hearing before the judge the claimant's
    brother was absent in Afghanistan, and although he has  a  sister  here
    who provided a witness statement  saying  she  was  supportive  of  the
    appeal she did not attend in person.  The  written  statement  evidence
    clearly shows that both the brother and sister of  the  claimant  would
    like him to stay here.  Their desire is underlined by the fact that the
    brother was a Sponsor in a failed  earlier  application  to  bring  the
    claimant and his sister who  remains  in  Afghanistan,  to  the  United
    Kingdom as his dependants, an application which was refused.

 8. The claimant is a young, single man who has family  in  Afghanistan  as
    evidenced by the fact that on the date of hearing before the First-tier
    Tribunal his brother from the United Kingdom was visiting  Afghanistan,
    attending a funeral, and  who  could  expect  to  continue  to  receive
    financial support from the same family relatives who had been providing
    it to him whilst he has been here between November  2011  and  December
    2012, the date of the decision.

 9. The reality is that this claimant has no claim  to  be  in  the  United
    Kingdom, the fact that he has had the benefit of a year's residence  in
    his brother's household having arrived in the United Kingdom illegally,
    has provided him with an opportunity  to  re-establish  ties  with  his
    brother and sister here but the character and  quality  of  those  ties
    does not of itself create any additional entitlement,  or give rise  to
    a proper basis upon which to allow  an  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds
    outside of the Rules.

10. I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  a
    material error of law in failing to recognise that  the  weight  to  be
    given to the public interest as reflected in the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules means that there must be something in the  claimant's
    family circumstances which operates to  elevate  his  position  to  one
    which shows that the application of  the  Rules  does  not  provide  an
    adequate answer to his circumstances.  On the scant evidence before the
    Tribunal there was no proper evidential basis so to conclude.

11. For all the reasons above I allow the Secretary of  State's  appeal.  I
    find that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  vitiated  by
    material legal error and  is  set  aside  and  I  remake  the  decision
    dismissing the Appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds.

12. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

