

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/01584/2016




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12th July 2017                         |On 15th August 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY

                                   Between

                            MR.MOHAMMAD CHOWDHURY
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Simon Noble Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. There is a history behind this appeal which is necessary to set out.

2. The appellant was originally granted leave to remain as a student on 20
   September 2007 until 2 September 2010. Then, on 14 September 2010 he was
   granted further leave to remain until 30 December 2013.

The first appeal

3. A decision of Judge of First Tier Tribunal O'Malley promulgated on 1 May
   2015 refers to an application of the 13 September 2013 for leave to
   remain as a student which was refused on 29 August 2014. The judge states
   the refusal was on the basis he did not have a valid CAS, it having been
   withdrawn.

4. First tier Judge O'Malley found that the College, by the date of
   decision, had lost its licence. The appellant had not been notified of
   this and had not had the benefit of the 60-day notice normally given in
   the interests of fairness. The judge said it was not reasonable for the
   respondent to then delay deciding his application for eight months and
   failing to give him time to rectify the situation. The judge allowed the
   appeal on the basis of fairness because of the respondent's delay and in
   not following her own policy of giving 60 days notice.

The second appeal

5. The decision which is the subject matter of the present appeal is dated
   2 March 2016. It relates to an application made on 30 December 2013 for
   further leave to remain.

6. It was heard by First tier Judge Chamberlain who had a copy of the
   decision of First tier Judge O'Malley. The appeal was heard on the papers
   so the judge did not have the benefit of submissions.

7. There is no reference in the respondent's decision to the earlier appeal
   and the 60-day notice. Again, it refers to the CAS having been withdrawn
   by the sponsor and as a consequence the necessary points not being
   awarded. Additionally, reference is made to the respondent inviting the
   appellant for interview on 10 December 2015 to assess whether he
   genuinely was a student. As he did not attend the conclusion was that he
   was not genuine.

8. The judge recorded the appellant's claim that he never received the 60
   day notice nor the invitations for interview. The judge indicated some
   scepticism about the latter pointing out the apparent lack of enquiry on
   his part over a 10-month period.

9. At paragraph 14 of the decision the judge stated:

    The grounds of appeal are limited to an appeal on the basis that the
    decision is a breach of the appellant's human rights. The Appellant
    cannot appeal against this decision on the basis that it is not in
    accordance with the law, or on the basis that he meets the requirements
    of the immigration rules...

10. At paragraphs 18 the judge went on this:

    I have considered the refusal of the Appellant's application. I find
    that the respondent has not provided evidence that she invited the
    appellant to an interview. There is no evidence of any correspondence
    sent either to the appellant or to his representatives. I find that the
    respondent has failed to provide evidence to show that she invited the
    appellant for interview. She has provided a copy of the template for an
    interview which has been filled in with the appellant's name, and date
    and location of the proposed interview. However, she has provided no
    evidence to show that she invited the appellant to attend at this date
    and time. I therefore find that the respondent has failed to show that
    the decision should have been refused under paragraph 322(10).

11. At paragraph 21 the judge stated:

    As I have set out above, in any event, the appeal is limited to an
    appeal on human rights grounds...

The Upper Tribunal

12. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable from
   paragraph 14 that the judge believed the appeal was limited to human
   rights grounds. This was not the case given that the application was made
   on 30 December 2013. This may have meant no proper decision had been made
   by the judge under the immigration rules.

13. I am satisfied from the decision the judge was under the
   misapprehension that there was a limited right of appeal in this case,
   namely, to human rights grounds. The 2014 Act came into force in July
   2014 and transitional provisions applied. Given the date of the
   application the appellant had a full right of appeal. Consequently, the
   judge incorrectly did not consider the merits of his application under
   the immigration rules. This was a material error of law. Because the
   appeal was not considered under the rules the decision cannot stand.

Disposal

14. The appellant's representative submitted that I should remake the
   decision and allow the appeal. He submitted the appeal could be allowed
   on a freestanding article 8 basis in the absence of a valid CAS.

15. I do not find I am in a position to remake the decision. This is
   because having sought to unravel the chronology it is not apparent what
   action the respondent took on foot of the earlier decision of First Tier
   Tribunal O'Malley. The index decision makes no reference to it and again
   raises the absence of the CAS without reference to the 60-day notice
   issue. First tier Judge Chamberlain did indicate a view on the question
   of notification and non-attendance at interview but do not make a
   decision on this point because of the misunderstanding about the rights
   of appeal. In this circumstance it is my conclusion that the proper
   course is for the matter to be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal to
   remake afresh. This is in the hope that the respondent can clarify the
   basis for the refusal in light of the above.




Decision

The decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge Chamberlain dismissing the
appellant's appeal materially errs if law and cannot stand. The appeal is
remitted for a hearing de novo to the First Tier Tribunal.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.


8th August 2017





























