
S-T
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01279/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 November 2014                  |On 26 November 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                NAHEED AKHTAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Fisher, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.   By a decision promulgated on 10 October  2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Latter set aside the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Trevaskis
    and directed the appeal to be  reheard  on  its  merits  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal preserving, subject to them being supplemented or clarified by
    any further evidence, Judge  Trevaskis's  findings  of  fact  found  in
    paragraphs 35 to 39 of his decision.

 2.   The background to the appeal and the issues arising are  clearly  set
    out in Judge Latter's decision, which  is  annexed  to  this  decision.
    There is little utility to repeating the information set out in it.

 3.   I shall continue the practice of referring to  the  parties  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal. I shall refer to Ms Akhtar as "the
    appellant" and the Secretary of State as "the respondent".

 4.   I was not asked to make an anonymity direction and saw no  reason  to
    make one.

 5. I remind myself that the date of decision is  10  December  2013.  This
    being an in-country appeal I may consider  evidence  about  any  matter
    which I think relevant to the  substance  of  the  decision,  including
    evidence which concerns a matter arising after the date of decision.

 6. In immigration cases the  burden  of  proof  generally  lies  upon  the
    appellant with respect to any assertions of fact which she  makes.  The
    standard of that proof is the balance of probabilities.

 7.   The representatives agreed that the rules were met with the exception
    of subparagraph 317(i)(d), which the respondent continues  to  dispute.
    This subparagraph reads as follows:


         "317. The requirements to be met by  a  person  seeking  indefinite
         leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the  parent,
         grandparent or other dependent relative of  a  person  present  and
         settled in the United Kingdom are that the person:

         (i) is related to a  person  present  and  settled  in  the  United
         Kingdom in one of the following ways:

         ...

         (d) parent or grandparent under the  age  of  65  if  living  alone
         outside the United Kingdom in the  most  exceptional  compassionate
         circumstances; or ..."




 8.   I kept in mind the following when  assessing  this  case.  Where  the
    application has been made in-country, the appellant must show that  she
    would meet the substantive requirements of the rule if she  were  still
    in her own country. It is not enough to show the rule is being  met  in
    the UK (MB (para 317: in country applications) Bangladesh [2006]  UKAIT
    00091). According to the IDIs  referred  to  in  Ms  Fisher's  skeleton
    argument, the rule is aimed at situations such as illness,  incapacity,
    isolation and poverty.  The  wording  'most  exceptional  compassionate
    circumstances' shows the very high threshold for  dependent  relatives.
    The rule has a humanitarian purpose and requires an assessment  of  the
    degree of compassion evoked by the appellant's circumstances (KC &  Ors
    [2007] EWCA Civ 327) but the  use  of  the  word  'most'  is  not  mere
    surplusage (R v IAT, ex  parte  Joseph  [1988]  Imm  AR  329).  I  have
    considered  the   appellant's   circumstances   cumulatively   on   the
    information available to me.

 9. I heard brief oral evidence from  the  appellant  in  Urdu  through  an
    interpreter she confirmed she  could  understand.  I  also  heard  oral
    evidence from her son, Mr Usman Saleem ("the sponsor") in English. They
    both adopted the statements they had made for the hearing in the first-
    tier Tribunal. These are summarised in Judge Griffith's  determination.
    The appellant said there was no-one to look after her in Pakistan.  She
    said  her  life  was  short  and  she  wanted  to   remain   with   her
    grandchildren. She said her daughter-in-law looks after her. She bathes
    her, gives her medicine and feeds her. The appellant said  she  teaches
    her grandchildren the Holy Qu'ran and she  watches  them  playing.  The
    sponsor said the appellant's condition was worse than when she arrived.
    Her house is old and has been unoccupied for five years. It needs money
    to repair it. It was very important for a son to look after his  mother
    in their culture. The sponsor said his wife does not work  so  she  can
    look after the appellant. He said the appellant takes the  children  to
    the park next to their house.

10. The sponsor was cross-examined. He confirmed his sisters used to obtain
    antidepressants for the appellant before she came to the UK. They  have
    close family friends who are doctors. One of them  could  provide  what
    the appellant would need. He agreed that it is possible to hire help in
    Pakistan but he said this would not be suitable as they would not  look
    after his mother properly.

11. Re-examined the sponsor said he would continue to support his mother if
    she returned to Pakistan, as he  had  before  she  came.  However,  the
    problem  was  not  money  but  she  needs  someone  with  her.  She  is
    emotionally attached to them.

12. The appellant relied on the same bundle as was shown to Judge Griffith.
    She summarised the main documents in her  determination.  Judge  Latter
    gave permission for further evidence to be adduced. The  appellant  has
    now provided medical evidence. Dr Maggie Budden, the appellant's family
    doctor, wrote on 10 November 2014 as follows:

         "This patient has been registered at  South  Oxford  Health  Centre
         since March 2013.
         She has several medical problems:
         In November 2013 she had a  cardiovascular  risk  assessment  which
         showed her to be at  risk  of  a  cardiovascular  event.  This  was
         because she has high lipid levels, is overweight, inactive and is a
         heavy smoker.
         She was prescribed a statin to reduce her lipid levels and  advised
         about weight loss and to stop smoking.
         She takes an antidepressant for longstanding depression,  predating
         her arrival in the UK.
         She was recently diagnosed with mild to moderate arthritis  of  the
         left knee, confirmed by X ray. She has been prescribed  painkillers
         for this and has been offered a steroid injection to the knee,  but
         has not yet attended for this. Her X ray showed that her R knee and
         hip joints were normal.
         She also suffers from a skin rash diagnosed as psoriasis, for which
         she has been prescribed a range of creams, and an antihistamine  to
         reduce itch."


13. A letter from the local pharmacy states the sponsor has bought Voltarol
    tablets/cream, Ibuprofen tablets/gel and Jointcare  capsules  over  the
    counter for his mother. A letter from a family friend who  works  as  a
    beautician  and  massage  therapist  confirms  she  used  to  give  the
    appellant exercise and massage therapies  regularly.  The  massage  has
    stopped due to the appellant's psoriasis.

14. The representatives made submissions, which I have recorded  and  taken
    it o account. Ms Fisher provided a skeleton argument. At the end of the
    hearing I reserved my decision.

15. Having heard the evidence and submissions and having taken into account
    the fresh evidence, as well as the preserved findings of fact,  I  find
    that paragraph 317(i)(d) is not met and I dismiss the appeal under  the
    rules.  Whilst there are compassionate circumstances in this case, they
    do not reach the high threshold of "the most exceptional  compassionate
    circumstances".

16. The appellant is approaching her 65th birthday and she has some  health
    problems. However, I do not  accept  that  these  are  severe  or  even
    moderately severe. Her main problem is depression, which appears to  be
    longstanding and treated with antidepressants. I accept the uncertainty
    over her immigration status will be  contributing  to  her  anxiety.  I
    accept she feels low. However, there is a paucity of  medical  evidence
    about this. As a result of the appeal and Judge's  Latter's  direction,
    there has been plenty of time to obtain evidence and it  is  reasonable
    to infer that everything  which  could  have  been  obtained  has  been
    produced. In the circumstances, I find it significant  that  Dr  Budden
    does not indicate that the appellant is on a high dose of medication or
    that she  has  required  referral  for  therapy  or  to  mental  health
    specialists. I infer from this that the problem is relatively mild.

17. There is no  medical  support  for  the  notion  that  the  "confusion"
    observed by Judge Griffith is due to any cognitive deficit. There is no
    evidential basis for  concluding  that  the  appellant's  confusion  is
    symptomatic of an underlying medical condition. The fact she  was  able
    to given instructions for a detailed witness statement and the fact she
    teaches her grandchildren the Holy Qu'ran would also indicate  she  has
    no significant impairment of mental functioning beyond experiencing low
    mood.

18. I accept the appellant has mild to  moderate  arthritis  in  one  knee.
    However, Dr Budden  states  that  the  other  knee  and  her  hips  are
    unaffected. Again, treatment has  been  conservative.  It  appears  the
    appellant told Judge Griffith that she was prescribed Naproxen for  her
    high cholesterol. In fact, it is an  anti-inflammatory  used  for  pain
    relief. I accept the appellant needs painkillers but I  see  no  reason
    why she cannot walk reasonable distances. She has a walking stick.  She
    insisted on showing me the dry  skin  on  one  of  her  shins  and  she
    appeared to balance on one leg to do so.  I  was  told  she  takes  the
    grandchildren to the park, albeit this is only a short  walk  away.  Dr
    Budden implies in her letter that she has advised the appellant to take
    more exercise. She makes no reference to neck or back pain and it seems
    the appellant did not  require  further  sessions  with  Oxford  Sports
    Physio &  Pilates  following  her  assessment.  I  do  not  accept  the
    appellant has a reasonable  need  for  assistance  with  bathing,  with
    taking her medication or with feeding.

19. I accept the  appellant  has  high  cholesterol  for  which  she  takes
    statins. I also accept the appellant has psoriasis which  can  also  be
    alleviated with creams  and  antihistamines.  The  cardiovascular  risk
    assessment would be a  relatively  routine  matter  undertaken  by  the
    appellant's GP. The appellant has been advised about reducing the risk.
    There is no evidential basis for the claim  that  the  appellant  is  a
    "heart patient".

20. I  find  the  appellant's  medical  conditions  are  less  severe  than
    presented in the witness evidence. The appellant could receive adequate
    treatment in Pakistan as she has a close family friend who is a doctor.
    As before, her daughters could bring her the medication  on  a  monthly
    basis. As said, I perceive the main issue to  be  the  appellant's  low
    mood for which medication is not going to be a complete answer.  She is
    likely to feel lonely after living for five years in the  household  of
    the sponsor. The affidavits made by the sponsor's sisters,  Aneela  and
    Shakeela Khawaja, are in drafted similar terms and  lack  detail.  They
    simply state that, "unluckily", they do not really have enough time  or
    resources to look  after  the  appellant.  They  do  not  supply  their
    addresses, other than that they live in Lahore. I accept the  appellant
    cannot live with them. However, it has not been clearly  explained  why
    they cannot visit the appellant more frequently. I  have  rejected  the
    notion she needs "24-hour care". It is unclear why the appellant  could
    not see her grandchildren in Pakistan. I do not accept the  appellant's
    isolation would be as severe as presented.

21. I reject the notion  that  the  sponsor  would  abandon  his  wife  and
    children in the UK to return to live in Pakistan with his  mother.  The
    present circumstances do not make this necessary or even reasonable.  I
    also reject the notion he would have to give up his job with the  Royal
    Mail in order to  spend  long  periods  in  Pakistan.  The  appellant's
    circumstances would not demand that of him.

22. I also reject the claim made in the statements that the appellant  will
    be "destitute" on return. The sponsor made it clear he  would  continue
    to support his mother financially. She owns her property.  The  sponsor
    acknowledged that the main issue was emotional rather than financial. I
    find the appellant would be adequately provided for and  she  would  be
    able to afford the treatment she needs. It  is  also  likely  that  her
    problems could be alleviated to a degree  by  hiring  a  home  help  to
    assist her with her chores and shopping.

23. As far as the condition of the house is concerned, there is no  advance
    on the evidence as it was before Judge Griffith. Clear photographs have
    not been provided. I accept the house is old and that, if it  has  been
    left unoccupied for five years, it  will  be  in  need  of  repair  and
    decoration. However, the sponsor told me it was the family house and  I
    see no reason why the family could not pay for the necessary  works  to
    be done to make it comfortable for the appellant.

24. I accept that cultural expectations are in play and that the  appellant
    would anticipate being looked  after  by  her  sons  in  her  old  age.
    However, I also take account of the fact they both decided to  emigrate
    and therefore they must be taken to have given this some consideration.
    The sponsor is, I accept,  taking  responsibility  for  his  mother  by
    providing for her support. She has no other means of supporting herself
    in Pakistan. I accept he has done so since  his  father  died.  I  also
    accept the appellant cannot be expected to live with her  daughters  in
    Pakistan for the reasons found by Judge  Griffith.  It  is  unfortunate
    there are no sons living in Pakistan with whom the appellant can  live.
    However, the appellant cannot be alone  in  this  predicament,  in  the
    sense there must be many thousands of widows living in Pakistan without
    sons with whom they can reside, and this matter only  attracts  limited
    weight in my overall assessment of the compassionate circumstances.

25. Ms Fisher stressed the importance of the position of women in  Pakistan
    and the vulnerability the appellant would face as a lone woman  without
    a male head of household. She drew support from paragraph 20  of  KC  &
    Ors. I accept that the position of  women  in  general  is  a  relevant
    matter in the overall assessment of the degree of sympathy evoked in  a
    particular case. However, the appellant has not made any  reference  to
    this as a factor which led to her decision to seek leave to remain. She
    entered as a visitor and changed her mind due to  her  health  problems
    and fear of isolation in Pakistan. I was not referred to  any  part  of
    the evidence in which she has said she previously encountered  problems
    living alone as a widow. I therefore regarded this submission as unduly
    speculative.

26. The impact on the sponsor's family was a matter rightly  considered  by
    Judge Griffith. I accept the sponsor's wife has responded well  to  the
    appellant's needs and wishes and that they will have become attached to
    one another. Equally the sponsor's children have had their  grandmother
    living with them for five years, which they  must  value  greatly.  The
    youngest child has only known life with grandmother at  home.  However,
    the fact the sponsor's wife does not work and the claims made about the
    appellant's incapacity must logically mean the role she  plays  in  the
    children's day to day upbringing is limited. She plays with them  after
    school and sometimes takes them to the park.  She  teaches  them  about
    their Pakistani heritage and educates them  in  their  Muslim  beliefs.
    These matters are important. The appellant's abrupt  removal  from  the
    household would be keenly felt by the children,  the  sponsor  and  the
    sponsor's wife. However, I do not regard these matters  as  taking  the
    case to the high threshold required by the rule. The appellant will not
    entirely  disappear  from  the  children's  lives.  Contact   will   be
    maintained through the usual means of visits and telephone calls.

27. The issues considered and discussed above paint a sorry picture of  the
    appellant living alone in Pakistan, in low mood and missing the sponsor
    and his family. I do not underestimate the importance of  the  decision
    or the distress caused to the appellant.  However,  I  must  apply  the
    rules, which  set  a  very  high  threshold.  Taken  cumulatively,  the
    appellant's circumstances on return do not reach the  most  exceptional
    compassionate circumstances.

28. In the event I dismissed the appeal under the rules, Ms Fisher asked me
    to allow it on article 8 grounds. The rules now  provide,  in  Appendix
    FM, for the application of article 8  in  the  admission  of  dependent
    relatives. However, Ms Fisher accepted the requisite rules could not be
    met in this case which, in the light of my finding that  the  appellant
    does not currently need care, would appear to be correct.

29. Following R (on the application  of)  Nagre  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin) and the Upper Tribunal's decision in Gulshan (Article 8  -  new
    rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT  00640  (IAC),  it  is  sometimes
    argued that appeals will only have to be  considered  by  reference  to
    domestic and European case law if there are arguably good  grounds  for
    granting leave to remain outside the rules because  the  outcome  would
    have unjustifiably harsh consequences. Given the high test  imposed  by
    paragraph 317(i)(d) is not met it is conceptually difficult to see  how
    this additional threshold for  the  engagement  of  article  8  can  be
    overcome in this case. I raised this. Mr  Jarvis  did  not  pursue  the
    point, perhaps because of the uncertainty over the application  of  the
    threshold requirement, and he was content to argue the article  8  case
    on its merits outside the rules by reference to domestic and Strasbourg
    jurisprudence. For similar reasons, it  is  difficult  to  see  how  an
    article 8 proportionality assessment could deliver a  different  result
    in a case such  as  this  which  does  not  meet  a  rule  because  the
    compassionate circumstances are not sufficiently severe. However, as  I
    was requested to make a full article 8 assessment outside the rules,  I
    shall do so.

30. Article 8 states as follows,

         1.    Everyone has the right to respect for his private and  family
         life, his home his and correspondence.
         2.     There shall be no interference by a  public  authority  with
         the exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the
         law and is necessary in a democratic society in  the  interests  of
         national security, public safety or the economic well being of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others.


31. I approach my evaluation of the  appellant's  arguments  in  stages  by
    reference to the five questions to be asked as set out in paragraph  17
    of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, an approach confirmed in paragraph  7  of  EB
    (Kosovo)[2008] UKHL 41. The appellant  must  show  that  she  currently
    enjoys  protected  rights  and  that  there  would  be  a   significant
    interference with her human rights as a result of the decision.  It  is
    for the respondent to show that the interference is in accordance  with
    the law and in pursuit of a legitimate aim. I must then assess  whether
    the decision is necessary in a democratic society, including whether it
    is disproportionate to the legitimate aim  identified.  The  burden  of
    showing the decision is proportionate is on the respondent.

32. The first question to answer is whether the appellant currently  enjoys
    family life or private life in the UK.  The point was not taken against
    the appellant by Mr Jarvis. The appellant's case rests primarily on her
    having established that she enjoys family life in the UK which requires
    respect and which removing her to Pakistan would  interfere  with.  The
    appellant lives with the sponsor, his wife and his  children.  She  has
    done so since she arrived in the UK on 18 June 2009. She  is  genuinely
    dependent on the sponsor and would be if she were returned to Pakistan.
    Even though the sponsor has formed his own family unit  with  his  wife
    and children, there continues to be a close emotional bond between  him
    and his mother and the family  currently  live  together  as  a  single
    household. I am aware that there is a cultural  dimension  to  this  in
    that the appellant may expect to be looked after by her son in old age.



33. The question of whether family life exists between adult family members
    was considered in detail in the case of Ghising (family life - adults -
    Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) (see  paragraphs  50  to  62  in
    particular). The guidance given by the Upper Tribunal was  approved  by
    the Court of Appeal in paragraph 46 of Gurung & Others [2013] EWCA  Civ
    8. Most of the case law has been concerned with adult  children  living
    with their parents. The thrust  of  the  guidance  is  that  each  case
    depends on its own facts.

34. In the present appeal I find the appellant and  the  sponsor  currently
    enjoy family life which engages article 8. The key facts are  that  the
    appellant is both emotionally and financially dependent on the sponsor.
    This situation has not been contrived. The household  and  family  unit
    now contains six people and all  of  them  would  be  affected  by  the
    removal of the appellant at this stage.  Although  the  sponsor  is  an
    adult, who has started his own family, it  is  artificial  to  separate
    this point from the overall picture.  The  particular  model  for  this
    family is that the there are three generations living together.

35. I have reminded myself that, in Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 489, the  House
    of Lords upheld an argument that family members enjoy a  single  family
    life  and  whether  or  not  the  removal  of   one   would   interfere
    disproportionately with family life had to be looked at by reference to
    the family as a whole. The impact on all affected members of the family
    unit had to be considered. Baroness Hale explained that the alternative
    argument was to miss the central point about family life which is  that
    the whole is greater than the sum of its individual  parts.  Ms  Fisher
    also reminded me of the passage on the  core  values  which  article  8
    protects in paragraph 18 of Huang and Kashmiri [2007] UKHL11.

36. It is therefore necessary  to  consider  the  remaining  steps  in  the
    analysis of article 8. Removing the appellant would bring an abrupt end
    to the relationships she currently enjoys. She  would  lose  day-to-day
    contact with the sponsor and  his  family  and  infrequent  visits  and
    contact over the telephone would be little substitute for the  kind  of
    quality of family life now enjoyed. Therefore there would a significant
    interference with the appellant's family  life  brought  about  by  the
    decision. I bear in mind this should not be read as meaning the minimal
    level of severity required is a special or high one (see  AG  (Eritrea)
    [2007] EWCA Civ 801, paragraph 27).

37. I find that the appellant's removal would be lawful and in pursuit of a
    legitimate aim. The  legitimate  aim  would  be  maintaining  effective
    immigration controls. Removal is the usual  legal  consequence  of  not
    having an entitlement to remain. The appellant  has  not  succeeded  in
    showing that she is entitled to remain  under  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Removal is "necessary" because there is no  other  means  of  enforcing
    immigration control in these circumstances.

38.  The  key  issue  for  determination  is  whether   the   decision   is
    proportionate to the need to maintain immigration controls. My approach
    to this question is guided by the House  of  Lords  decision  in  Huang
    (paragraph 20). The ultimate question for me is whether the refusal  of
    leave to enter or remain, in circumstances where the life of the family
    (or  private  life)  cannot  reasonably  be  expected  to  be   enjoyed
    elsewhere, taking full account of all considerations weighing in favour
    of the refusal, prejudices the family life (or  private  life)  of  the
    applicant in a manner sufficiently serious to amount to a breach of the
    fundamental right protected by article 8. A fair balance must be struck
    between  the  rights  of  the  individual  and  the  interests  of  the
    community. However, decisions taken pursuant to the lawful operation of
    immigration controls will be proportionate except in a  small  minority
    of exceptional cases, identifiable on a case  by  case  basis  (Razgar,
    paragraph  20).  That  does  not  mean  there  is  a  legal   test   of
    exceptionality or that  any  formula  can  be  devised  to  ensure  the
    expectation that only  a  small  minority  of  cases  will  succeed  in
    practice (AG (Eritrea)).

39. I have assessed the degree of interference in this case and balanced it
    against the public expectation that the Immigration Rules are  applied.
    However, before conducting the balancing exercise, I must identify  the
    best interests of the children. How  this  assessment  is  achieved  in
    practice has been the subject of considerable guidance. In  particular,
    I have kept in mind ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 and the summary of  the
    applicable legal principles set out in paragraph 10 of Zoumbas  v  SSHD
    [2013] UKSC 74.

40. The issue I was asked to consider is the impact of  separation  of  the
    appellant from her three grandchildren in the UK, now aged 9, 7 and  5.
    If they could be consulted I am sure they would not hesitate to confirm
    that they would like their grandmother to remain living with them. I am
    equally sure that separating from them now would be very upsetting  for
    the appellant.  She became tearful when asked to  contemplate  this  at
    the hearing.

41. However, on the facts of this case, I do not think it  is  possible  to
    say that the children's best interests require the appellant to  remain
    living with them in the UK. The children have two  capable  and  loving
    parents from whom they are not going to be removed. The sponsor's  wife
    does not go out to work so it is not even the case that the appellant's
    presence is required to provide child care after school. I cannot  find
    that the children would suffer any significant harm  or  detriment  if,
    like many or most children in the UK, they  were  to  live  apart  from
    their grandmother and only saw her occasionally.  The  children's  best
    interests are a primary consideration. However, in this case their best
    interests are not a  weighty  factor  in  the  overall  proportionality
    assessment.

42. The matters weighing in favour  of  the  appellant  have  already  been
    canvassed  above  in  respect  of  paragraph   317(i)(d).   There   are
    compassionate circumstances, albeit not reaching the high threshold set
    by the rules. It could be added that the appellant has never overstayed
    her leave or breached the conditions of her  stay.  She  entered  as  a
    visitor but the decision to seek to remain here  permanently  was  only
    taken after her entry when  the  sponsor  became  concerned  about  her
    health and ability to live alone. Since September  2009  she  has  been
    seeking to establish permission to  remain  permanently.  At  least  in
    terms of her maintenance and accommodation, there is no question of her
    needing recourse to public funds. The sponsor is willing  and  able  to
    provide for his mother in that sense.

43. However, the fact the appellant does not meet the requirements  of  the
    rules, either in the shape of paragraph 317(i)(d) or the  more  onerous
    requirements of Appendix FM, has to be  the  starting-point.  There  is
    public interest in the rules being applied consistently  in  all  cases
    and the House of Lords explained this in paragraph  16  of  Huang.  The
    public interest in maintaining the economic wellbeing of the UK  is  an
    important  consideration.  The  government  has  decided  the   current
    economic conditions justify a tightening of immigration controls so  as
    to reduce net immigration. The threshold for dependent parents has been
    set very high. I must give that weight even though I have no doubt  the
    appellant would be financially supported and  accommodated  in  the  UK
    without recourse to public funds.

44. Since the coming into force of section 19 of the Immigration Act  2014,
    the new section 117B of the 2002 Act requires me to take  into  account
    the public interest factors set out in that section, which I have done.
    Subsection (1) speaks for itself and requires  no  further  discussion.
    Subsections (2) and (3) are  concerned  with  the  implications  of  an
    appellant becoming a "burden on taxpayers", which is clearly a  broader
    test than the test of whether she will have recourse to  public  funds,
    as defined. It is wide enough to cover reliance on public services such
    as NHS treatment and social services. The appellant registered  with  a
    GP practice in November 2013 and has benefited from  consultations  and
    prescriptions. She has had an X ray and  has  been  offered  a  steroid
    injection for her knee. Ms Fisher sought to argue that her reliance  on
    the NHS has been minimal to date. It  does  not  appear  to  have  been
    great. However, there is no evidence the appellant has  private  health
    insurance and her health problems are such that she is likely  to  have
    increased needs as time goes on and that is something I must take  into
    account as indicating the public interest requires a refusal.

45. I recognise there would be significant  interruption  to  the  existing
    family ties in the form in which they have been established  since  the
    decision was made for the appellant to seek to remain here.  Having  to
    return to Pakistan will be extremely disappointing  for  the  appellant
    and the sponsor for the reasons explained. AT least in the short  term,
    it may affect the appellant  detrimentally  in  terms  of  her  health,
    although I see no reason to believe her life expectancy is as short  as
    she implied in her evidence. It will be baffling and upsetting for  the
    children if their grandmother has to leave after so long in the  UK.  I
    have sympathy for the  parties.  However,  I  am  required  to  make  a
    dispassionate judgment about whether respect for the family's right  to
    family life,  which  is  a  qualified  right,  would  be  unjustifiably
    breached by this decision and, after balancing the respective interests
    of the parties, I am unable to say that the facts  of  this  case  show
    that  the  decision  would  amount  to  a  disproportionate  breach  of
    fundamental human rights.

46. I dismiss the appeals on article 8 grounds.


NOTICE OF DECISION

    The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.
    The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.
    No anonymity direction.




                               Signed                 Date 24 November 2014






                               Judge Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of
                               the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

                               Signed                 Date 24 November 2014






                           Judge Froom, sitting as a Deputy Judge of
                           the      Upper Tribunal

                                    ANNEX

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing an  appeal  by  the  applicant  against  a
    decision made on 03 December 2013 refusing to grant her leave to remain
    as the dependent relative of her son, who is present and settled in the
    UK. In this determination I will refer to  the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal, the applicant as the appellant and  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1950. She came to the UK
    on 18 June 2009 with a visit visa valid from 01 June 2009  to  01  June
    2014. On 18 December 2009 she applied for indefinite leave to remain as
    the dependent relative of her son, her sponsor. Her  first  application
    was refused because of formal irregularities and she re-applied  on  31
    August 2010. This application was  refused  on  12  September  2011  as
    invalid but notification of the decision was not  sent  until  25  July
    2012. She made a further application for indefinite leave to remain  on
    08 May 2013 and it was agreed that it would be  considered  under  para
    317 of HC395 as in force before 09 July 2012.

 3. However, the respondent was not satisfied that the applicant  was  able
    to show that she could meet the requirements of para 317(i) or (v). The
    respondent went on to consider the position under article 8 taking into
    account the provisions of para A277C, Appendix FM and para 276ADE.  The
    application was refused on both immigration and human rights grounds.

 4. The judge identified the outstanding issues in [5] of his  decision  as
    follows:

           "The respondent was not satisfied that the appellant was  related
          to a relative present and settled in the United Kingdom (para  317
          (i)); or that she had no other close relatives in her own  country
          to whom she could turn to for financial support (para 317 (v))  or
          that she would be living alone outside the United kingdom  in  the
          most exceptional and compassionate circumstances (para 287 (v))."

    However, the reference to para 287 taken from the decision  letter  was
    clearly erroneous as that paragraph relates to applications by  spouses
    or civil partners. Further, there appears to be nothing in the decision
    letter  to  indicate  that  the  respondent  took  any  issue  on   the
    relationship with her sponsor. The two issues on which the  application
    were refused were under para 317(i)(d),  whether  the  applicant  as  a
    person under the age of 65 would be living  alone  outside  the  United
    Kingdom in the most exceptional  and  compassionate  circumstances  and
    under para 317 (v) whether she has no other close relatives in his  own
    country to whom she could turn for  support,  these  two  issues  being
    correctly identified in [41] of the decision.

 5. The judge heard evidence from both the appellant and her  sponsor.  The
    documentary  evidence  included   letters   from   a   doctor   and   a
    physiotherapist and photographs of the appellant's home in Pakistan.

 6. The judge accepted that the appellant was related to her sponsor as his
    parent and that he was present and settled in the  UK  although,  as  I
    have indicated, this never appears to have been in  dispute.  He  found
    that the appellant was aged 64 at the date  of  hearing  and  had  been
    living alone in Pakistan following the death of  her  husband  and  the
    marriage of her  2  daughters.  She  had  been  taking  medication  for
    depression and  received  occasional  but  irregular  visits  from  her
    married daughters and financial support from her sponsor in the UK.  He
    said that he had not  heard  much  about  her  life  in  Pakistan.  The
    photographs he had been shown were of poor quality  and  the  appellant
    had had great difficulty in explaining what they depicted. The  sponsor
    had explained that the photographs  had  been  taken  recently  by  his
    sister. The judge commented that it  appeared  that  the  property  was
    suitable for the appellant to live in alone after her younger  daughter
    left because that is what she had done but that it had not  been  lived
    in since 2009 when  she  came  to  the  UK  and  therefore  would  have
    deteriorated. He went on to consider the appellant's medical  condition
    saying that she was clearly in physical discomfort which she  said  was
    due to back pain. She appeared to be confused  throughout  the  hearing
    and had had difficulty in providing answers relevant to  the  questions
    put to her.

 7. The judge was satisfied that the appellant suffered from depression and
    was taking medication for this when living in Pakistan and continued to
    do so after coming to the UK which explained why she  had  not  seen  a
    doctor until 2013. So far as her  other  ailments  were  concerned,  he
    found that these had not been formally diagnosed: she did  not  have  a
    blood test as advised  to  diagnose  arthritis  and  had  not  had  any
    treatment for her back pain apart from one visit to a  physiotherapist.
    He accepted that it was a cultural norm  in  Pakistan  that  a  married
    woman  lived  with  her  husband's  family  and  would  be  principally
    responsible for her husband's parents and that care for a  widow  would
    normally be the responsibility of her sons and their families. He  said
    that it was not reasonable to expect  that  the  appellant's  daughters
    would be in a position to support her financially let alone  return  to
    live with her to care for her.

 8. The judge summarised his findings as follows:

        "39 The appellant has lived in the United Kingdom for 5  years  and
       has formed a close relationship with [the sponsor] and  his  family,
       especially his children, I find that their enforced separation would
       have a significant adverse impact upon them all.

         40 I am  satisfied that if the appellant was to turn  to  Pakistan
       she  would  be  living  in  the   most   exceptional   compassionate
       circumstances, due to a combination of her age, physical and  mental
       problems, lack of support of family  and  friends  in  Pakistan  and
       living conditions together with the loss of contact with her  family
       in the United Kingdom."

    For these reasons the appeal was allowed under the Rules and the  judge
    did not therefore need to consider article 8.

The Grounds and Submissions

 9. In the respondent's grounds it is argued that the judge failed to  make
    adequate findings on material matters and in particular  it  is  argued
    that the appellant would not be living alone in Pakistan as she had two
    daughters there who could assist her and it would not  be  unreasonable
    for her to move closer to them if not  with  them.  Her  sponsor  could
    continue to provide financial support and visit and  provide  emotional
    support by keeping in contact with her. It would  not  be  unreasonable
    for the family to fix any issues with the appellant's accommodation  or
    find new accommodation if it had deteriorated since she left in 2009.

10. The grounds further argue that the appellant would not be living  alone
    in the  most  exceptional  compassionate  circumstances  and  that  the
    Tribunal had failed to give adequate reasons why she could not continue
    her family life in the UK  from  Pakistan.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Designated  Judge  Coates  who  summarised  the  grounds  as
    submitting that the First-tier judge had given  inadequate  reasons  in
    support of his finding that the appellant would be living alone in  the
    most compelling compassionate circumstances if she were to  return  and
    that her circumstances could not properly be regarded as exceptional.

11. In his submissions Mr Tufan adopted these grounds  and  submitted  that
    the judge had failed properly  to  consider  the  high  test  of  "most
    exceptional compassionate circumstances". In R v IAT  ex  parte  Joseph
    [1988] Imm AR 329, Kennedy J had made it clear that the word "most" was
    not  mere  surplusage  but  added  significantly  to  the  other  words
    appearing in the rule.

12. Mr Nasim submitted that the reasons challenge raised in the grounds was
    not made out. The judge had given clear reasons in  [40]  referring  to
    the appellant's age, physical  and  mental  problems,  lack  of  family
    support and friends in Pakistan and living conditions and the  loss  of
    contact with her family in the UK. He had also been  entitled  to  take
    into account that the appellant was approaching  the  threshold  of  65
    where different provisions would apply  to  her.  The  judge  had  made
    positive findings, so he  submitted,  which  supported  the  conclusion
    reached at [40]. He submitted that the test in  para  317(i)(d)  should
    not be interpreted in an unrealistically high  way  and  proper  regard
    should be paid as in the IDIs to the cultural issues  within  Pakistani
    society about looking after parents.

Consideration of whether there is an error of law

13. The rules in issue in the present appeal are para 317 (i)(d)  and  (v).
    These require that the person seeking leave to enter:

        "(i) is related to a person  present  and  settled  in  the  United
        Kingdom in one of the following ways:

         (d) a parent or grandparent under the age of 65  if  living  alone
        outside the United Kingdom in the  most  exceptional  compassionate
        circumstances

        ...and

         (v) has no other close relatives in his own  country  to  whom  he
        could turn for financial support..."

14. In ex parte Joseph, Kennedy J said as follows:

         "...In ground 4 it is said:

        "The proper approach it is submitted is first to  consider  whether
        there are compassionate circumstances. Secondly to consider whether
        there  are  any  aggravating  features  such  as   to   make   them
        exceptional. If, then looked at in the round, the  position  is  in
        truth exceptional, then it is submitted that  the  word  "most"  is
        surplusage




        I  cannot  regard  it  as  surplusage  it  seems  to  me   to   add
        significantly to the other words which appear in the rule."

15. I was referred in submissions to Macdonald 6th ed.  para  11.140  which
    says that this provision is undoubtedly a high one but it must  not  be
    interpreted in an unrealistically high way. On the issue of  having  no
    close relatives to turn to I was referred to para 11.138  which  refers
    to the IDIs and  the  Entry  Clearance  Guidance  indicating  that  the
    ability of home based relatives to support is partly cultural and  that
    a married daughter is unlikely to be able to provide support.

16. The primary challenge  is  whether  the  judge  has  provided  adequate
    reasons for his finding that the appellant was able to  meet  the  most
    exceptional compassionate circumstances test.  In  determining  whether
    reasons are adequate, two questions  can  usefully  be  posed:  do  the
    alleged defects in the  reasons  create  a  genuine  as  opposed  to  a
    forensic doubt that significant issues in dispute  may  not  have  been
    properly addressed and secondly, even if they do,  is  there  any  real
    doubt whether the decision would have been the same if the reasons  had
    been adequate: see Elias J in Atputharajah [2001] [Imm AR 566].

17. The judge has summarised his reasons in [40]  where  he  sets  out  the
    factors which taken together satisfied him that the appellant would  be
    living in the most exceptional  compassionate  circumstances.  He  took
    into account her age, 64 at the date of hearing but without  more  this
    is not a factor which meets the criterion. He referred to her  physical
    and mental problems but this finding must be read in the light  of  the
    findings in [37] where he accepted that the appellant was  in  physical
    discomfort, suffering from depression and had  been  taking  medication
    whilst living in Pakistan. However, she did not see a doctor in the  UK
    until 2013 and relation to  her  other  ailments  these  had  not  been
    formally diagnosed.

18. The judge then took into account the lack  of  support  of  family  and
    friends in Pakistan and her living conditions. It was accepted that the
    sponsor is a British citizen with children aged nine,  seven  and  five
    but there is no reason to believe that the sponsor's financial  support
    would not be continued  if  the  appellant  returned  to  Pakistan.  He
    accepted that the  appellant  would  be  living  alone  there  but  she
    received occasional,  irregular  visits  from  her  married  daughters.
    Although there was evidence that the appellant  looked  neglected  when
    she came to the UK in 2009 and could not stand or cook  properly  [21],
    the judge made no findings on that aspect of the evidence.  So  far  as
    the living conditions were concerned, photographs were produced of  the
    appellant's home in Pakistan said to be taken two weeks  prior  to  the
    hearing by the elder sister but the judge commented in  [36]  that  the
    photographs were of very poor  quality  and  the  appellant  had  great
    difficulty in explaining what they depicted.

19. The judge simply accepted that it had not been lived in since 2009  and
    would have deteriorated but that it would not be unreasonable  for  any
    problems to be fixed. Finally, the judge referred to  loss  of  contact
    with family in the UK. Clearly returning to Pakistan  would  have  this
    effect but it would be mitigated by the ability to maintain contact  as
    would have been the position before 2009.

20. Looking at [40] in the context of the findings at [35]-[38], the  judge
    was without doubt  entitled  to  find  that  there  were  compassionate
    circumstances.  However,  it  is  much  more  doubtful  whether   those
    compassionate circumstances could be  described  as  exceptional  still
    less that they  were  the  most  exceptional.  For  this  reason  I  am
    satisfied that the judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
    findings such as to raise a genuine doubt as to whether  a  significant
    issue in  dispute,  whether  the  appellant's  circumstances  could  be
    categorized as the most  exceptional  compassionate  circumstances  has
    been properly considered.

21. I am not satisfied in the light of the judge's findings of fact that it
    can be said with any degree of confidence that if the  right  test  had
    been applied that the decision would have been the  same.  I  therefore
    find that the judge erred in law such that the decision should  be  set
    aside. During submissions Mr Tufan indicated that  if  I  reached  this
    decision the matter  should  remain  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  the
    decision to be re-made whereas Mr Nasim argued that the  better  course
    would be for it to be sent back to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard
    afresh. He indicated that he would be seeking to adduce further medical
    evidence.

22. I am not satisfied that there  is  any  proper  justification  for  the
    matter being remitted for a rehearing to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It
    will be retained in the Upper Tribunal where the decision will  be  re-
    made. The judge's findings in [35]-[39] should stand  subject  to  them
    being supplemented or clarified by any further evidence.

23. I give permission for further evidence to be adduced under rule 15(2A).
    Any further witness statements or documentary evidence relating to  the
    circumstances of the appellant and in particular her medical  condition
    must be filed with the Tribunal no later than 14 days before  the  date
    of the resumed hearing, copies being  served  on  the  respondent.  The
    appeal will be listed for a resumed hearing on the first available date
    28 days after the date on which this decision is issued.

Signed                                  Date 10 October 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
