
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/01985/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Field House            |Decision Promulgated              |
|On: 21 November 2014              |On: 27 November 2014              |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                             SHAGINDRA KOGULARAJ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, against the
    determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bradshaw  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to vary leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant.

 2. The application under appeal was made on 31 May 2013 and was refused by
    reference to paragraph 245ZX(ha) of the Immigration Rules (HC395) on 12
    December 2013.  The Appellant exercised his  right  of  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  This  is  the  appeal  which  came  before  Judge
    Bradshaw on 28 May 2014 and was dismissed. The  Appellant  applied  for
    permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   His  application  was
    refused by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers  and  on  renewal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein.

 3. At the hearing listed before me the Appellant was not present  and  not
    represented. The case file showed that Notice of Hearing had been  duly
    sent to both the Appellant and to his nominated legal  representatives.
    There was no response or further representations made and there was  no
    explanation for non- attendance and no application to adjourn.  In  all
    these circumstances  I  decided  to  proceed  in  the  absence  of  the
    Appellant.

 4. For the Respondent Mr Tufan relied on the rule 24 response filed  on  7
    November 2014  and  added  that  the  Appellant's  assertion  that  the
    Respondent should have made enquiries to ascertain the  length  of  the
    Appellant's course was without foundation.

 5. I reserved my decision.

DECISION

 6. This appeal involves a very narrow issue as put forward in the  grounds
    of appeal to the Upper Tribunal. The Appellant applied for variation of
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant. His  application
    was refused because the Respondent was satisfied that  the  application
    would cause the Appellant to exceed the 5 year maximum  period  allowed
    for degree  level  study.  The  Respondent  noted  that  the  Appellant
    commenced his studies on 2 November  2009  and  on  the  basis  of  the
    application submitted would not complete those  studies  until  31  May
    2015.

 7. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the  Respondent  conceded
    that the Appellant's studies in the United Kingdom  commenced  with  an
    English language course that was not degree level study. It was  agreed
    that his first degree level course ran  from  1  February  2010  to  31
    January 2013 which was  exactly  3  years.  Both  representatives  also
    agreed that his current course ran from 28 May 2013 to 30 May 2015  and
    that this meant that there was an excess of either 2 or 3 days over the
    5 year period allowed. The Appellant's representative  argued  that  30
    May 2015 was shown as  'the  expected  end  date"  of  the  course  and
    suggested that the Respondent had  failed  to  make  enquiries  of  the
    college to ascertain whether this was the actual end  date  and  should
    have done so. He said that there was unfairness involved.

 8. In dismissing the appeal the Judge found (at  paragraph  23)  that  the
    Respondent was not under a duty to make enquiry of the college to check
    dates. He further found that 'expected end date' was the day  that  the
    college expected the course would end and that whereas  this  was  only
    two or three days outside the limit allowed it nevertheless caused  the
    application to fall outside the rules.

 9. In grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  the  Appellant  essentially
    repeats the argument put forward to the First-tier Tribunal namely that
    Respondent should have made enquiries to ascertain the  exact  date  of
    completion  of  the  course  and  that  having  failed  to  do  so  the
    Respondent's decision was therefore unfair.

10. In my judgment this is an appeal that stands no  prospect  of  success.
    Like the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  I  have  some  sympathy  for  the
    Appellant on the basis that the prime reason for refusal was  that  the
    Respondent took into account the English language course at  the  start
    of the Appellant's studies. At the hearing tt  was  accepted  that  the
    Respondent was wrong to do so. However having  taken  out  the  English
    language course from the calculation the Appellant was  still  2  or  3
    days over the limit. The CAS clearly showed 31 May 2015 as the expected
    end date. An expected end date is not an approximate end date it is the
    date on which the college expects a course  to  end.  There  is  in  my
    judgment no duty on the Respondent to check with the college to see  if
    the expected end date is indeed expected to be the date  on  which  the
    course ends. No authority was given for such a proposition and it is in
    my judgment facile to suggest that such a duty is in any  way  implied.
    It is not. The length of the course exceeds that  allowed  by  2  or  3
    days. In accordance with the Immigration Rules the  Respondent  refused
    the application. This is unfortunate but it is not unfair.

11. There is no error of law. This appeal is dismissed.

Summary

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of no error
    of law.

13. This appeal is dismissed.

Signed:



      Date: 26 November 2014
J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
