
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01791/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 January 2015                            |On 5 March 2015               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

                              sujanuzzaman khan
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Ahammed, of RMS Immigration Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of  Bangladesh,  had  been  in  the  UK,  with
    leave, as a student.   In  2013  the  appellant  made  a  human  rights
    application, apparently as a variation of  an  outstanding  application
    for further leave as a  student.   The  human  rights  application  was
    refused by notice dated 17 June 2013.

2.   An appeal against this decision was considered at a hearing  at  Hatton
    Cross, on 19 June 2014, before First-tier Tribunal Judge Robinson.  The
    appellant was represented, but did not attend the  hearing  for  health
    reasons.  In a determination promulgated on 3 July 2014 the judge found
    that there was no valid appeal before the Tribunal.

3.    Permission  to  appeal  was  initially  not  admitted,  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth, on 28 August 2014.   On  5  December
    2014, however, permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Peter Lane.  In relation to the jurisdiction issue the  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge commented as follows:

         "The appellant has adduced evidence that he posted  (and  therefore
         made) the application for further leave on 1 June 2012,  which  was
         within the currency of his previous leave.  If that application was
         properly varied, then it is arguable  the  decision  to  refuse  to
         grant leave to  remain  fell  in  law  to  be  treated  not  as  an
         unappealable decision to refuse to grant leave to remain, but as an
         appealable decision to refuse to vary leave to remain:  see  Basnet
         [2012] UKUT 113 (IAC) and Ved [2014] UKUT 150."

4.   Upper Tribunal Judge Lane went on, however, to warn  the  appellant  as
    follows:

         "The appellant must, however, be prepared at the hearing to explain
         why, even if he had a right of appeal, his human rights are such as
         to compel the respondent to grant him leave."

5.   At the start of the error of law hearing I raised with the  appellant's
    representative, following on from this  warning,  what  evidence  there
    would have been to form the basis for the judge, or any judge, to  have
    allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.  I drew the attention of  both
    parties to the appellant's  witness  statement.   This  had  two  short
    paragraphs (paragraphs 4 and 7) that could be relevant  to  Article  8.
    Paragraph 4 consisted of the appellant's contention that he  was  well-
    established in the UK and had no meaningful social, cultural, or family
    ties to his country of origin;  but  without  offering  any  supporting
    detail.  Paragraph 7 consisted of a single sentence,  stating  that  he
    had established a private life in the UK in the time that he  had  been
    here, and that he had social  connections  in  the  UK;  again  without
    offering any detail.

6.   There was  a  handwritten  addition  to  paragraph  7  on  the  witness
    statement, but the appellant's representative confirmed that  this  had
    been added in January 2015.  It referred to the fact that the appellant
    had an aunt and her family in the UK.

7.   Mr Avery, for the respondent, accepted that the judge  had  been  wrong
    to say that there was no right of appeal for the reason that  he  gave,
    but raised a separate point, apparently not raised  previously,  as  to
    whether the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal had been out of time.

8.   Ms Ahammed, for the appellant, pointed to the fact that  the  appellant
    had been studying for more than four years, that he had not  been  able
    to study the course that he wanted to do, that  every  case  should  be
    considered separately, and that the refusal had not properly considered
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

Error of Law

9.   As was agreed at the hearing I find that the judge did err  in  law  in
    his approach to the issue of whether the  decision  was  an  appealable
    one.  The decision that there was no valid appeal before  the  Tribunal
    must therefore be set aside.

10.  If the error as to validity had  not  been  made,  however,  the  judge
    could not possibly have allowed the appeal on human rights  grounds  on
    the basis of the evidence presented.  The appellant was not present  at
    the hearing and there was no oral evidence.  The only references in the
    witness statement are those referred to above.  These were entirely and
    obviously inadequate as an evidential basis for any findings that could
    even potentially lead to an arguable basis for allowing  an  appeal  of
    this sort on Article 8 grounds.  As I pointed out to Ms Ahammed at  the
    hearing reliance can no longer be placed  on  the  CDS  (Brazil)  case,
    following the Supreme Court case of Patel.  It may be the case that the
    door to pleading Article 8 in student cases cannot be said to  be  shut
    entirely, but what is clear is that what would be needed would be  some
    significant evidence of family or private life interference, that could
    then be connected to the other issues.  In this case paragraphs 4 and 7
    of the witness statement fall so far short of  evidence  of  this  sort
    that there would not even have been an arguable Article 8 case for  the
    judge to address; and that remains the case.

11.  Ms Ahammed referred to the fact that  paragraph  276ADE  had  not  been
    properly considered.  Reference was made to paragraph 276ADE(vi), which
    was concerned with adults who had been in the UK for less  than  twenty
    years but had no ties to their country of origin.  The same point about
    evidence applies.  Even if paragraph 276ADE had  been  given  full  and
    proper consideration there would have been nothing  to  say  about  it,
    other than that the evidence presented fell woefully short of  anything
    that could be said to establish that the  appellant  had  no  remaining
    ties to Bangladesh.

12.  Before the First-tier, and before me, Article 8  was  the  only  matter
    being argued.   No  other  issues  relating  to  fairness,  or  to  the
    Immigration Rules, connected to the appellant's history  as  a  student
    were put forward.  On remaking  the  decision,  therefore,  the  appeal
    falls to be dismissed because there was, and is, no evidence that could
    be said to form the basis for any arguable case under paragraph 276ADE,
    or in relation to Article 8 outside the Rules.

13.  It was not suggested that there was any  need  for  anonymity  in  this
    appeal and I  make  no  such  order.   The  appeal  on  remaking  being
    dismissed there is no basis for any fee award.

Notice of Decision

14.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed only  to  the  extent  that
    the decision that there was no valid appeal is set aside.  The decision
    in the appeal is remade as follows.

15.  The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.





Signed                                  Date 03/03/2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb



