
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/01415/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25th August 2017                       |On 11th September 2017           |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            ms cecilia ama darko
                       (anonymity direction NOt Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Maku-Kemi

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Ms Darko is a citizen of Ghana whose date of birth is recorded as  14th
    June 1961.  On 6th September 2013, she made application to  extend  her
    discretionary leave.  On 25th March 2014, a decision was made to refuse
    the application and so she appealed.  Her appeal was heard by Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Stewart on  15th  June  2016  when  sitting  at
    Taylor House, London.  Judge Stewart allowed the appeal on human rights
    grounds.

 2. Not content with that decision, by Notice dated 5th  January  2017  the
    Secretary of State made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The grounds seeking permission run  to  some  thirteen
    paragraphs but in essence the grounds amount to the following:

      1) That there was no sufficient basis for allowing the  appeal  beyond
         the Immigration Rules having regard to  the  wider  application  of
         Article 8 ECHR.

      2) That the decision was inadequately reasoned.

 3. In granting permission on 10th  July  2017,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Brunnen having set out the basis of the application stated  as
    follows:

         "In paragraphs 39 and 41 of his decision, when considering  Article
         8 outside the Immigration Rules, the judge considered the  position
         with reference to the date of the Appellant's application for leave
         to remain, made on 6th September 2013, whereas arguably  he  should
         have considered the position as at the date of the hearing.  Had he
         done so, it is arguable that he might have found that there were no
         longer family life between the Appellant and her now adult son  and
         that her son was not a qualifying child for the purposes of Section
         117B(6) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002".

 4. It is relevant to note that at paragraph  35  of  his  decision,  Judge
    Stewart said,

         "I am not persuaded that [Ms Darko] has established that there  was
         an error of law within the application of the Immigration Rules  to
         [Ms Darko's] the Appellant's application.  However, I am  satisfied
         that [Ms Darko] had established a private and family life in the UK
         such as to engage Article 8".

 5. The appeal therefore was  allowed  having  regard  only  to  the  wider
    application of Article 8.  There has been no cross-appeal, so that  the
    matter which I have to resolve is whether the judge in  fact  erred  in
    law in his finding that the wider application of Article 8 led  to  the
    result being sought by Ms Darko.

The Factual Matrix upon which Judge Stewart made his Eventual Findings

 6. It is helpful to set out what I  consider  to  be  the  material  facts
    relied upon by Ms Darko and adjudicated upon by Judge Stewart in  order
    to provide context to the decision.

 7. On 3rd December 1993 Ms Darko gave birth to  a  daughter,  Amanda.   In
    1997 Ms Darko married one Mr Mintah.   The  marriage  was  pursuant  to
    Ghanaian customary law.  On 3rd January 1998 Ms Darko, who was  already
    pregnant by Mr Mintah, gave birth to a son, Kwame.  In  2001  Ms  Darko
    came to the United Kingdom and joined Mr Mintah but was not  joined  by
    Kwame until 2004 nor by Amanda until 2006.

 8. In October 2012 Mr Mintah brought into the household  a  woman  by  the
    name of Margaret whom he purported to marry in the United  Kingdom.   I
    say "purported to marry" because it remains open whether  the  marriage
    was in fact polygamous (a matter which the Secretary of State may  wish
    to investigate).  Be that as it may, Ms Darko remained in the household
    with Mr Mintah and Margaret until 2013 when Ms Darko was about to renew
    her leave.  At that point Mr Mintah suggested that he and Margaret move
    out of the family home into Margaret's home.  He  suggested  also  that
    Kwame, then aged 15, should move with them. There was  a  dispute.  The
    police called and were persuaded that Ms Darko was responsible for  the
    violence which had ensued.  Ms Darko was arrested, and on 23rd November
    2013 was convicted before the magistrates, of a  battery  but  given  a
    conditional charge for a period of twelve months.

 9. It is of note that the application giving rise to this appeal was  made
    prior to the conviction. It had been made on  the  basis  of  Ms  Darko
    being a victim of domestic violence, although the  form  actually  used
    for the application was form FLR(O) which form is used  for  categories
    not covered by  other  forms.   Although  the  form  FLR(O)  was  used,
    nevertheless, reliance was placed  in  the  application  itself  on  Ms
    Darko's contention that  she  was  the  victim  of  domestic  violence,
    notwithstanding the subsequent conviction against her.

10. In considering Ms Darko's  application,  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    regard to a letter  sent  by  Mr  Mintah  dated  16th  September  2013,
    advising the Secretary of State that Ms Darko no longer  lived  in  the
    matrimonial home. In his letter he made mention  of  what  was  then  a
    pending court hearing.  The letter also asserted that Ms Darko was  not
    responsible  for  the  welfare  of  Kwame  due  to  her   "unacceptable
    behaviour".

11. What was clear from the correspondence from Mr Mintah to the  Secretary
    of State was that he was contending that there was no family life being
    enjoyed between him, Mr Mintah and Ms Darko and that she, Ms Darko, had
    no contact with Kwame.

12. The judge found that the Secretary of State, for the reasons  given  in
    the refusal letter, was entitled to refuse the  application  under  the
    Immigration Rules but  found,  notwithstanding  that,  that  the  wider
    application is Article 8 entitled her to remain. It is that which falls
    for consideration.

Was there an Error of Law?

13. In his submissions to me, Mr Wilding submitted that having  found  that
    the Immigration Rules were not met, there  was  no  engagement  by  the
    judge in the relevant considerations.

14. At paragraph 36 of  his  Decision  and  Reasons,  Judge  Stewart  makes
    mention of the five questions which  a  judge  should  consider  in  an
    Article 8 case as approved of in the case of R (Razgar) [2004] UKHL 27.
     Judge Stewart found that the first four questions were  resolved  such
    that the issue turned on proportionality.  He gave  three  reasons  for
    allowing the appeal:

      1) The actual offence for which Ms Darko was  convicted  was  a  minor
         offence  given  the  sentence  imposed;  there  were   considerable
         mitigating factors.

      2) At the date of the application, Kwame was a child  who  would  have
         been continuously resident in the United Kingdom  for  nine  years.
         Had Kwame being making an application, Judge Stewart found that  it
         was unlikely that it would have been  found  to  be  reasonable  to
         expect him, Kwame to leave the United Kingdom and  consequent  upon
         that, Ms Darko also would  have  been  entitled  to  remain  having
         regard to paragraph 276ADE(iv) to  which  I  shall  return.   Judge
         Stewart was satisfied that Kwame had indefinite leave to remain  in
         the United Kingdom but Ms Darko was unable to produce documents  to
         support that because Kwame was under the influence  of  his  father
         who was preventing any meaningful  contact  between  Kwame  and  Ms
         Darko.

      3) That the interference with  the  rights  of  Ms  Darko  was  wholly
         disproportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved
         because it rewarded behaviour on the part of Mr Mintah  that  might
         well have been criminal and would  include  Mr  Mintah  having  the
         "uninterrupted enjoyment of a property in which [Ms  Darko]  has  a
         beneficial interest".

15. Judge Stewart was fortified in his conclusion by  noting  that  at  the
    date of the application,  Kwame  was  a  qualifying  child  within  the
    meaning of Section 117D(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 which meant that having regard to Section  117B(6),  Ms  Darko
    having a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying
    child in circumstances where it would not be reasonable to expect  that
    child to leave the United  Kingdom,  Ms  Darko  should  be  allowed  to
    succeed.   Judge  Stewart  then  went   on   to   consider   additional
    considerations applicable to persons liable to deportation  as  foreign
    criminals, though it is of note that no  one  was  suggesting  that  Ms
    Darko should be deported.

16. Mr Wilding submitted that there really was  no  appreciation  shown  by
    Judge Stewart to the weight to be given to the failure on her  part  of
    meeting the Immigration Rules.

17. The wider application  of  Article  8  was  focused,  in  Mr  Wilding's
    submissions, on the nature of the relationship between Ms Darko and her
    son Kwame, yet there was no up-to-date evidence  in  relation  to  him.
    Indeed, Mr Wilding made the point that the judge appears to  have  made
    no  findings  of  fact  at  all  in  relation  to  the  nature  of  the
    relationship with Kwame as at the  date  of  the  hearing  but  focused
    entirely on the date of the application.  Even Ms Darko's  own  witness
    statement was in Mr Wilding's submission virtually silent on the nature
    of the relationship which she had with Kwame.  There  was,  he  pointed
    out, no suggestion that Kwame should be removed.  This was  Ms  Darko's
    appeal and as to the  reference  to  the  beneficial  interest  in  the
    property, that would not be affected by her removal.

18. Mr Maku-Kemi relied on his document, "Appellant's Grounds of Resistance
    against Appeal" [sic] which ought more particularly to  have  been  the
    Respondent's document but be that as it  may.   He  confirmed  in  that
    document that it was not an issue that Ms Darko could not succeed under
    the Immigration Rules.  Not surprisingly, it was  his  submission  that
    the judge made findings that were open to him in that regard.  Emphasis
    is placed however in support of Ms Darko on the fact that  the  offence
    for which Ms Darko was convicted  was  not  serious  or  at  least  not
    serious of its kind with there being no suggestion of repetition.

19. Further, reliance was placed  on  the  case  of  SC  (Article  8  -  in
    accordance with the law)  [2012]  UKUT.  (  I  observe  in  that  case,
    however, that the child in question in that case was  a  child  at  the
    date on the hearing of  the  appeal.)  The  burden  of  Mr  Maku-Kemi's
    submissions was that at the date of  the  application,  Kwame  being  a
    child meant that his best interests were to be looked at.  He  went  on
    to rely on the guidance of the case of VV (Grounds  of  Appeal)  [2016]
    and in particular the head note which provides:

         "(1) An application for permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  of
             inadequacy of reasoning in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal  must  generally  demonstrate  by  reference  to  the
             material and arguments placed before that Tribunal that:

               a) the matter  involved  a  substantial  issue  between  the
                  parties at first instance; and

               b) that the Tribunal either failed to deal with that  matter
                  at all, or gave  reasons  on  that  point  which  are  so
                  unclear that they may well conceal and error of law.

          1) Given that parties are  under  a  duty  to  help  further  the
             overriding objective and to cooperate with the Upper Tribunal,
             those drafting Grounds of Appeal:

              a) should proceed on the basis that decisions  of  the  First-
                 tier Tribunal are to be read fairly  and  as  a  whole  and
                 without excessive legalism;

              b) should not seek to argue that  a  particular  consideration
                 was not taken into account by the Tribunal when it  can  be
                 seen from the decision read fairly and as a whole  that  it
                 was (and the  real  disagreement  is  with  the  Tribunal's
                 assessment of the evidence or its merits); and

              c) should not challenge the adequacy of the reasons  given  by
                 the  First-tier  Tribunal  without  demonstrating  how  the
                 principles in (1) above have been breached, by reference to
                 the materials placed before that Tribunal and the important
                 or substantial issues which he was asked  to  determine  in
                 that particular case.

          2) Where permission to appeal is  granted,  an  Appellant  should
             review whether the Grounds of Appeal are genuinely arguable in
             the light of any response from the Respondent to  the  appeal.
             Whether or  not  the  original  grounds  are  pursued,  it  is
             generally inappropriate to seek to raise new Grounds of Appeal
             close to the date of the hearing if, for example,  that  would
             cause unfairness to a Respondent  or  result  in  the  hearing
             being adjourned.".

20. The burden therefore of Mr Maku-Kemi's submissions, was that when  read
    as a whole, it was clear that the judge had taken into account all  the
    relevant circumstances  and  that  although  at  paragraph  37  of  the
    decision, there does not appear to be sufficient findings of fact,  the
    weightiest factor when the decision is reads as a whole, was the nature
    of the relationship between Ms Darko and Kwame.

21. I find that the judge did in fact err in law.  In an  Article  8  case,
    unless there is specific statutory provision for it, the relevant  date
    for an in-country appeal, is the date of the hearing, not the  date  of
    the application.  This is trite law.  It  is  not  in  issue  that  the
    Appellant in the First-tier Tribunal,  Ms  Darko  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  At paragraph 39, Judge  Stewart
    speculates as to whether or not Kwame might have met Immigration  Rules
    had  he  made  application  but,  the  relevant  consideration  of  the
    Immigration Rules in fact led to a conclusion that they were  not  met,
    so that what Ms Darko was left with in respect of her relationship with
    Kwame, was the provision of Section 117B(6).  The difficulty pointed to
    by Judge Brunnen when granting permission was that at the date  of  the
    hearing, Kwame was no longer  a  child.   Section  117B(6)  was  of  no
    relevance at all.

22. What the judge was required to do was begin with Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and  recognise  that  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public interest.
     He was required then to bear in mind that the Appellant, Ms Darko  was
    unable to meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  give
    weight to that factor.  It is not clear from the findings of the  judge
    whether he took into account the extent to which, if at all,  Ms  Darko
    was financially independent or that any private life was established at
    a time when her immigration status was precarious.

23. In looking to the individual circumstances, the judge was  entitled  to
    have regard to the fact that the Appellant had  already  spent  fifteen
    years in the United Kingdom but against that,  should  have  recognised
    that the Immigration Rules would  have  required  twenty  years  before
    being entitled to apply for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on
    the basis of long residence, although even then the  conviction  was  a
    matter to be taken into account, albeit of minor significance given the
    sentence attaching to it.

24. Notwithstanding the submissions made by Mr Maku-Kemi, the  decision  is
    inadequately reasoned  and  includes  irrelevant  considerations.   The
    purpose in Section 117B(6) is clearly not intended for the  benefit  of
    the "person" but for the benefit of the child.  The best  interests  of
    the child are a primary consideration and Section  117B(6)  provides  a
    rule of thumb similar to a derivative right in EEA cases.  But it is to
    be remembered that the  "person"  is  only  entitled  to  discretionary
    leave.  Different considerations apply when the child is  no  longer  a
    child.  It is this entire focus on Kwame as a child when at the date of
    decision, he was not, taken together with the  other  factors  which  I
    have mentioned, that in my judgment renders the decision  made  by  the
    judge unsustainable. It is clear to me, reading the decision as a whole
    that  the  judge  was   influenced   by   historical   and   irrelevant
    considerations.

25. Accordingly I set the decision aside.



The Re-making

26. Ms Darko gave evidence before me and adopted her witness  statement  of
    13th June 2016.  In the witness statement with  respect  to  Kwame  she
    said that she would normally see him at school as his father would  not
    allow her to see him at her home.  I observe that there was no  witness
    statement produced above and beyond that witness statement of 13th June
    2016.  The witness statement however also makes reference to Amanda and
    her relationship with Kwame, although it is not suggested  that  either
    Amanda or Kwame were at any immediate risk of removal.

27. Ms Darko was cross-examined.  She said that there were  no  proceedings
    now in respect of the former matrimonial home and that was because  she
    did not have the money to pursue any claim.

28. As to seeing or contact with Kwame, Ms Darko said that she  did  go  to
    court but she was told that nothing could be done because by then Kwame
    was over 16 years of age.  She said however that she saw him at  school
    but when pressed upon the circumstances in which that would occur,  she
    said that she would see him in the reception area about  two  or  three
    times a month, although the school was not aware of the problems.  She,
    Ms Darko would go to school at the end of  the  school  day  and  spend
    about ten to fifteen minutes with Kwame.  Occasionally Kwame would come
    to her home but that had only  happened  she  said  on  four  occasions
    because Kwame's father had become aware of this and  prevented  further
    visits.

29. When asked when the last time was that Kwame had come to her home,  she
    said that it was last Christmas when he stayed about 30 to 45  minutes.
    The effect of the evidence was that since she  and  Kwame  had  stopped
    living together in 2013, there had been four visits  to  the  home  and
    when pressed upon which Christmas it was that  she  had  actually  seen
    Kwame, it turned out that it was Christmas 2015.

30. Ms Darko did say however that she had had communication  from  her  son
    and at that point she produced a text message from her phone dated 25th
    July 2016. In fact the text message was not from her son at all but had
    been forwarded to her by her lawyer.  The text message  made  reference
    to a witness statement which was to be obtained but that was a  witness
    statement being the letter of support referred to at  paragraph  20  of
    Judge Stewart's decision which was in fact a letter. There was  clearly
    some reluctance on the part of Kwame to get involved  in  his  Mother's
    appeal if it would compromise him, making reference, as it did  to  his
    wishing to qualify as an accountant.

31. Cross-examination then turned to Amanda with whom Ms Darko said she had
    been living for three years.  It was  noted  that  the  statement  from
    Amanda appeared to have been signed with block capitals rather  than  a
    regular signature.  Ms Darko said that  she  was  not  there  when  the
    statement was signed. When asked about Amanda's immigration status, she
    said, "They refused her.  Then she stopped working".  She said she  had
    no idea when  such  applications  that  had  been  made  were  refused,
    although she knew that her daughter was studying.

32. She disputed the suggestion made by Mr Mintah in correspondence to  the
    Home Office that she had never looked after her  son  Kwame,  she  said
    that she had tried to support him.

33. She said that she did have other family in the United Kingdom although,
    when pressed these were close family friends whom she said  helped  her
    financially.  However, it was not since Christmas  2016  that  she  had
    seen them.  She  does  have  a  father  still  alive  in  Ghana  and  a
    stepmother.  She said she was still in contact with her father and that
    was about once a week.

34. As to the text from Kwame, she said that she received that because  she
    wanted his bank details in order to provide him with some money.

35. I observed that neither Kwame nor Amanda, who was not  living  with  Mr
    Mintah, had come to give evidence.  I stood the matter  down  in  order
    for Mr Maku-Kemi to take instructions as to whether or  not  he  wanted
    the opportunity to call Amanda.  However, after a short adjournment,  I
    was told that the decision had been made not to call her, so that I had
    the witness statement from her being dated 14th June 2016,  essentially
    unsigned, but I had not had the opportunity to hear from her  what  she
    had to say about her relationship with her  mother,  her  brother,  and
    indeed her mother's relationship with Kwame.

36. Mr Wilding submitted that the evidence pointed to no real  family  life
    existing now between Ms Darko and  Kwame.   Mr  Wilding  accepted  that
    broadly speaking, family life did not disappear  on  reaching  majority
    such that the guidance in the case of Kugathas would immediately become
    pertinent.  But the evidence in this  case  was  such  that  there  was
    hardly any contact between the Appellant and Kwame and  as  to  Amanda,
    the evidence was unsatisfactory with no real reasons as to why she  had
    not attended to give evidence in the appeal.  Still further  there  was
    no real explanation as to why Kwame, now 19 years of age, had  no  real
    contact with his mother.  There was, Mr Wilding submitted, a total lack
    of corroborating evidence going to Ms Darko's account.   There  was  no
    evidence,  certainly  no  sufficient  evidence,  as   to   what   court
    proceedings were embarked upon when Kwame was  16  and  so  Mr  Wilding
    submitted that I was left entirely in the dark as to what all that  was
    about.  There were avenues which might have been  explored,  such  that
    evidence might have been provided including the friends in  the  United
    Kingdom, whom I  was  told  were  providing  help  yet,  there  was  no
    sufficient evidence from them.  It is to be observed, that  those  were
    friends who apparently were helping with bills and were  aware  of  the
    substance of the circumstances leading to the  situation  in  which  Ms
    Darko now found herself.

37. Finally, Mr Wilding submitted that Ms Darko's evidence was unimpressive
    and  far  removed  from  "enlightening  us"  as  to  what  the  current
    circumstances were.  I was invited to find that Ms Darko had failed  to
    establish the circumstances upon which she actually moved  out  of  her
    husband's house and why there was  such  limited  contact  with  Kwame.
    What we did know on the basis of the evidence was that  Amanda  had  no
    lawful status in the United  Kingdom  and  whilst  the  conviction  was
    minor,  some  weight  was  to  be  given  to  it   even   before   117B
    considerations were applied.

38. For Ms Darko, Mr Maku-Kemi submitted that it was necessary for  him  to
    demonstrate compelling, compassionate and exceptional circumstances and
    as Mr Wilding had suggested that the case was  "peculiar  and  unique",
    that  was  established.   However,  the  facts  of  the  case  were  in
    themselves extraordinary.  To be removed from the matrimonial  home  in
    the circumstances in which Ms Darko was removed would have  traumatised
    any human being.  She was to be  viewed  as  a  victim.   Reliance  was
    placed on the written document and on the  unfortunate  history  of  Ms
    Darko whilst in the United Kingdom.

Findings

39. I found Ms Darko as a witness to be wholly unimpressive.  Simply to say
    that she was evasive  is  not,  I  appreciate  enough.   However,  when
    pressed on certain matters, she looked for help from her lawyer  before
    answering the questions and at one point  even  sought  to  communicate
    with him.

40. The evidence at its highest shows very little communication with  Kwame
    and taken together with the text  which  she  produced,  suggests  that
    actually he is rather reluctant to support her for  reasons  which  are
    not at  all  clear  save  that  he  is  concerned  that  there  is  the
    possibility that his desire to become an accountant might be  adversely
    affected by what he, Kwame was being asked to do.   The  text  did  not
    suggest to me that he was motivated towards lack of assistance  to  his
    mother by concerns about his father but rather more, by a concern  that
    there was something in the nature of the application being made by  his
    mother that might  adversely  affect  his  own  status  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Whatever the circumstances, it was clear that the family life
    as between Ms Darko and her son Kwame was hardly being enjoyed at  all.
    On the evidence she had not even seen her  son  since  Christmas  2015.
    There was therefore very little contact.  As to the  daughter  Amanda's
    lack of attendance, and the court documents which were not provided  in
    relation to any attempt by Ms Darko to have better  access  or  contact
    with her son, then I am entitled, and do draw adverse inferences guided
    by the case of TK (Burundi).

41. I see no reason to interfere with the approach of Judge Stewart in  the
    application of Razgar save that I do not agree with him in his  finding
    that the second test was made out.  I do not find on the basis  of  the
    evidence that refusing the application for continued leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom for Ms Darko would have consequences of such gravity
    as potentially to engage the operation of  Article  8.   There  was  no
    sufficient evidence of any  meaningful  or  ongoing  relationship  with
    Amanda.  The Appellant's evidence was that she was continuing  to  live
    with her but I did not find sufficient evidence, given the way in which
    the evidence was presented to enable me to make a favourable finding in
    that respect nor, did I find any sufficient evidence to satisfy me that
    there was a sufficiently meaningful relationship with Kwame such as  to
    engage article 8.

42. If I  am  wrong  about  that  and  the  case  turns  on  the  issue  of
    proportionality then, taking the approach which  I  have  already  said
    should  have  been  taken  by  Judge  Stewart,  I  have  no  hesitation
    whatsoever in finding against Ms Darko.  The maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control is in the public interest.  She falls  a  long  way
    short from meeting a twenty-year period and whilst only  little  weight
    should be given to the conviction, I bear in mind that she  had  sought
    to present an application on the basis of domestic  violence,  when  it
    had been found beyond reasonable  doubt,  that  in  fact  she  was  the
    aggressor.  Of course, there is considerable  mitigation  in  that  and
    overall I attach little  weight  to  that  conviction  but  it  remains
    nevertheless, a relevant factor when one considers the extent to  which
    Ms Darko falls short of meeting any Immigration  Rule  upon  which  she
    might  have  relied.   She  is  clearly  not,  on  her  own   evidence,
    financially   independent   because   she   is   reliant   on   friends
    notwithstanding the fact that I heard no evidence  from  these  people.
    Any private life with them has been  established  at  a  time  when  Ms
    Darko's immigration status was precarious.  There is as I have  already
    observed no parental relationship with a qualifying  child  as  at  the
    date of the hearing.

43. Against that I have to look to the matters which  are  personal  to  Ms
    Darko.  I acknowledge that she has two children in the United  Kingdom,
    although one of them may, in the event be removable with her  but  that
    is not a matter for me.  For present purposes, I proceed on  the  basis
    that she has a relationship of sorts with two children  in  the  United
    Kingdom but there is no sufficient evidence for me to find, on  balance
    of probabilities, that the relationship is more than, "of sorts".  I am
    not able to assess from the limited evidence that I received, precisely
    the nature of it.  In those circumstances, she, who has the  burden  to
    the civil standard, has failed to satisfy me of the factual matrix upon
    which she seeks to rely in this regard with respect to the relationship
    that she has with the children, if any.  There is otherwise very little
    to put on this side of the equation.  She does have family  connections
    in Ghana, so that all in all when one does the balancing exercise,  one
    is left with the only finding in my judgment which  could  be  made  in
    this case, namely that in the re-making of this appeal,  it  is  to  be
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  The decision is re-made such that  the  decision  in  the
First-tier Tribunal is that the appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                              Date 8 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker







