
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01587/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th September 2018                        |On 22nd October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     mr pinkeshkumar mahendrabhai patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Patel of Hiren Patel Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant a national of India date of birth 14 March  1990  appealed
    against the Secretary of State's decision dated 7 March 2016 to  refuse
    an application made on 13 January 2015 for further leave to remain as a
    Tier 2 (General) Migrant.  That application  was  refused  because  the
    TOEIC certificate which was submitted as part of a Tier  4  application
    as long ago as 29 October 2012 had been obtained  using  a  proxy  test
    taker.   The  Secretary  of  State  also  did  not   make   any   final
    determination on the certificate of sponsorship (COS)  and  the  matter
    was left unresolved.

3.   His appeal came before the  IAC  and  on  7  February  2018  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Herbert  promulgated  his  decision  [D]  allowing  the
    appeal.  At that hearing Mr H Patel appeared for the Claimant.

4.   The Judge then clearly erred in  law  because  he  allowed  the  appeal
    outright notwithstanding the status of the COS element  of  the  matter
    had not been resolved.   The  Judge  however  heard  the  evidence  and
    accepted that the Appellant had taken a valid TOEIC test  with  Colwell
    College (erroneously referred to in the decision as Caldwell).

5.   The Judge heard, essentially by  reference  not  least  to  a  detailed
    skeleton argument, a substantive challenge to the  reliability  of  the
    generic evidence in giving what  are  called  "false  positives".   The
    Judge in the extensive argument heard a number of  points  being  taken
    against the generic evidence relied upon by the Secretary of State.  It
    rather  seemed  to  me  the  Judge  failed  to  put  his  mind  to  the
    considerations which the Upper Tribunal gave to  such  evidence  in  SM
    Qadir [2016] UKUT 00229 and also appeared to  have  forgotten  that  at
    date of decision that the Court of Appeal in the case of  Majumber  and
    Qadir [2016] EWCA Civ 1167 had generally supported the  approach  taken
    by the Upper Tribunal in Qadir.  The Judge's analysis  really  did  not
    address the basis that the TOEIC ETS evidence was being challenged.  It
    also seems to me  that  the  Judge  perhaps  by  reference  to  another
    college, not the Colwell College, took some view on the extent  of  the
    audits.  It may be just it is a typographical error, I do  not  exclude
    that possibility.

6.      In considering  the  case  the  Judge  heard,  although  it  is  not
    entirely clear whether he was satisfied that the evidential burden  had
    truly shifted to the Claimant, or if so accepted the latter's  innocent
    explanation of the events in 2012. The Judge recited [  D23]  the  fact
    that as heard by him in 2018 the Claimant had very  good  English  with
    some accent but a good command of the  English  language  and  grammar.
    Plainly at the time of the taking of the TOEIC language test  it  seems
    unlikely that the Claimant's English was as  good  as  it  had  become.
    Indeed since the taking of the test in September 2012 the Claimant  has
    gone on to undertake further and more difficult studies  to  which  the
    English language was plainly going to be necessary and at an acceptable
    standard.

7.     Mr Tufan drew my attention to the case  of  MA  (ETS  TOEIC  testing)
    [2016] UKUT 450 and in particular to the familiar  paragraph  57  which
    identify in considering amongst other things the motives  for  using  a
    proxy test taker in paragraph 57 which are so familiar as to  need  not
    repeating. Mr Tufan points to the fact that that analysis has not  been
    substantively challenged since the case of MA. Rather  he  relied  upon
    the reported judicial review decision of Nawaz [2017]  UKUT  00288  and
    its general support given for the Tribunal's approach to the  issue  of
    the TOEIC tests and proxy test takers.

8.   The case law has also to a degree developed in the case  of  Gaogalalwe
    [2017] EWHC 1709 (Admin) which is a High Court decision  in  which  the
    issue of Professor French's analysis of the material is considered  and
    accepted in relation to the generic evidence and the general outcomes.

9.   The case law therefore to some extent plainly  supports  the  Secretary
    of  State's  position  that  faced  with  the  wealth  of  that  report
    notwithstanding the skeleton argument and  arguments  by  Mr  Patel  it
    needed to be properly addressed by way of the reason.

10.  Ultimately it seemed to me  the  Secretary  of  State's  challenge  was
    essentially one as to the adequacy and the sufficiency of  the  reasons
    for accepting the Claimant's explanation was a  "innocent  explanation"
    of the taking of  the  test.   The  Judge's  reasoning  as  to  why  he
    concludes that the test was undertaken is broadly contained in  D23  to
    D27.

11.  The primary consideration the Judge  gave  weight  as  evidence  of  an
    innocent  explanation  was  the  Claimant's  current  English  language
    ability demonstrating similar ability in 2012 and thus no need to use a
    proxy test taker. The Judge heard the Claimant's past ability  actually
    i.e. by reference to a test which he had  done  and  his  Level  5  HND
    passed in September 2012.  However, the Judge appeared  to  accept  the
    following factors.  First, there was no motive  to  use  a  proxy  test
    taker.   Secondly,  whilst  it  was  a  requirement  for  studying   at
    Sunderland University the Judge was satisfied that the Claimant's study
    in English was sufficient to show the false test result  was  unlikely.
    Thirdly, what the Judge describes in the following terms:

         "I also took the view  that  the  Appellant's  (Claimant)  did  not
         appear before me to exhibit any dishonesty on  the  basis  that  he
         spoke without hesitation and with no sign of any embarrassment with
         explaining what he had done, how he had done it, and why he had sat
         the test."

12.   I find, given the generic evidence and later English language  skills,
    the Judge gave inadequate and insufficient reasons  for  accepting  the
    Claimant had not used a proxy test taker and that is an error  of  law.
    Accordingly I find in addition to the COS issue the Original Tribunal's
    decision cannot stand. The matter will have to be remade in the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed to the extent that the matter  is
returned to the First-tier Tribunal  (not  before  F-t  TJ  Herbert)  to  be
decided in accordance with the law.

No anonymity direction was necessary and none was sought.

Signed                                  Date 10 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is appropriate.

Signed                                  Date 10 October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

