




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01545/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 18 September 2014                         |On 17 October 2014           |
|Prepared:  11 October 2014                    |                             |
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mr Ebeneezer Kwame Danning
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Appiah, of counsel (instructed by Kilic and
Kilic Solicitors)



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer  to  the  appellant  as  the
      secretary of state and the respondent as the claimant.


   2. The claimant is a national of Ghana, born on 28th September  1973.  He
      appealed before the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision  of  the
      secretary of state refusing his application made on 7th July 2013  for
      a residence card pursuant to Regulation 17 of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
      Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations"). His application  was  based
      on his proxy/customary marriage in Ghana to Ms Anais  Hofe,  a  French
      national exercising Treaty rights in the UK. He was represented at the
      hearing by Ms Appiah. The respondent was also represented.


   3. The respondent was not satisfied that his claimed proxy  marriage  had
      been properly executed so as to satisfy the requirements of the law of
      Ghana.


   4. His application was also refused under Regulation  8(5)  of  the  2006
      Regulations. At page 7 of the reasons for refusal,  the  secretary  of
      state contended that due consideration to this claim  had  been  given
      "as an alternative." The claimant had provided  no  evidence  that  he
      resided together as a couple at the same address prior to the date  of
      the alleged customary marriage certificate.  Nor  was  there  evidence
      that they even knew each other or had met prior to  the  date  of  the
      customary marriage being issued abroad.


   5. Documents  such  as  a  tenancy  agreement,  utility  bills  and  bank
      statements were produced. The bills and bank statements were addressed
      to the EEA National sponsor and did  not  demonstrate  a  genuine  and
      subsisting relationship between the  parties.  No  joint  council  tax
      bills, joint  utility  bills,  joint  bank  statements  or  any  other
      relevant  documents  "that  are  acceptable  proof  of  address"  were
      produced.


   6. Accordingly, the secretary of state concluded that  the  claimant  had
      not provided sufficient evidence "to suggest" that he is in a  durable
      relationship.


   7. The grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal are at pages  12-
      23 of the claimant's bundle. The "legal basis for appeal" is  set  out
      from paragraph 3 onwards. The remaining paragraphs contained  detailed
      submissions regarding the validity of the marriage in Ghana.


   8. At paragraph 4 of the grounds, at page 23, there is a contention  that
      the claimant continues to live with his spouse who works as a cleaner.
      Apart from  that  assertion  however,  there  is  no  specific  ground
      relating to the refusal of his claim pursuant to  Regulation  8(2)  of
      the 2006 Regulations.


   9. At the date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, counsel  on
      his  behalf  made  an  application  to  adjourn  the  hearing  as  the
      claimant's partner was abroad. However, the Judge stated at  paragraph
      15 that on the basis of information submitted to him "the  application
      did not reach the level required in Rule  21  of  the  2005  Procedure
      Rules". He states that "that was accepted". The hearing proceeded.


  10. At paragraph 2 of the determination, the Judge noted the secretary  of
      state's contentions relating to the lack of adequate evidence to  show
      that the parties resided together as a  couple  and  that  there  were
      doubts as to whether they had ever met prior to the customary marriage
      certificate which was issued in Ghana.


  11. The Judge had  regard  to  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
      secretary of state, and in particular at paragraph 23  to  the  effect
      that with  regard  to  the  durable  relationship,  there  was  little
      evidence of their life together except for the tenancy  agreement.  It
      was noteworthy that the claimant did not know exactly where  his  wife
      lived in France.


  12. Ms Appiah, who represented the claimant before the first-tier Tribunal
      relied on the skeleton argument in the claimant's bundle.  Submissions
      were made as  to  the  claimant's  relationship  with  his  wife.  She
      referred to evidence of  the  photographs  of  the  parties  together,
      utility bills in the name of the sponsor,  the  tenancy  agreement  in
      joint names and the wife's payslips. She had also stood surety for the
      claimant when he was in immigration detention.


  13. The Judge's findings and conclusions were set out from  paragraphs  27
      to 34. At paragraph 32, he found on the evidence that  the  claimant's
      proxy marriage to his French national wife in Ghana was valid in Ghana
      and hence valid in the UK. He therefore satisfied Regulation 17(1)  of
      the 2006 Regulations. He was accordingly entitled to a residence  card
      under Regulation 17.


  14. The Judge did not go  on  to  consider  the  appeal  pursuant  to  the
      alternative  submission  relating  to  Regulation  8(5)  of  the  2006
      Regulations.


  15. On 1st August 2014,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fisher  granted  the
      secretary of state  permission to  appeal  against  the  determination
      promulgated on 3rd June 2014. The grounds seeking permission  asserted
      that the Judge erred in law by failing to apply the decision in Kareem
      (Proxy Marriages - EU Law) [2014] UKUT 0024 (IAC). Nor did  the  Judge
      give reasons for concluding that the proxy marriage was valid in Ghana
      and therefore in the UK.


  16. Judge Fisher noted that the Judge had made no reference to  Kareem  in
      which it was held that the starting point  was  to  decide  whether  a
      marriage was contracted between the claimant and the qualified  person
      according to the national law of the EEA country, in this case France.
      The decision  in  Kareem  was  confirmed  in  TA  and  Others  (Kareem
      explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC).


  17. Moreover, the Judge gave no reason for concluding that the  claimant's
      proxy marriage to his French national wife in Ghana was valid in  that
      country and hence in the UK. Nor did he consider whether the  marriage
      would be valid under French law.


  18. Mr Bramble on behalf of the secretary of state relied on  the  reasons
      for refusal.


  19. On behalf of the claimant, Ms Appiah relied on the Rule  24  response.
      She submitted that the Judge made no material misdirections of law.


  20. Ms Appiah accepted that Kareem, supra, is  "good  law.  She  submitted
      that the Judge took into consideration "the good law" at both the date
      of the hearing and the date of his determination. He made a finding of
      fact as to whether the marriage certificate produced was issued  by  a
      competent authority following the principles in Kareem. She  submitted
      that the decision in TA, supra, was  promulgated  on  18th  June  2014
      which was several weeks after the date of  the  determination  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Thanki. She submitted that prior to  TA  the
      Judge was within his powers to interpret the guidance in Kareem in the
      "two step" fashion that he did. She therefore submitted that TA cannot
      be applied retrospectively.


  21. Ms Appiah very properly informed me that French law does not recognise
      the relevant proxy marriage. Accordingly, French law  would  not  have
      helped.


  22. Further,  Ms  Appiah  accepted  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  barely
      mentioned the appeal against  the  respondent's  conclusion  that  the
      parties were not in a durable  relationship.  She  accepted  that  the
      grounds did not adequately address it.


  23. She also accepted that the claimant had not sought to lodge a  counter
      appeal in this matter. Ms Appiah stated that  she  only  received  the
      papers relatively recently. She appreciated that the claimant would be
      well out of time. Moreover, although  she  faintly  suggested  that  I
      should allow the claimant to do so at this stage, Mr  Bramble  pointed
      out that pursuant to the 2005 Procedure Rules, a claimant must make  a
      written application for permission to appeal. That had not been  done.
      Accordingly, Mr Bramble opposed any attempt to formally introduce  the
      cross appeal.


  24. Ms Appiah did not seek to adjourn the hearing on the  basis  that  the
      claimant would seek to apply for permission out of  time  to  lodge  a
      counter appeal.


  25. I did not consider that it is appropriate to  allow  the  claimant  to
      introduce a counter appeal at this stage.


     Assessment


  26. I find that the First-tier Tribunal did not consider the  decision  in
      Kareem. Ms Appiah submitted however that the decision  in  TA,  supra,
      had not been promulgated at the date  of  the  Judge's  determination.
      Accordingly there was no error of law regarding the state of law  that
      applied at the date of Judge Thanki's determination.


  27. However, TA did not make any "new law" relating to the issue of  proxy
      marriages in the context  of  an  application  for  a  residence  card
      pursuant to the 2006 Regulations. What the Tribunal did was to analyse
      the decision in Kareem, and in particular the suggestion that there is
      a two stage process in the determination of whether a marriage can  be
      considered to be valid for the purpose of the 2006 Regulations.


  28. However, after a thorough analysis of Kareem, the Tribunal found  that
      the determination of whether there is a marital relationship  for  the
      purpose  of  the  2006  Regulations  should  always  be  examined   in
      accordance with the laws of the member  state  from  which  the  union
      citizen obtains nationality.


  29. In the circumstances, having regard to Ms Appiah's concession that the
      laws of France would not recognise this proxy marriage,  I  find  that
      the claimant has not proved that his marriage is a valid one  for  the
      purpose of the 2006 Regulations.


  30. Accordingly, the claimant cannot  establish  that  he  is  the  family
      member for the purposes of Regulation 7 of the Regulations.


  31. As indicated, there is no appeal by the claimant  against  the  First-
      tier  Tribunal  Judge's  failure  to  make  a  decision  relating   to
      Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.


  32. The secretary of state has considered the application under Regulation
      8(5) and has has set out in some  detail  the  basis  upon  which  she
      concluded that the  claimant  had  not  provided  sufficient  evidence
      suggesting that they are in a durable relationship.


  33. The submissions contained in the Rule 24 response  on  behalf  of  the
      claimant were confined to upholding the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
      findings concerning the validity of the marriage in Ghana.


     Decisions


The First-tier Tribunal's determination contained an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside.


The decision I substitute is to dismiss the claimant's appeal.




                               Signed                     Date 11/10/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


