
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01607/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8 September 2017                      |On 14 September 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           anish kamleshkumar shah
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent Anish Kamleshkumar Shah to whom I  shall  refer  as  the
    "Applicant" is a citizen of India  born  on  12  August  1990.   On  20
    January 2012 he arrived with leave to  enter  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student which expired on 6 June 2014.  On  that  day,  he  applied  for
    further leave to remain as a student.



SSHD's Decision

 2. On 8 March 2016 the Appellant (SSHD) refused the application. The  SSHD
    considered the Applicant had submitted fraudulently  obtained  evidence
    of his facility in the English Language, having  obtained  certificates
    issued by ETS after the Applicant had used the services of a proxy test
    taker.

 3. The Respondent also refused the application  because  at  date  of  his
    application the Applicant had  not  been  assigned  an  Acceptance  for
    Studies (CAS).  The application was made on 6 June 2014 to study at the
    London School of Advanced Studies.  The Respondent  confirmed  at  that
    time the School had a Sponsor Licence but the licence had been  revoked
    on 8 December 2014, some five months after the Applicant had  made  his
    application.

The Original Grounds of Appeal

 4. On 22 March 2016 the Applicant lodged notice of appeal under Section 82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  as  amended.   The
    grounds are formulaic and generic.  They refer to the revocation of the
    College's Sponsor Licence, the Appellant's private  life  protected  by
    Article 8 of the European Convention and  the  right  to  complete  his
    education protected  by  at  Protocol  2  Article  1  of  the  European
    Convention.

The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 5. In the Notice of Appeal the Applicant stated that he did  not  want  an
    oral  hearing.   Nevertheless,  the  Tribunal  listed  the  appeal  for
    hearing. On the day set for the First-tier Tribunal hearing  there  was
    no representative for the Applicant or for the SSHD in  attendance  and
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Beach dealt with  the  appeal  on  the
    papers in the Tribunal file.  She considered the Applicant had not been
    refused on the basis of fraudulently obtained  documentation,  that  is
    the evidence of his facility  in  English.   She  found  the  College's
    Sponsor's licence had been revoked and that the Applicant could not  be
    considered to be part  of  the  reason  for  revocation  licence.   She
    referred to the SSHD's policy to grant a  further  60  days'  leave  to
    enable a prospective student to find an alternative college. The  Judge
    considered the Appellant should have been given such  short-term  leave
    and allowed the appeal on that ground alone.

 6. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  policy  to
    grant a further 60 days'  leave  was  not  relevant  to  the  Applicant
    because his original application had been bound  to  fail.  The  SSHD's
    reasoning was that the College's Sponsor's Licence remained in force at
    the date of the application at which moment the Applicant had failed to
    submit a CAS.

 7. On 19 July 2017 permission to appeal on  that  ground  was  granted  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal J M Holmes.



The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

 8. The hearing of the appeal had been set on 10am on 8 September  2017  at
    Field House. I was satisfied that notice of the time, date and place of
    the hearing had been given to the Applicant and his then solicitors and
    that such notice  had  been  given  in  accordance  with  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. The solicitors had confirmed  to
    the Tribunal they were without instructions from the Appellant.  Having
    considered the papers in the Tribunal file and any issues likely to  be
    raised by the application, I was satisfied that it was just to  proceed
    in the absence of the Applicant or any representative for him.

 9. Mr Tarlow relied on the SSHD's application for permission to appeal and
    the issue identified in the grant of the permission.  The Appellant had
    never become entitled to the benefit of the SSHD's policy  of  granting
    60 days' leave. His application was doomed to failure  because  it  was
    not accompanied by a CAS at a time when the College's Sponsor's Licence
    was still in being.

10. He did not seek to pursue any allegation of  fraud  the  Appellant  may
    have used to obtain the English Language certificates.

Findings and Consideration

11. I find for the reasons identified in the SSHD's permission  application
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material  error
    of law such that it cannot stand and is set aside.

Re-Making of the Decision

12. I remake the decision and dismiss the appeal  under  Part  6A  (Points-
    Based System) of the Immigration Rules for the reason already given.

13. For the avoidance of doubt, I have considered the issue of  the  SSHD's
    fraud allegation.  The SSHD's original bundle includes at  pages  E1-E5
    the transcript of an interview of the Appellant entitled "Border  Force
    Credibility Interview Template (ETS)".  At the  end  of  the  interview
    record the interviewing officer recorded a  number  of  findings.   The
    officer found the Applicant was  able  to  answer  questions  based  in
    English in a fluent manner, suggestive of the fact that he had not been
    coached in providing specific answers and that there were no points  in
    the interview where the Applicant appeared  to  lack  credibility.  The
    officer concluded that the Applicant was credible.

14. Further evidence submitted by the SSHD  evidence  included  a  computer
    search  entitled  "ETS  SELT  Source  Data  Sheet"  showing  that  four
    certificates issued in the name of the Applicant were invalid.  Looking
    at this evidence in the round, I am not satisfied  the  Respondent  has
    submitted sufficient evidence to shift the burden of proof back to  the
    Applicant to supply a plausible explanation to show that  the  did  not
    use a proxy test taker.  The SSHD's  original  decision  was  ambiguous
    whether the fraud allegations were being  pursued.   If  they  were,  I
    allow the appeal in respect of the alleged fraud under paragraph 322 of
    the Immigration Rules.

15. Although the Applicant made a claim relying the right  to  respect  for
    his private life, there was no evidence before the Judge or before  the
    Upper Tribunal.  He was  granted  leave  to  enter  as  a  student  and
    subsequently sought an extension for that leave.  I  do  not  find  the
    Applicant has shown he has any private or family  life  such  that  any
    interference  with  it  consequent  upon   the   SSHD's   decision   is
    sufficiently grave to engage the State's obligations under Article 8 of
    the European  Convention.  The  Applicant  referred  to  the  right  to
    education acknowledged in  Protocol  to,  Article  1  of  the  European
    Convention. His claim does not engage this right which  is  limited  to
    primary education. Consequently, his appeal on human rights grounds  is
    dismissed.

Anonymity

16. There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the appeal find there is no need for one.


Comment on any future applications from abroad

17. If the Applicant makes any future application for entry  clearance  and
    can show that he voluntarily left the United Kingdom during any  period
    when he was permitted to remain, then the  findings  in  this  decision
    should not be held against him.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal's decision contained an error of law and is set
    aside. The following decision is substituted: -
    The appeal is dismissed on immigration grounds  (Part  6A  Points-Based
    System).
    The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.
    Anonymity direction not made.


Signed/Official Crest                                          Date 13.  ix.
2017

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed/Official Crest                                          Date 13.  ix.
2017

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


