

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/01448/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On March 11, 2015                    |On March 12, 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                          MR CHAUDHRY UMAR IFTIKHAR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Ahmed (Legal Representative)
Respondent  Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.  On  August  7,  2013  the
    appellant, through his legal representatives, applied for  a  residence
    card as confirmation of his right  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom
    pursuant to the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006.
    On December 1, 2013 the respondent refused the application.

 2. The appellant appealed on December 30, 2013 under section 82(1) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and Regulation 26  of  the
    2006 Regulations. .

 3. The matter  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Carroll
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on  September  19,  2014  as  a
    paper case and in a decision promulgated on October 3, 2014 he  refused
    his appeal under the 2006 Regulations.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on October 15,  2014  submitting
    the FtTJ had erred by failing to have regard to all of the  documentary
    evidence.

 5. On November 20,  2014  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    MacDonald gave permission to appeal finding there were arguable grounds
    that the FtTJ had erred by arguably not  making  specific  findings  in
    relation to the reliability of the documents and instead  concentrating
    on the lack of evidence and the reasons given in the refusal letter.

 6. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above. The appellant was not in attendance.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Ahmed submitted the FtTJ had failed to consider all of the documents
    when making his decision and had not  provided  adequate  reasoning  in
    rejecting the application.  There  was  evidence  in  the  bundle  that
    supported the claim the EEA national was working and exercising  treaty
    rights.

 8. Mr McVeety adopted the rule 24 response dated  November  26,  2014  and
    argued the FtTJ made findings that were open to him  on  the  evidence.
    There  were  inconsistencies  in  the  documents   and   whilst   those
    inconsistencies may have been explained by oral or written evidence the
    FtTJ could not be  criticised  for  reaching  conclusion  he  did.  The
    appellant could have provided a letter from the employer  or  a  letter
    from his wife addressing the concerns raised but failed to  do  so.  He
    then chose not to pursue an oral hearing and instead chose to pursue  a
    hearing on the papers. The appellant only had  himself  to  blame  when
    matters  that  concerned  the  FtTJ  could  not  be  addressed  through
    questioning.

 9. Mr Ahmed referred me to a letter in the  bundle  from  the  accountants
    that confirmed the appellant's wife's employer's  exact  name  and  the
    FtTJ failed to deal with this evidence.

10.  Having  considered  the  submissions,  the  evidence  and  the  FtTJ's
    determination, in particular, I refused the appeal and indicated to  Mr
    Ahmed I would give my written reasons in this determination.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

11. The appellant chose to pursue his appeal rights on the papers  and  the
    consequence of this approach was that the FtTJ was not  satisfied.  The
    name on the contract and a Google search of the company  differed  from
    the name on the payslips. The  original  letter  from  the  accountants
    dated August 16, 2013 contained a different employer's name to that  of
    their more recent letter dated August 13, 2014. Mr Ahmed agreed  during
    the hearing that all of the observations and submissions  he  made  did
    not address the concerns raised by the FtTJ in  paragraph  [7]  of  his
    determination.

12. Mr McVeety summed up  the  position  when  he  submitted  that  if  the
    appellant had produced an explanation from the employer and  perhaps  a
    statement from his  wife  or  there  had  been  an  attendance  by  the
    appellant then these maters may have been resolved.

13. I am satisfied that although harsh the FtTJ did  not  err.  There  were
    inconsistencies on the documents and whilst I accept there  may  be  an
    innocent explanation such as an abbreviated trading name this  was  not
    something before the FtTJ and he was entitled to make the  findings  he
    did.

14. If the appellant can produce  the  correct  evidence  and  explain  any
    inconsistencies then I see no reason why a  future  application  should
    not be granted although ultimately that  would  be  a  matter  for  the
    respondent.

15. On the evidence presented the decision was open to the FtTJ  and  there
    is no error in law.

    DECISION

16. There was no material error. The original decision shall stand.

17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction pursuant to
    Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I see
    no reason to alter that order.


Signed:     Dated: March 12, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made.


Signed:     Dated: March 12, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
