
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01888/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20th June 2013                               |On 27th June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                         Nanette Saldana Marcellana
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person, representing herself
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Freestone) who dismissed  an  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 7th January 2013  to  refuse
    to vary leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the
    points-based system and to make a decision for removal under Section 47
    of the 2006 Act.

 2.   The history of the appeal is as follows.  The Appellant, a citizen of
    The Philippines, was born on 28th October 1973.  On 17th November  2008
    she was granted leave to enter the UK as a student until  31st  January
    2010 and subsequently until 17th September 2011.  On 16th June 2011 she
    made an application for further leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant.  Her intended course was at the Royal  London  College
    (RLC) to study an NQF level 6 graduate diploma in  business  management
    and marketing to run from 1st June 2011 until 30th June 2013.

 3. In a letter dated 27th February 2012 the  Respondent  acknowledged  the
    application that she had made on 16th June 2011 for leave to remain  in
    the UK to study at the Royal London College but informed the  Appellant
    that the licence of the college had been revoked on 9th September 2011.
     In those circumstances, the Appellant was informed that  consideration
    of her application would be suspended for 60 calendar days.  The letter
    went on to state that during the 60 day period it would be open to  her
    to withdraw the  application  and  submit  a  fresh  application  in  a
    different category or to leave the United Kingdom.  If  she  wished  to
    remain as a Tier 4 Student, she would be required to obtain a  new  CAS
    for a course of study at a fully licensed Tier  4  educational  Sponsor
    and  submit  an  application  to  vary  the  grounds  of  the  original
    application.

 4. On 23rd April 2012 the Appellant wrote to the Respondent  stating  that
    she had been looking for an alternative college to sponsor her but they
    required an up-to-date English test.  She had approached  a  number  of
    examination centres but they all  required  her  original  passport  to
    register and take the exam.  Thus the Appellant asked for her  passport
    to be returned to her and asked for a further extension until 30th  May
    2012.  The Appellant received no response to that letter of 23rd  April
    2012.

 5. On 28th May 2012 the Appellant wrote again to the Respondent and  asked
    for an extension to 15th July 2012 on the same grounds making it  clear
    that she required her passport so that she could obtain a new  CAS  and
    submit a variation application.

 6.  There  was  still  no  response  from  the   Respondent.    In   those
    circumstances she submitted an application on 11th June 2012 an  FLR(O)
    application  based  on   compassionate   grounds   citing   the   above
    circumstances.  In effect, the Appellant was concerned that she may  be
    treated as an "overstayer" as she had had no reply from the  Respondent
    concerning the return of her passport and her Tier 4 application.   She
    had been accepted to study on a postgraduate diploma in management (NQF
    level 7) from 1st June 2012 until June 2014.  She attached  a  new  CAS
    issued by Onto Limited.

 7. There  was  still  no  response  from  the  Respondent  to  either  the
    application made in April 2012 for her passport back so that she  could
    comply with the letter that she was sent nor the application  that  was
    made in June.

 8. The Appellant finally received a response on 26th September 2012.  An e-
    mail was sent to her from a case worker who enquired of  the  Appellant
    which application she wished to progress; either the FLR(O) application
    made in June 2012 or her Tier 4 application.  The Appellant replied  by
    e-mail, explaining the reason for making the application  in  June  for
    the reasons set out earlier and confirming that she wished  to  proceed
    with her Tier 4 application and  again  requested  the  return  of  her
    passport.  At this stage the Appellant had been requesting  the  return
    of her passport from April until October 2012.

 9. The Respondent replied on 5th October.  In that letter, the  Respondent
    apologised for the delay in failing to respond  to  the  letters  dated
    April and May 2012 and set out the history.  In particular  the  letter
    noted that she had been given 60 days to withdraw  the  application  or
    vary it with a new CAS  from  a  new  Sponsor.   The  expiry  date  was
    therefore 27th April 2012 and acknowledged that she had replied on 23rd
    April, four days before the expiry of that period requesting the return
    of the passport.  The letter stated that they  were  unable  to  comply
    with a request for extending the 60 day period.  The letter went on  to
    state that as the Respondent did not return the passport when requested
    on 23rd April 2012, the passport would now be returned.  As a result of
    the delay in returning  the  passport  it  was  decided  to  allow  the
    Appellant extra time that she would have had if they had  returned  her
    passport immediately upon request.  Thus the new expiry  date  was  9th
    October 2012.

10. It is common ground that that letter was received by the  Appellant  on
    12th October 2012 after  the  expiry  of  9th  October  which  was  the
    deadline.

11.  On  15th  October  2012,  the  Appellant  wrote  to   the   Respondent
    acknowledging the letter which she had received on 12th  October.   She
    asked for a further expiry date because as she set out, the 9th October
    2012 had already expired before she had  received  her  letter  and  it
    defeated the whole purpose of returning her passport because it was not
    possible therefore to book and sit an approved English test, enrol with
    a Tier 4 Sponsor and submit a new Tier 4 application  in  a  matter  of
    days.

12. Nothing further was heard from the Respondent until an e-mail was  sent
    on 28th  December  2012.   The  e-mail  requested  that  the  Appellant
    returned her passports to the Respondent within seven working days.

13. In the intervening  period,  between  the  date  in  October  when  she
    received the letter and the e-mail in December, she attempted  to  book
    the next available English test with IELTS and Pearson  which  are  the
    test centres which could issue test results quickly however, due to the
    unusually high volume of test takers during that period of time  as  it
    was near to the Christmas period, the nearest test date that she  could
    obtain was the second week of January 2013.

14. The Appellant had returned her passports on 28th December  as  required
    because she was concerned that if she did not, it could  be  viewed  as
    not complying with any instructions.

15. On 4th January 2013 a further letter was sent to the Appellant  by  the
    UK Border Agency confirming that the FLR(O) application  had  therefore
    been withdrawn and the documents submitted had  been  linked  with  the
    Tier 4 application.  Nothing further was said in that letter concerning
    her application or her passport.

16. On 7th January 2013 the Respondent issued a decision to refuse to  vary
    leave and made a decision to remove the Appellant under Section  47  of
    the 2006 Act.  The application was  refused  under  paragraph  245ZX(c)
    with reference to paragraph 116(e) of Appendix A and paragraph 245ZX(d)
    of the Immigration Rules.  The refusal noted that the Appellant had not
    provided a new CAS by 9th October 2012 and that she had not submitted a
    variation of her Tier 4 application to study with Onto Limited  by  the
    same date.  As she had not submitted a new application form as required
    nor a CAS as required, her application had been assessed on  the  basis
    of the documentation previously sent including the  original  CAS  from
    the Royal London College which was not listed as a Tier  4  Sponsor  at
    the date of decision.  Thus the application was refused.

17. The Appellant appealed that decision and on 15th April 2013 the  appeal
    came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Freestone) sitting at Taylor
    House.  The facts are not in dispute.  The history which I have set out
    earlier in this determination was accepted by the judge at paragraph 10
    of the determination.  The judge found the Appellant to be  a  credible
    witness and the evidence that she had given, which was contained  in  a
    statement  and  supported  by  documentary  evidence  in  a  bundle  of
    documents, was not challenged in cross-examination  by  the  Presenting
    Officer.

18. The First-tier Tribunal in a determination promulgated  on  30th  April
    2013 dismissed the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  human
    rights grounds.  The judge made the following findings:-

         "11. This Appellant has been caught  up  in  the  very  complicated
             Immigration Rules (the Rules)  relating  to  the  points-based
             system.  She  is  unrepresented  and  throughout  the  lengthy
             process thought that she was complying with  the  requirements
             of the Respondent in obtaining a new CAS.  Her  difficulty  is
             that she failed to complete a new application form as required
             by paragraph 34E of the Rules.  This requirement  was  pointed
             out to her in the  letters  from  the  Respondent  dated  27th
             February 2012 and 5th October  2012.   Her  difficulties  were
             compounded by the fact that she could never have complied with
             the requirements of the second letter because she received  it
             after the deadline stated in that letter.

         12.  In her Grounds of Appeal  the  Appellant  submitted  that  she
             should have been granted 'a short and reasonable extension' of
             the 60 day deadline so that she could take her  English  test.
             However I note that even after she received her passports from
             the Respondent on 12th October she was unable to book  a  test
             until the second week in January.  That would  have  meant  an
             extension for three months.  I do not find that it is a  short
             and reasonable extension particularly as  she  was  previously
             given 60 days.  In those circumstances, whilst I  accept  that
             the Respondent acted unreasonably by extending a deadline to a
             date that could never be met by the Appellant, even if she had
             been granted a short and reasonable extension  she  would  not
             have been able to comply."

    Thus the judge found as she had failed to complete the new  application
    form as required, although obtaining a valid CAS she could not  succeed
    in her appeal.  The judge also dealt with Article 8 at paragraphs 14 to
    18 but after considering the five-stage test in Razgar and the issue of
    the Appellant's private life, the judge found that the refusal  of  the
    application was not a disproportionate interference  with  her  private
    life and dismissed the appeal on human rights grounds also.

19. The Appellant sought permission to appeal the decision and on 13th  May
    2013  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Designated  Judge   Zucker)   granted
    permission for the following reasons:-

         "1.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Freestone dismissed the  Appellant's
             appeal against the decision of the Respondent  to  refuse  her
             application for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
             Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the points-based system
             and for a biometric residence permit.

         2.   The judge found the Appellant credible (see paragraph 10).

         3.   In essence what the Appellant contends is that the decision of
             the Respondent  was  unfair  and  that  the  judge  failed  to
             recognise that when dismissing the appeal.

         4.   It is arguable that the failure to return  to  the  Appellant,
             her passport, despite several letters from her,  so  that  she
             was frustrated in advancing her application, coupled with  the
             judge's finding that the  Respondent  had  acted  unreasonably
             (see paragraph 12) means that the judge should have considered
             whether the decision of the Respondent was otherwise  than  in
             accordance with the law because of 'unfairness'."

20. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  The Appellant appeared
    before the Tribunal unrepresented.  Prior to the hearing she had  filed
    and served a  bundle  upon  which  she  sought  to  rely.   The  bundle
    contained in the main the documents that had been before the First-tier
    Tribunal including her witness statement setting out the history of the
    proceedings  which  was  dated  5th  April  2013  and  a  copy  of  the
    correspondence between herself and the Respondent.

21.  In the grounds for permission the Appellant stated that the judge  was
    in  error  because  there  were  matters  that  were  not  taken   into
    consideration, namely, that the Appellant was not able to make a Tier 4
    application in the first place because the Respondent had only provided
    the original passport after seven months of  repeated  written  request
    for that passport so that she could take  the  required  English  test.
    She could only make the Tier 4 application after she passed the English
    test and could not do so by the deadline given by the Respondent on 9th
    October because she did not receive her passport until the  12th.   She
    further submitted that she could not have sat her English test  because
    the earliest time that she could obtain one  was  the  second  week  of
    January because of the heavy volume of test takers  and  the  Christmas
    break.  Before she could book the test, the Respondent on 28th December
    demanded that the passports were returned within  seven  working  days.
    Furthermore, the grounds submit that the judge failed to consider  that
    an application had been made to vary leave on 11th June 2012 using  the
    application FLR(O) after  the  Respondent  had  failed  to  respond  to
    repeated written requests for the return of the passport.  She had only
    withdrawn that application upon query of the  Respondent  as  to  which
    application she wished to pursue.  She chose  the  Tier  4  application
    because her main purpose was  to  obtain  the  UK  qualification.   She
    further submitted that it was the unfairness of the Respondent that led
    to the failure to make the Tier 4  application  and  the  circumstances
    were "beyond my control".  The Appellant  further  submitted  that  the
    Respondent had failed to apply its own published policy of  flexibility
    and provide "excellent customer care to points-based system  applicants
    given the potential of human error."  In that respect she  had  annexed
    to her bundle at pages 82  to  83  a  copy  of  a  letter  from  Jeremy
    Oppenheim dated 19th May 2011 in respect of the commencement of Section
    19 of the UK Borders Act.

22. In her oral submissions to the Tribunal, she  could  not  add  anything
    further to those written submissions but relied upon  them  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.  She reiterated  that  she  was  unable  to  obtain  an
    English test without her passport and that it had not been provided  to
    her until 12th October, days after the deadline had expired.   She  did
    not know the deadline expired because the letter was received by her on
    12th October.  She could not possibly book the  test  and  due  to  the
    delay, the period of time in which she could have booked it had already
    expired.

23. Mr Avery on behalf of the Respondent, submitted that in this  case  the
    Respondent had followed the policy in place namely when a  college  was
    suspended or taken off the register a period of 60 days is  allowed  to
    find an alternative course.  He submitted that it had been  regrettable
    that the Respondent had not returned the passport when  she  had  asked
    for it.  However she did not ask for the passport until very  close  to
    the expiry of the period.  In this case, the judge noted that she would
    not have been able to produce the  qualification  within  a  reasonable
    time because she could not get a test date until January.  He  conceded
    that the passport was not returned until 5th October  (it  having  been
    requested as long ago as April) but even if the Respondent had sent the
    passport when she had asked for it she had only got a few days when she
    could have made the application.  This is not a case when she had  been
    given a fresh 60 days from October and they had taken into account  the
    delay in the passport.  She should have asked  for  her  passport  back
    earlier.

24. As to the submission concerning  evidential  flexibility,  that  policy
    related  to  missing  documents  that  are  nothing  to  do  with  this
    particular appeal thus the  policy  did  not  apply,  the  decision  in
    Rodriguez (flexibility policy) [2013] UKUT 00042  (IAC)  therefore  did
    not apply.

25. I reserved my decision.

26. In this case the facts are not in dispute  as  set  out  early  in  the
    determination.  The history given of the application  and  the  ensuing
    correspondence was accepted by the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph  10
    of the  determination  in  which  the  judge  was  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant was a credible witness.  Her evidence was not  challenged  in
    cross-examination by the Presenting Officer.

27. The thrust of the submissions made on behalf of the Appellant relate to
    the decision making process in respect of the application that she made
    to vary her leave in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4  (General)  Student
    Migrant under the points-based system.  The  original  application  was
    made as long ago as 16th June 2011 and it appears that the licence  for
    the Royal London  College  was  revoked  at  least  on  or  before  9th
    September 2011 however, the Respondent informed the Appellant  of  that
    in February 2012  some  five  months  after  the  revocation  of  their
    licence.  The Appellant takes no  issue  with  the  way  in  which  the
    Respondent dealt with the revocation which was that they had  suspended
    her application for 60 calendar days but considers  that  the  decision
    making process thereafter and the  Respondent's  inaction  led  to  her
    application being refused unfairly and thus was "not in accordance with
    the law."

28. I have  considered  with  care  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I have set out earlier paragraphs 11 to 12 where the reasons
    were given for dismissing the appeal.  In  effect,  the  judge,  whilst
    recognising that the  Respondent  acted  unreasonably  by  extending  a
    deadline to a date that could never be met by the  Appellant,  even  if
    she had been granted a short time, she would  not  have  been  able  to
    comply because her evidence in the appeal was that she could not obtain
    a test until the second week in January.  As set out in  the  grant  of
    permission, the basis of the appeal was whether or not the judge should
    have considered whether the decision of the  Respondent  was  otherwise
    than in accordance with the law  because  of  "unfairness."   That  was
    based on the failure of the Respondent to return to the  Appellant  her
    passport, despite several letters from her, which resulted in her being
    frustrated in advancing the application.

29. The current appeal is based on an argument of fairness of the  UKBA  to
    act in accordance with established public law  principles.   They  have
    been summarised at paragraph 70 of the Court of Appeal judgment, R  (on
    the application of Q) v The SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ  364  which  dealt  in
    part with the place of fairness in the immigration system.

30. The Tribunal have considered the issue  of  procedural  fairness  in  a
    number of cases including  Naveed  (student  -  fairness  -  notice  of
    points) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 0014, Patel (revocation of sponsor licence
    - fairness) India [2011] UKUT 211 and Thakur (PBS decision - common law
    fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 154 (IAC).  The facts of  those  cases
    are dissimilar to the facts of this particular appeal but all the cases
    deal in general terms with the issue of  fairness.   The  Appellant  in
    Thakur was a case where the Tribunal proceeded on the  basis  that  the
    Appellant was unaware that the college had lost its  Sponsor's  licence
    and that he had had not adequate opportunity of finding an  alternative
    college.  In the case of Patel, unbeknown to the Appellant, the college
    was removed from the list of  approved  Sponsors  by  the  Home  Office
    during the time it was considering the application and the  removal  of
    the college from the list of Sponsors was taken at about the same  time
    as the decision to refuse  the  application,  therefore  there  was  no
    opportunity for the Appellant to be informed of the consequences on his
    application of the Respondent's action.  Nonetheless those  cases  deal
    in general terms with the issue of fairness.  The Tribunal in Patel  at
    paragraph 14 stated:-

         "We also note the decision of procedural  fairness  in  De  Smith's
         Judicial Review (Sixth Edition 2007) at paragraphs 7-003 to  7-009.
         We accept the author's proposition that the law has  advanced  from
         imposing  a  public  law  requirement  of  fairness  in  particular
         situations.  To the general  proposition  that  wherever  a  public
         function is being performed there is an inference that the function
         is required to be performed fairly; in the absence  of  an  express
         indication to the contrary."

31. The Tribunal in Patel at paragraph 28 also made it clear that:-

         "Where a judge finds that there is a duty to act  fairly  and  that
         has not been complied with in the particular circumstances  of  the
         case, he or she can allow the appeal on the basis that the decision
         is not in accordance with the law."

32. In the decision of Thakur the Tribunal took into account the concept of
    fairness taken from the decision of ex parte Doody.   At  paragraph  18
    the Tribunal stated:-

         "We  emphasise  the  guidance  given  by  Lord  Mustill  that   the
         principles of fairness are not to be applied by rote identically in
         every situation and that what fairness demands is dependent on  the
         context  of   the   decision   and   the   appellant's   particular
         circumstances."

33. There is no dispute that  the  Respondent  began  the  decision  making
    process in accordance with its own policy by providing the Appellant an
    opportunity before refusal of the application to vary that in the light
    of the revocation of the Sponsor licence.  The issue relates to whether
    the First-tier Tribunal took into account the decision  making  process
    as a whole in the context of any "unfairness".  There is  no  reference
    in the determination to the common law duty of  acting  fairly  in  the
    decision making process, or any reference to  the  cases  that  I  have
    cited earlier.  Whilst it is not necessarily an error of law not to set
    out those decisions, I do not consider that the judge  dealt  with  the
    principle of fairness sufficiently in  the  determination.   There  is,
    some consideration of the decision  making  process  at  paragraph  12.
    Indeed the judge  found  as  a  fact  that  the  Respondent  had  acted
    "unreasonably by extending a deadline to a date that could never be met
    by the Appellant."

34.   The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, was that  the  Appellant
    had asked for her passport on 23rd April 2012.  It is right  that  that
    was shortly before the expiry of the 60 day period.  Mr  Avery  submits
    that she should have applied for her passport earlier.   However,  that
    does not take into account the subsequent  actions  of  the  Respondent
    which was to keep  the  passport  despite  repeated  requests  for  the
    passport to be returned to her between April and October,  which  is  a
    considerable period of time.  There was evidence before the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the Appellant's priority during the period from  February
    until April was to find a course provider that could offer her a course
    and to accept her application.  It is reasonable to  assume  that  once
    she found a course that it would not take such a long period to  submit
    the form and obtain the necessary documentation.  However, it is  clear
    from the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that before she  could
    even register for the new English test,  which  was  a  requirement  to
    obtain the CAS and submit with the form, that she required her original
    passport.  It seems to me  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  that
    explanation concerning the delay between February 2012 and  23rd  April
    which was material.  The Appellant wrote to the UKBA  on  a  number  of
    occasions requesting her passport and making it clear that she would be
    unable to comply with their request in February unless she obtained her
    passport and set out very clearly the reasons why she could not  comply
    with  their  request.   Their  inaction  led  to  her   submitting   an
    application in June by way of a last resort in  a  further  attempt  to
    obtain her passport.  She did that for entirely credible reasons.   The
    only communication from the Respondent was in September to ask  whether
    or not she wished to proceed with the FLR(O) application or her Tier  4
    application.  There was no recognition  of  their  failure  to  act  by
    returning her passport to her which  was  the  reason  why  the  FLR(O)
    application had been made in the first place.  As the Appellant  stated
    before the First-tier Tribunal, the only reason why she  had  made  the
    application was to in effect, force some action from the Respondent  so
    that she could obtain her passport.  She did not wish to remain in  the
    UK unlawfully and could see no other way of obtaining her passport.

35. The passport was eventually enclosed  along  with  the  letter  of  5th
    October.  The Appellant  did  not  receive  that  passport  by  way  of
    recorded delivery until 12th October 2012.  The  deadline  for  her  to
    provide her documentation was given in that letter to be  9th  October,
    thus the deadline had been reached and  expired  before  she  had  even
    received notice of it.  The judge found that to be unreasonable  action
    on the part of the Respondent but failed to take into account the whole
    decision making process by placing weight on the fact that she was  not
    able to obtain a test until January, which was some  months  after  the
    return of her passport.

36. It seems to me, that the failure to consider the whole of the  decision
    making process and thus the issue of fairness is an error of law and  I
    have reached the conclusion  that  this  was  an  issue  that  required
    consideration before the Tribunal.  In those circumstances, I set aside
    the decision.

37. It was not necessary to hear any further evidence  as  the  Appellant's
    account was not in dispute before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  facts
    are set out clearly earlier in this determination.   I  have  therefore
    considered the whole of the decision making process in this appeal.  As
    I have set out earlier, there is no dispute that the  Respondent  began
    the decision making process in a fair manner by providing the Appellant
    with a 60 day period in which to make a variation  of  her  application
    originally made in June in view of the Sponsor's licence being revoked.
     It is entirely clear to me that the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was that her priority was to find a course provider who  could
    offer her course.  It is reasonable therefore to assume that  it  would
    not take a long period to submit the form and thus the delay that  took
    place between February and 23rd April was entirely  reasonable  in  the
    circumstances.  It was during that period of time that she was informed
    that before she could even register to take an English test, which  was
    required to comply with the matters set out in the letter of  February,
    she required her original passport.  The Appellant did all  she  could,
    in my judgment, to obtain that passport from  the  Respondent.   It  is
    entirely clear from the  correspondence  that  she  had  requested  her
    passport, setting out the reasons why she could  not  comply,  in  that
    correspondence.  The Respondent failed to  answer  that  correspondence
    within a reasonable time.  The Appellant, even took the opportunity  to
    make an application under the FLR(O) provisions as a second attempt  to
    obtain her passport.  Thus from April till October the  Respondent  did
    not comply with the request made by the Appellant in order for  her  to
    complete the process for which she had been given the 60 day extension.
     When the passport eventually was returned to her it came with a letter
    informing her that she had until 9th October to provide  the  variation
    application and the necessary documentation.

38.   It is common ground that by the time she received the letter on  12th
    October 2012, the deadline had expired.  It is clear from that  letter,
    that the Respondent accepted some responsibility  for  the  failure  of
    producing the passport to the Appellant when  she  had  asked  for  it.
    They recognised that she had been late in asking for her  passport  but
    that their inaction had led to a period where she could not obtain  her
    English test thus the period was extended.  In my judgment  it  appears
    to be a recognition that the Appellant had not been able to comply with
    the request in their letter of February because they had kept  hold  of
    her passport and that the application had been  frustrated  because  of
    that.  The difficulty is that by sending the passport after the  expiry
    of the deadline further frustrated her opportunity to obtain the  test.
    Whilst she had a date for January, which seems to be a long time  after
    5th October letter, that has to be seen in the light  of  the  time  of
    year.   Her  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  was  that  that   was   a
    particularly busy time due to the high volume of students requiring  an
    English test at the end of the year and due to  the  Christmas  period.
    That was a matter entirely outside her area of  control.  The  position
    may have been entirely different if she had been sent her the  passport
    when it had been requested; this would not have been  during  the  busy
    end of year /Christmas period which appears to have been the reason why
    she could not obtain a test during that time of the year when  she  did
    receive her passport , albeit after the deadline had  expired.  It  was
    further compounded by the request  by  the  Respondent  to  return  her
    passport on 28th December and thus she could not have obtained her test
    any earlier because her passport had been sent back to  the  Respondent
    as requested on 28th December.

39. Having considered the decision making  process  as  a  whole,  and  the
    recognition by the Respondent in their letter of 5th October  that  she
    could not have complied with the requirements because they had retained
    her passport, despite her requests, I find  that  her  application  had
    been frustrated.  By extending the deadline until 9th October, but  not
    making that clear to her until after  it  had  expired  frustrated  her
    application.  She could not comply with a deadline that  she  had  been
    unaware of.  She could not comply in any event until she  had  received
    her passport.  To enable her to register for the test she required  her
    passport and she had been asking for this since 23rd April.

40. It has been held by the Tribunal in Contractor (CAS -  Tier  4)  [2012]
    UKUT 00168 (IAC) at paragraph 13 that "fairness is always a  matter  of
    fact and degree, as demonstrated by Patel."  Whilst the  facts  of  the
    case are entirely different, I consider the Tribunal was right to  note
    as a matter of principle that when considering issues of fairness it is
    a matter of "fact and degree".  In this case I am  satisfied  that  the
    critical factor in this case was the frustration of her application  by
    the failure of the Respondent to  produce  her  passport  to  her  when
    requested or  in  good  time  so  that  she  could  comply  with  those
    requirements.  In those circumstances, I am satisfied that there was  a
    course of action that prevented the Appellant from drawing  information
    to the decision maker.  I  am  satisfied  that  having  considered  the
    documentation and the particular facts of this appeal, that  procedural
    unfairness has occurred during the decision making process on the  part
    of the Respondent.  In those circumstances, I allow the appeal  on  the
    basis that the decision is not in accordance with the  law.   Thus,  no
    lawful decision has been made on the application  and  the  application
    remains to be determined by the Respondent  or  the  relevant  officer.
    The Appellant shall be provided with her passport and should be given a
    reasonable period of time in  order  to  allow  the  Appellant  a  fair
    opportunity  to  provide  the  application  form  and   the   necessary
    documentation.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law; the  decision  is  set  aside.
The appeal is re-made as follows:

The appeal is allowed on the basis that the decision of the  Respondent  was
not in accordance with the law.






Signed                              Date: 27th June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

