
[pic]
IAC-HX-KM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/01941/2013
     IA/01942/2013
     IA/01944/2013
     IA/01945/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7 June 2013                                  |On 25 June 2013            |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                          ms elena aruquipa charca
                       master daniel huarachi aruquipa
                         mr ignacio morales huarachi
                        miss natalie abigail huarachi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr P Thomas
For the Respondent:    Ms M Tanner

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are all members of the same family and are  citizens  of
    Bolivia.  According to the Reasons for Refusal Letter dated  4  January
    2013 Owoyele Dada & Co applied on behalf of the third  named  appellant
    (with the other appellants named as his dependants) for leave to remain
    on human rights grounds.  The applications were refused by  a  decision
    dated 4 January 2013.  Decisions to remove all the appellants are dated
    the same date.  The appellants appealed the decisions and those appeals
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge A J M Baldwin who  dismissed  the
    appeals under the Immigration Rules and on human rights  grounds  in  a
    determination promulgated on 5 April 2013.

 2. The appellants sought permission to appeal the decisions to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Permission was granted.  The judge granting permission found
    it arguable that the FTT Judge erred in law in that he failed  to  make
    adequate findings as to where the best interests of  the  two  children
    involved  lay  and  to  treat  their  best  interests  as   a   primary
    consideration.  The grounds submitted that the  judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for finding that the best interests  of  the  children
    did not require that they stay in the UK or for finding that their best
    interests were overridden by other considerations.

The Skeleton Argument

 3. At the hearing before me I had all the documentation  that  was  before
    the FTT Judge.  In addition Mr Thomas, on  behalf  of  the  appellants,
    lodged a skeleton argument.  That document broadly followed the grounds
    that were advanced in support of the application seeking permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal. It refers to the  appellants'  background
    history.  It asserts that it is  a  matter  of  common  knowledge  that
    Bolivia is a less developed country than  the  UK  and  that  therefore
    economic conditions are worse including for children.  As the  evidence
    provided demonstrates Bolivian children face indigency,  poverty,  poor
    sanitation, malnutrition, high  mortality  (particularly  for  children
    under 5), difficulty accessing education, illegal labour, and  physical
    and sexual abuse.  The Judge refers to the  Country  Information  about
    Bolivia reciting that many of these problems remain for the time being,
    with child poverty being more severe in rural areas and a high level of
    child mortality, malnutrition and anaemia.

 4. However, I note that the  judge  stated  also  that  primary  education
    matriculation rose from c. 80% in the early 90s to 97% in  2001  though
    in rural areas water collection, required of children, can prevent them
    attending school, though this is free at primary level. 80  percent  of
    children receive physical punishments,  with  40  percent  of  teachers
    considering  it  necessary  and  effective.  Important  challenges   in
    relation to healthcare remain despite all the initiatives, and  in  the
    larger cities it is estimated that c. 4,000  children  and  adolescents
    live on the streets with all the attendant risks.

 5. In support of the argument that the FTT Judge erred in  law  more  than
    five pages of argument follow under two headings.  Firstly it is argued
    that the best interests of the children must be a primary consideration
    and the relevant test is whether those best interests are outweighed by
    other considerations.  It is asserted that the judge did not  establish
    what the best interests of the children are.  The judge while admitting
    that "it may be that" the children's  mother  "would  much  prefer  her
    children to enjoy everything the UK has to offer" states that "the test
    is whether it would be disproportionate and unreasonable to expect them
    to relocate in Bolivia".  It is said that the judge was not looking  at
    the children's best interests at that point.  The Judge refers  to  the
    test in VW (Uganda) v SSHD and AB (Somalia) v SSHD [2009]  EWCA  Civ  5
    which  "requires  more  than  mere  hardship,  mere  difficulty,   mere
    obstacles or matters of choice and inconvenience".  That is said to  be
    the wrong test.  It will usually be against the best interests  of  the
    children to endure hardship, difficulty,  obstacles  or  inconvenience,
    and in matters of choice the Tribunal should exercise anxious  scrutiny
    as to which choice is in the child's best interests, following which of
    course they need to be weighed against other factors.  That  error  has
    made a material difference to the outcome of the determination.

 6. The second ground asks the question as to whether it  is  in  the  best
    interests of the children to be removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  to
    Bolivia.  Quotations are then given from background evidence  regarding
    Bolivia and as far as the age of the children goes  while  their  youth
    may mean they could adapt to the harsh conditions in Bolivia that  also
    makes them more vulnerable to  those  conditions  than  older  children
    would be.  It is further argued that the  findings  and  the  objective
    evidence lead to only one rational conclusion and that is that it would
    be against the best interests  of  the  children  for  them  and  their
    parents to be removed to Bolivia.  It is said  that  this  is  strongly
    suggested by the IJ's observation that "it may  be  that  their  mother
    genuinely has very unpleasant memories of Bolivia and would much prefer
    her children to enjoy everything the UK  has  to  offer"  since  it  is
    likely that the mother's preference is aligned with her children's best
    interests.

 7. Reference is then made to EA (Article 8  -  best  interests  of  child)
    Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC) where it was found that "it is  in  the
    best interests of the child to live with  and  be  brought  up  by  his
    parents".  Although this is uncontroversial in the current  appeals  it
    is irrelevant.  Neither side has made any suggestion that  the  parents
    and children should be separated.  The issue is not the  disruption  of
    family life entailed by separation but whether the  best  interests  of
    the children are to live in the UK with their  parents  or  in  Bolivia
    with their parents.  A quotation is then taken from paragraph 6  of  EA
    (Nigeria) but in that case as is emphasised in  the  skeleton  argument
    "there is no evidence to suggest that the return of these  children  to
    Nigeria with their parents places them at any risk of harm or prejudice
    to their welfare".  As that passage makes clear EA  (Nigeria)  was  not
    decided on the basis of a comparison  of  conditions  for  children  in
    Nigeria with conditions for children in the  United  Kingdom.   In  the
    current appeal submissions were made at  considerable  length  both  on
    paper and orally as to conditions for children in Bolivia  as  compared
    with conditions for children in the United Kingdom and that  comparison
    was explicitly linked with the question of the best  interests  of  the
    children.  The current appeals can therefore be properly  distinguished
    from EA (Nigeria).

 8. It is further argued that if it is not in the children's best interests
    to be removed there are no  compelling  countervailing  factors  strong
    enough to override the best interests of the  children  in  this  case.
    The adult appellants have no criminal record and there is no suggestion
    that they are a danger to society.  It is accepted  that  they  have  a
    poor immigration history but this should not  be  counted  against  the
    children. A quotation is then taken from paragraph 44 of ZH (Tanzania),
    the last sentence of which states that it would be wrong  in  principle
    to devalue what was in  their,  (the  childrens'),  best  interests  by
    something for which they could in no way be held to be responsible.

 9. I heard submissions from both representatives.  I made a full  note  of
    them and have taken them into account in this decision.

My deliberations

10. I announced my decision at the conclusion of  the  proceedings  that  I
    found that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not err in such a way that
    the Tribunal should exercise its powers to remake  the  decision  in  a
    different way.

11. The determination of the FTT Judge sets out the immigration history  of
    the adults who both came to the United Kingdom as  visitors  separately
    in 2006 and 2007 each with six months' leave.  They admitted that  they
    had no intention to return  to  Bolivia  and  they  took  no  steps  to
    regularise their status until after Immigration Officers  visited  them
    in early 2011 and served notices of removal.  The judge  did  not  find
    plausible their claim that they knew no one who could advise them  what
    to do to regularise their  situation,  not  least  because  within  the
    respondent's bundle is to be found a  letter  from  The  Cardinal  Hume
    Centre which confirms that Mrs Charca was attending  that  centre  from
    September 2010 - and it is that Centre which represents the  appellants
    in this appeal.  The judge found clear that the adult appellants made a
    very deliberate decision to remain unlawfully and that  it  would  seem
    highly unlikely that the applications they  eventually  made  were  not
    triggered by the visit of the Immigration Officers.   The  judge  notes
    that there is no suggestion that either of the  adult  appellants  have
    any criminal convictions in this country and they appear  well  thought
    of by a number of people though whether  those  who  have  written  are
    aware that the adult appellants are  in  a  bigamous  marriage  remains
    unclear.

12. It is not in issue that the appellants could not meet the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules and that therefore this is a  pure  Article  8
    ECHR claim outside the Rules.  The FTT judge in paragraph 25 refers  to
    that "and the interface with Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
    Immigration Act 2009".  The judge also refers to the relevant case  law
    at paragraph 22 and even if he is criticised by the representative  for
    the appellants for applying the "reasonableness" test  in  VW  (Uganda)
    and AB (Somalia) the fact is that the  judge  clearly  directs  himself
    correctly. He reminds  himself  that  the  correct  starting  point  in
    considering the welfare and best interests of a young child is that  it
    is in the best interests for the child to live with and be  brought  up
    by his or her parents.  There is acknowledgement  that  the  children's
    removal with their parents would not involve any separation  of  family
    life (see 22(i)).   There is  reference  to  a  period  of  substantial
    residence in effect allowing roots to be put down, personal  identities
    developed, friendships formed and links made with the community outside
    the family unit.  There is recognition also that during a child's  very
    early years he or she will be primarily focused on self and the  caring
    parents or guardian.  Long residence once the child is likely  to  have
    formed ties outside the family is likely to have greater impact on  his
    or her wellbeing.

13. In paragraph 27 the judge makes specific reference to  the  welfare  of
    the children being a primary  consideration  but  recognises  that  the
    children are both under 5 years of age, are Bolivian and  have  Spanish
    speaking parents who are Bolivians who each  spent  over  30  years  of
    their life in Bolivia.  They all have relatives in Bolivia but none  in
    the United Kingdom, save for each  other.   The  judge  looked  at  the
    education of the older child but found that there is no suggestion that
    she is not fluent in her parent's first and  preferred  language,  that
    she is still very young and will only recently have  begun  to  develop
    any life beyond that with her parents and her brother  who  is  only  2
    years old.  Other aspects concerning the children,  their  parents  and
    their comparative situations in the UK and in Bolivia are  referred  to
    in paragraphs 27 and 28.

14. Paragraph 29 recognises that if the elder child were older,  and  there
    was evidence of substantial integration into UK society by all  members
    of the family, the outcome in  the  case  might  have  been  different.
    There  is  reference  to  it   being   neither   disproportionate   nor
    unreasonable to expect the family to relocate to Bolivia.

15.  Although Mr Thomas on behalf of the appellants seeks to say that there
    are no compelling countervailing factors strong enough to override  the
    best interests of the children in this case it  seems  to  me  that  he
    ignores both the (admitted) poor immigration history of the  appellants
    and that in considering the matter of proportionality  the  maintenance
    of an effective and firm immigration control is one of  the  legitimate
    aims of the respondent. It cannot therefore be  every  case  where  the
    best interests of the children "trump" that legitimate objective.

16. The judge has not ignored or failed to consider the background evidence
    in relation to Bolivia.  That  is  set  out  at  paragraph  15  of  the
    determination.  He notes that in 2010 Bolivia experienced unprecedented
    economic growth and had successfully avoided the most negative  effects
    of the global economic crisis.  The Government has made  major  efforts
    to  close  the  social  and  economic  gap  between  rural  and   urban
    populations, and UNICEF has  been  cooperating  with  the  Government's
    initiatives to improve  health,  nutrition,  education  protection  and
    access to sanitary services and clean water for  children,  adolescents
    and women.  The judge goes on to say that many of these problems remain
    and he refers to child poverty being more severe in  rural  areas  etc.
    The judge notes in paragraph 27 that the adult  appellants  have  spent
    most of their lives in Bolivia where each of them worked.  Paragraph 13
    refers to Mr Huarachi  working  as  a  chauffeur  in  Bolivia.   It  is
    implicit, if not expressed specifically, that this family  through  its
    past  history  and  connections  in  Bolivia,  and  in  particular  the
    children, would not suffer in the way that many  children  do  in  that
    country who are from less advantaged backgrounds.

17. Whereas there are some criticisms of the determination that  are  valid
    overall  this  is  a  safe,  thoughtful  and  thorough  decision.   The
    accusation that  if  the  FTT  Judge  had  applied  the  correct  (best
    interests)  test  the  conclusion  he  came  to  was  "irrational"   is
    completely unjustified in all the circumstances.





Decision

18. For the above reasons the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  is
    upheld, namely that these appeals are dismissed on all grounds.

19. An anonymity direction has not been made previously and  there  was  no
    argument before  me  that  one  should  be  made.   In  the  particular
    circumstances of the appeal I can see no need for one.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

