
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/01515/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 August 2014                             |On 28 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS

                                   Between

                       miss hetalben harshadbhai patel

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Layne, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, Miss Hetalben Harshadbhai Patel, is a citizen of  India.



2.   On 4 September 2009 the Appellant was granted leave to enter the UK  as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student until 30 July 2011.  Her leave was  extended
    on 27 May 2011 until 27 July 2014.

3.   On 16 July 2013 the Respondent sent the Appellant a  letter,  addressed
    to her at the address which she had notified and where she was  living.
    It stated that the licence of Hendon Business  School,  in  respect  of
    which she had submitted a Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies  (CAS)
    for a Diploma in Management, had been revoked; her CAS was therefore no
    longer valid; and her application would be suspended  for  60  days  to
    enable her to submit a fresh application or  to  leave  the  UK.   Both
    representatives submit that this letter curtailed her leave  to  remain
    in the UK.  It does not however say  this.   The  letter  was  sent  by
    recorded delivery.  The Track and Trace system of Royal Mail  shows  it
    to have been signed for "S.H.P.0940.Santa."

4.   The evidence of the Appellant before the judge was  that  she  did  not
    receive this letter; there  was  nobody  called  Santa  living  at  the
    property where she lived; and three other people lived there, and  each
    said that they had not received or signed for the letter.

5.   On 9 December 2013 the Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application
    for leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant and
    made a decision to remove her from the UK under Section 47 of the  2006
    Act.  The decision was on the basis that Hendon Business School was not
    listed as a Tier 4 Sponsor on either 16 July or 9  December  2013;  the
    Appellant had not submitted a new CAS within the 60  day  period  which
    had been allowed to her on 16 July 2013; and she  could  therefore  not
    show either a CAS or adequate maintenance (funds).

6.   The Appellant's ensuing appeal was  heard  by  Judge  Adio  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on 8 May 2014.  The  Appellant  appeared  in  person;  the
    Respondent was represented.  In a determination promulgated on  27  May
    2014 the judge dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and  on
    human rights grounds.

7.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal,  which  was  granted  on  24
    June 2014 by Judge Colyer, as subsequently supplemented  by  procedural
    directions, in the following terms:

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal against a decision of
             the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Adio) who, in  a  determination
             promulgated on 27th May 2014 dismissed the Appellant's  appeal
             against the Respondent's decision to curtail  the  Appellant's
             leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  4  (General)
             Student under the immigration rules and to remove her  by  way
             of directions under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and
             Nationality Act 2006.


         2.   The Appellant's Grounds and reasons for permission  to  Appeal
             to the upper tribunal in summary were that:


             a.   The judge has materially erred in law by finding that the
                  Appellant had received the curtailment letter (whereas  it
                  is submitted that the recorded delivery signature  "Santa"
                  did  not  match  anyone  who  lived  at  the   Appellant's
                  address).


             b.   The Secretary of State has  to  be  able  to  prove  that
                  notice of such a decision was communicated to  the  person
                  concerned in order to  be  effective.   The  Secretary  of
                  State cannot rely upon deemed postal service.


             c.   The judge erred by finding  that  the  Appellant  already
                  mentioned that since September/October 2013  A  has  tried
                  her best to get admission from  other  colleges  but  they
                  confirmed that without the curtailment  letter  they  were
                  unable to issue a new CAS.  When she  requested  from  the
                  Home Office they informed her to wait  for  letters  which
                  they never do till refusal.


         3.   Permission to appeal can only be granted  if  I  am  satisfied
             that there was a material error of law that would have made  a
             material difference to the outcome  of  the  original  appeal.
             This could be due to adverse or irrational findings or a  lack
             of findings on core issues as established in  the  case  of  R
             (Iran etc) v SSHD [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982.   I  have  read  the
             determination carefully to see  if  it  contains  any  obvious
             errors of law.


         4.   When considering the determination it  is  arguable  that  the
             judge has made a material error of law in the determination in
             respect in finding that the Appellant's leave  to  remain  had
             been validly terminated by the service by recorded delivery on
             "SANTA" which the  Appellant  stated  she  had  not  received.
             Therefore if the Appellant's leave had not been terminated  by
             proper notice the decision  to  remove  her  from  the  United
             Kingdom would be unlawful."

8.   The Appellant attended the error of law hearing before me,  which  took
    the form of submissions, which I have taken into account, together with
    the permission application.  I reserved my determination.

Determination

9.   The facts of the matter are not in dispute.  The issue is whether as  a
    matter of law the Appellant is to be treated  as  having  received  the
    Respondent's letter of 16 July 2013 giving her 60 days  to  attempt  to
    find a new college and a new CAS and purportedly curtailing her leave.

10.  In Syed (curtailment of leave - notice) [2013]  UKUT  00144  (IAC)  the
    appellant was twice served  by  recorded  delivery  with  a  notice  of
    curtailment of leave, and the notices were twice returned.   The  issue
    was whether he was to be deemed to have been served.  The head note  to
    the case reads:

         "1.  The Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003 do not apply  to  a
             decision under the Immigration  Act  1971,  which  is  not  an
             immigration decision within the meaning of section 82  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


         2.   There is no statutory instrument under the  1971  Act  dealing
             with the means of giving notice for the  purposes  of  section
             4(1) of a decision under that Act, which is not an immigration
             decision.


         3.   Accordingly, the Secretary of State has to be  able  to  prove
             that notice of such a decision was communicated to the  person
             concerned, in order for it  to  be  effective.   Communication
             will be effective if made to a person authorised to receive it
             on that person's behalf: see Hosier v  Goodall  [1962]  1  All
             E.R. 30; but the Secretary of State cannot  rely  upon  deemed
             postal service."

11.  At paragraph 28 Upper Tribunal Judge Spencer stated:

         "In the absence of an order  made  by  statutory  instrument  under
         section 4(1) of the Immigration Act 1971 dealing with the giving of
         notice of variation of leave where there is no right of appeal, the
         Secretary of State has to  be  able  to  prove  that  notice  of  a
         decision varying leave to  remain  under  section  3(3)(a)  of  the
         Immigration Act  1971  where  there  is  no  right  of  appeal  was
         communicated to the person concerned for it to be effective.  Where
         there  is  no  'immigration  decision'  the  Immigration  (Notices)
         Regulations 2003 do not apply.  Communication would be effective if
         made to a person authorised to receive it on that person's  behalf,
         see Hosier v Goodall [1962] 1 All E.R. 30,  but  the  Secretary  of
         State cannot rely upon deemed postal service."

12.  Hosier v Goodall [1962]  1  All  E.R.  30,  relating  to  a  notice  of
    prosecution, held at page 32 C/D:

         "I am quite satisfied that ever since Ex p. Rossi (5), the question
         of reasonableness does not enter into the matter at all.  It is not
         a question whether the police were reasonable in sending the notice
         to this, that or the other address, but whether it has  been  shown
         that a notice wherever sent has been received.  In other words,  if
         the police choose to  send  the  notice  to  the  defendant's  home
         address they take the risk that there is no  one  there,  that  the
         letter is returned, or that if there is  somebody  there  it  is  a
         person who has no authority to receive it.  They take the  risk  of
         matters of that sort, but if they do send,  whether  reasonably  or
         unreasonably, a notice to the home address and it is taken in by  a
         person authorised not merely to sign for it, but to receive it  and
         deal with it, it has in fact been received by the defendant."

13.  In Hosier v Goodall the notice of intended prosecution was received  by
    the defendant's wife, who did not show it to him in hospital.   It  was
    held that because she was to  be  taken  to  have  been  authorised  to
    receive and deal with it, he should be treated as having  received  it.
    In the present case the evidence is  that,  although  the  Respondent's
    letter was received and signed for by  "Santa",  that  person  was  not
    authorised to receive and deal with it on behalf of the Appellant.

14.  There is inevitable harshness for the Respondent if a notice which  was
    given and signed for is not treated as  having  been  received  by  the
    Appellant, and for the Appellant if she is  to  be  treated  as  having
    received an important  notice  which,  according  to  her  unchallenged
    evidence, she did not.  Syed determines the issue in  her  favour.   In
    finding at paragraph 9 that the Appellant is to be  treated  as  having
    received the letter affording her this 60 day  opportunity,  the  judge
    fell into legal error.  His determination must be set aside.

15.  Mr Layne invited me to allow the appeal.   Mr  Wilding  submitted  that
    the issue of service would determine the  appeal.   It  does,  but  the
    issue is with what consequence.  The Refusal Letter of 9 December  2013
    is based upon the Appellant not having taken the opportunity to  submit
    a new CAS within 60 days.  The Appellant did  not  know  that  she  was
    entitled to  do  so.   Indeed,  according  to  her  statement  she  was
    disappointed not to have been given any opportunity to submit a new CAS
    and pursued the Home Office in October 2013 for a response.   The  only
    just and appropriate outcome is for her now to be afforded that 60  day
    opportunity.

26.  The appeal is accordingly allowed to the extent that,  within  60  days
    of the date of deemed receipt of this determination, the  Appellant  is
    entitled to submit a new application accompanied by  a  new  CAS.   The
    Respondent is to make a decision in the light of  whether  or  not  she
    does so.

Decision

27.  The original determination contained an error of law and is set aside.

28.  The appeal is allowed with the consequences set  out  in  paragraph  26
    above.

Signed
    Dated: 27 August 2014



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

