

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01518/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 5 June 2013                                |On 10 June 2013              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                               Joseph Thompson
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J. Heybroek, Counsel instructed by Geeta Patel &
                  Co., Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen of  Ghana  born  on  5  August  1959  who
       appeals against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Elson
       MBE promulgated on 11 April 2013 dismissing his appeal  against  the
       decision of the Secretary of State made on 3 January 2013 to  refuse
       him with a residence card as confirmation of a  right  of  residence
       under European Community law as the family member of a Union citizen
       exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.


    2. The refusal was made on the basis that the respondent did not accept
       the appellant had entered into a valid marriage with Ms  Acheampong,
       an Italian citizen of Ghanaian extraction.


    3. The objections taken to the  validity  of  the  marriage  originally
       relied upon the fact that it was not registered under Ghanaian  law,
       relying on a provision that a marriage celebrated on 14 August  2010
       had to be registered within three months of the date of the marriage
       and this was not registered until February  2012.  It  goes  without
       saying that if the Ghanaian authorities were  prepared  to  register
       the marriage in February 2012, Ghanaian  law  did  not  contain  the
       restriction relied upon by the respondent. Indeed, I was referred to
       the relevant provisions and they had indeed been  amended.  Further,
       the appellant produced evidence  from  an  attorney  which  was  not
       challenged, nor was it suggested that it was  inaccurate,  that  the
       limitation did not apply. Accordingly, this objection fell away.

    4. In addition, the respondent relied upon a  number  of  discrepancies
       which is said emerged from the interviews conducted separately  with
       the appellant and Ms Acheampong.   The  interview  consisted  of  68
       pages of text and about 110 questions. In the course of argument  at
       the hearing I considered the first 30 of those  questions  and  drew
       attention to the parties such inferences as I felt were  capable  of
       being drawn from the answers provided. There is a recording of  what
       was said at the hearing to which reference may be  made.  The  first
       five questions set the scene, and the answers  were  consistent  but
       nothing turns on the answers. The next set of  questions  deal  with
       the journey made by the couple  to  their  interview  in  Liverpool.
       There can be no doubt that the answers  meticulously  given  by  the
       parties demonstrate that they travelled together. This may be only a
       small fragment of the evidence but if it is to be alleged that  this
       is a sham marriage, it plainly establishes that they travelled  from
       the same point. It may not establish they are living together but if
       they were not, they either share a home  or  a  departure  point  so
       close together that the journeys are identical.


    5. The couple next provided answers about when  they  first  met.  This
       occurred on 31 December 2009 at a party at  a  friend's  house  that
       they were both able to identify. They both gave addresses  at  which
       they were living at the time and  identified  the  different  places
       where their spouse  was  then  living.  They  provided  an  entirely
       consistent account of who approached whom, what was said,  who  gave
       the phone number, who did not, culminating in the appellant  calling
       Ms Acheampong two days later.

    6. The next part of the interview spoke of Ms Acheampong travelling  to
       Italy between January and April 2010. At first,  the  appellant  was
       not able to state the  date  when  Ms  Acheampong  left  the  United
       Kingdom [22] and then later in the interview  he  correctly  recalls
       that it was in January 2010  [29].  It  is  true  that  there  is  a
       discrepancy in their evidence. The appellant  said  that  they  only
       spoke on the phone before she went to Italy, whereas  Ms  Acheampong
       says they met in her home in January 2010. The  appellant  puts  the
       first visit to her home at some point  after  her  return  in  April
       2010.

    7. The interview goes on to deal with two visits the appellant made  to
       Italy in January 2010 and in July 2012 of which both gave consistent
       evidence.  Both speak of a proxy marriage in Ghana. Both referred to
       their beginning to live  together  only  after  the  marriage.  Both
       specify that date as being 4 September 2010. Although the  appellant
       originally only referred to 2 trips to Italy, he later spoke  of  Ms
       Acheampong's visit  to  Ghana  in  circumstances  where  no  adverse
       credibility finding can properly be made  of  not  referring  to  it
       earlier. Both are able to speak of the date when Ms Acheampong  left
       for Ghana and  the  day  on  which  she  returned.   There  is  some
       confusion as to the process by which her visa to travel to Ghana was
       obtained.  She  said  that  the  visa  was  issued  by  the  Italian
       authorities  but  this  cannot  be  correct  (it  is  the   Ghanaian
       authorities who issue visas to permit entry to  Ghana)  although  it
       was, of course, put into her Italian passport. On  the  other  hand,
       although he did not  go  to  the  Ghanaian  embassy,  the  appellant
       understood that Ms Acheampong obtained it from the Ghanaian embassy,
       as one would expect, although he identifies it  as  the  embassy  in
       Britain.  (There is no dispute that a visa was obtained and put into
       Ms Acheampong's Italian passport.)


    8. The couple then provided entirely consistent evidence  as  to  their
       current address, the day  when  the  tenancy  commenced,  who  lives
       there, who was the letting agency.

    9. Evidence was provided by each as to the  dates  when  each  of  them
       entered the United Kingdom. It is telling that the appellant  stated
       he came in 2008 on a visit visa and then immediately  conceded  that
       he entered clandestinely. In answer to question 35, he said


             "I came in 2008 on a visit visa, no I entered clandestine."


   10. If this was a lie, he quickly recovered from  it  and  in  the  same
       breath.


   11. By this stage the couple had only answered approximately  one  third
       of the questions that were asked of them. Throughout  the  remainder
       of the interview the answers that each provided were almost entirely
       consistent with the other. It is true, as one  might  expect,  there
       were some inconsistencies. For example, the appellant, who  did  not
       attend the proxy marriage in Ghana, understood from his mother  that
       his father was unwell and  did  not  attend  whereas  Ms  Acheampong
       stated that he was well enough to do so.


   12. The answers that were  provided  result  in  the  almost  inevitable
       inference that the couple have known each other since about  January
       2010 and are now living with each other.  The  alternative  scenario
       is that the couple are strangers to each other who have  devised  an
       account of what they have been doing over the  last  5  years  which
       they have managed to learn with such accuracy that they can  provide
       a consistent account with only minor inaccuracies.  It must be noted
       that neither the appellant nor Ms Acheampong knew the questions they
       were to be asked.

   13. I turn  to  the  Judge's  reasons  for  dismissing  the  appeal.  In
       paragraph 70 of her determination, it is said that in the  appellant
       produced no evidence that Ms Acheampong was divorced from her  first
       husband. The divorce had taken place in Italy. Her  second  marriage
       had taken place  in  Italy.  She  did  indeed  produce  satisfactory
       evidence in relation to the dissolution of her second  marriage.  In
       my judgment, that was all that was necessary. It was for the Italian
       authorities to satisfy themselves that the first marriage  had  been
       terminated sufficiently for Ms Acheampong to marry again  in  Italy.
       The fact of re-marriage is itself evidence of a prior divorce.   She
       had never been asked to produce the original divorce certificate for
       the first marriage which was celebrated in Ghana (but  she  has  now
       produced evidence of the divorce  being  registered  in  Ghana)  and
       indeed this matter had not been raised  by  the  respondent.  It  is
       apparent from paragraph 70 that the Judge relied upon the fact that,
       in the customary marriage which is the subject of  this  appeal,  Ms
       Acheampong is described in the marriage certificate as single rather
       than as divorced.

   14. It appears that this was a principal reason used by  the  Judge  for
       rejecting the appellant's claim that any marriage took place at all,
       although whether the  mis-description  of  a  party's  status  in  a
       marriage certificate invalidates the marriage  or  establishes  that
       the certificate is a forgery is left  open.  In  relying  upon  this
       point to the exclusion of all the other  evidence,  I  am  satisfied
       that the Judge materially erred. There was  ample  evidence  that  a
       marriage took place which the Judge does not put into the balance in
       reaching a conclusion. First, there is a document  under  seal  from
       the Second Deputy Judicial Secretary of the Judicial Service of  the
       Republic of Ghana in which he certifies  that  a  certain  Alexander
       Kofi Baah is a notary public of Ghana and that the  stamp  signature
       and seal on a statutory  declaration  which  he  has  notarised  are
       indeed those of Mr Baah.

   15. The document referred to is a statutory declaration from two  people
       who appeared before him and declared that they were the  fathers  of
       the appellant and Ms Acheampong and that they attended a marriage on
       14 August 2010.  The names of the mothers of the married couple  are
       provided which,  as  it  happens,  are  consistent  with  the  names
       provided in the answers both gave an interview.

   16. The statutory declaration is supported by marriage certificate  duly
       stamped in relation to which no objection has been made  as  to  its
       form or content.

   17. On the material before her, it was not open to  the  Judge  to  find
       that the document from the Judicial Service was a forgery unless and
       until, at least, the allegation was  put  to  the  appellant  or  Ms
       Acheampong and there were reasons to support that finding.  If  that
       document is correct then it establishes on balance of  probabilities
       that two people attended before a genuine notary public in Ghana and
       attested to him about  the  celebration  of  a  customary  marriage.
       Whilst, of course, it is possible for the appellant or Ms Acheampong
       to have employed actors to impersonate their respective  fathers  or
       to engage their fathers in a scam and to appear before the Notary in
       the  creation  of  this  document,  it  does  not  strike  me  as  a
       permissible  finding  to  make  unless  there  are  cogent   adverse
       credibility findings which support  it.   If  the  Judicial  Service
       document is valid  than  the  statutory  declaration  evidences  two
       people attending a Notary's office.  It is not just a document  that
       it a falsity; it is an event.
   18. Hence, whilst the Judge relies upon the description in the  marriage
       certificate that Ms Acheampong is single (in fact, the word used  is
       'spinster'), the Judge makes  no  reference  to  any  of  the  other
       material which evidences a ceremony  of  marriage  taking  place  in
       Ghana. It was open to the Judge to comment upon  the  fact  that  Ms
       Acheampong  described  herself  as  a  spinster  in   the   marriage
       certificate and that  there  were  no  photographs  of  the  wedding
       ceremony but this could only be done in the  context  of  evaluating
       the evidence as a whole and, indeed, in light of the challenges that
       were made by the respondent.


   19. In paragraph 71 of the determination, the Judge relies upon the fact
       that the appellant did not initially tell the truth  as  to  how  he
       gained entry to the United Kingdom, first claiming that  he  entered
       with a visa and later claiming to have entered illegally but,  as  I
       have pointed out above this was done in the same sentence. The Judge
       then questioned why the appellant needed to use an agent to come  to
       the United Kingdom when he could have done so by simply purchasing a
       ticket. The reason is surely that he  used  an  agent  in  order  to
       affect his illegal entry - which he admitted. The  circumstances  in
       which the appellant entered the United Kingdom  do  not  go  to  his
       credit and I do not in any way suggest that what he did  was  lawful
       or morally acceptable but his past immigration history has no direct
       bearing on whether he is married  to  a  woman  with  whom,  on  the
       evidence, he is currently living.

   20. In dealing with the interview, the Judge placed little weight on its
       contents. She said:
             "I have taken into account the discrepancies  in  the  answers
             given by the appellant and Ms Acheampong and the fact  that  a
             number of their responses appear to  have  been  rehearsed  as
             being adverse to their credibility."


   21. For the reasons that I stated, it is perfectly proper to  take  into
       account the discrepancies in an interview but in this appeal it  was
       only the discrepancies that had been relied on, not the bulk of  the
       material from which positive credibility  findings  might  be  drawn
       and, indeed, have to be drawn. Nor, in my judgment, is  it  fair  to
       say, without identifying them, that a number of responses appear  to
       have been rehearsed. If the purpose of an interview  is  to  form  a
       judgment about the overall truth of the account,  it  is  of  little
       assistance if only the discrepancies are taken into account ("I have
       therefore  taken  into  account  the  discrepancies")   whilst   the
       consistencies are rejected as being  rehearsed.  Can  it  really  be
       suggested that  the  detailed  and  consistent  evidence  about  the
       journey to Liverpool  was  as  a  result  of  a  well-rehearsed  but
       fabricated journey? If not, does this not assist the  decision-maker
       in reaching the conclusion (along with the other evidence) that  the
       couple are currently living together? If they are, how long has this
       been happening? If it has been happening since at least  2010,  does
       this not assist in shedding light on whether they  entered  a  valid
       marriage in Ghana?


   22. I entirely agree with the Judge that Ms Acheampong  secured  payment
       of council tax at a reduced rate as a sole occupant and that this is
       adverse to her credibility but it is only adverse to her credibility
       if she and the appellant are living together. Whilst the Judge takes
       full account of the lie, she fails to take into account what the lie
       establishes, namely, that the parties are living together (which she
       later rejects). That is just as much a material piece of evidence as
       the lie. Once again, I do not in any way approve of  the  misconduct
       of Ms Acheampong but a sense of  moral  revulsion  about  misconduct
       should not act as a bar to sustainable fact-finding.

   23. For these reasons, I do not regard the Judge's  wholesale  rejection
       of the entirety of the appellant's account (which must include their
       claim to  have  been  living  together  for  some  years)  as  being
       sustainable.

   24. There was one essential element in this appeal and that  related  to
       whether a ceremony of marriage took place in Ghana.  The  objections
       to the legality of the marriage by reason of non-compliance with the
       formal requirements for a proxy marriage have now fallen  away.  The
       reasons for rejecting the occurrence of  that  event  found  in  the
       determination are not sustainable. I am satisfied on  the  basis  of
       the consistent answers given in interview that the couple have known
       each other since at least the beginning of 2010 and commenced living
       with each other  from  4  September  2010.  That  event  immediately
       followed Ms Acheampong's departure from  the  United  Kingdom  on  4
       August 2010 on a flight to Ghana which she left on 1 September  2010
       arriving in United Kingdom on 2 September 2010. The couple have been
       living together since. They  travelled  to  Liverpool  together  for
       their  interview,  both  attended  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal and both attended the hearing before  me.  I  am  satisfied
       that no lawful objection can be  taken  to  the  material  from  the
       Judicial  Service  in  Ghana  to  the  effect  that  the   statutory
       declaration was properly notarised. This  evidences  the  fact  that
       appellant and Ms  Acheampong's  fathers  attended  before  a  notary
       public to make a statutory declaration in  relation  to  a  marriage
       ceremony which took place on 14 August 2010. There  is  no  adequate
       material before me upon which I can dismiss  this  material  or  the
       extract  from  the  register  evidencing  a  marriage  between   the
       appellant and Ms Acheampong on 14 August 2010.  In particular, I  am
       not prepared to find that the description of Ms  Acheampong  in  the
       certificate as a spinster or the absence of photographs  establishes
       that the certificate is a  forgery  or  that  no  weight  should  be
       attached to it or that a ceremony of marriage did not take place.


   25. Mr Walker agreed that the Judge's approach to her findings  of  fact
       was flawed and that the evidence  suggests  a  valid  marriage  took
       place.

DECISION

         The Judge made an error on  a  point  of  law  and  I  re-make  the
         decision in the following terms:


         The appeal is allowed  under  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006 (2006 No 1003), the appellant being entitled
         to receive such documentation as evidences his being married  to  a
         Union citizen exercising Treaty rights.







                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                 5 June 2013






