
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01774/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6 August 2014                                |On 26 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                      mrs Christelle Deudjui Djeukeussi
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the decision  by  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to issue her  with  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of her right to reside in the United Kingdom as the spouse
    of an EEA national  exercising  treaty  rights  here.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity order, and I do  not  consider  that
    such an order is warranted for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Cameroon, whose date of birth was 5 June
    1986. On 12 December 2013 the Secretary of State gave detailed  reasons
    (running to eleven pages) for refusing her application for a  residence
    card made on 4 February 2013.

 3. Firstly, an applicant must provide sufficient evidence  to  demonstrate
    their EEA family member is  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom as defined in  Regulation  6  of  the  Regulations  2006.   The
    Secretary  of  State  had  undertaken  various  checks  to  verify  her
    sponsor's claimed employment,  but  had  been  unable  to  confirm  his
    employment on the evidence provided.

 4. Secondly, it was her responsibility to submit  documents  demonstrating
    that she was the family member of an EEA national as claimed.  She said
    that she was a direct family member of her sponsor under Regulation  7,
    as a consequence of having contracted a  marriage  to  the  sponsor  in
    Ghana.  As evidence of her marriage to an EEA national, she submitted a
    Ghanaian customary  marriage  certificate,  but  stated  that  she  was
    married to her EEA national spouse in  Ghana  on  9  November  2012  by
    proxy, and that the marriage was registered with the district registrar
    on 26 November 2012.  She had not shown that  her  marriage  had  been
    registered in accordance with Section 31 or 32 of  the  PNDC  law  112,
    Customary  Marriage  and  Divorce  (Registration)  Law,  1995,  Part  1
    Registration of Customary Marriages.  The statutory declaration  relied
    on did not comply with various requirements of Section 3, and therefore
    the  marriage  certificate  was  not  valid.   A   customary   marriage
    certificate without a valid statutory declaration was not  recognisable
    proof that a legally accepted proxy marriage occurred in Ghana.

 5. The Ghana COI Report of 11 May 2012 illustrated problems that  occurred
    with forged and fraudulently obtained official documents.  She had  not
    provided birth  certificates  which  satisfactorily  demonstrated  that
    either she or her husband was of Ghanaian descent.  The first scheduled
    customary  marriage  certificate  that  had  been  submitted  with  the
    application contained a field  entitled  "signature  or  thumbprint  of
    husband" and a field entitled "signature or thumbprint of wife".   Upon
    careful examination of those fields, the signature in the husband field
    did not match that on her husband's passport.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant asked for her appeal to be determined on the papers,  and
    it came before Judge Cresswell sitting at Newport on 7 May  2014  as  a
    paper  appeal.   The  judge  had  before  him  the  contents   of   the
    respondent's bundle  and  a  small  bundle  filed  by  the  appellant's
    solicitors.  This consisted of a witness statement from  the  appellant
    and some documents.  In her witness statement she said she  had  chosen
    to have her appeal determined on the papers due to the  costs  involved
    in opting for an oral hearing and in instructing Counsel to attend  the
    hearing.  Her husband's parents were Ghanaians by birth.  There  was  a
    letter of attestation from the Ghana High Commission attesting  to  the
    authenticity of all the documents that had come from  Ghana,  including
    the marriage certificate and the statutory declaration.

 7. In his subsequent determination, he directed himself  at  paragraph  10
    that the appellant had a right of appeal in accordance with  Regulation
    6 of the 2006 Regulations only if she produced an EEA family permit  or
    other proof that she was related as claimed to the  EEA  national.   At
    paragraph 12, he set out the guidance given by the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 0024 (IAC).

 8. The judge set  out  his  findings  in  sub-paragraphs  (i)  to  (x)  of
    paragraph 15.  The appellant had provided no evidence  to  support  the
    claim that her EEA Belgian national sponsor was  the  son  of  Ghanaian
    parents.  The  appellant  had  not  shown  that  her  EEA  sponsor  was
    genuinely in employment or in some other way a  qualified  person.   He
    could place no weight upon the marriage documents for reasons which  he
    would go on to explain, citing Tanveer Ahmed.   The  signature  of  the
    husband on the Ghanaian marriage certificate differed from that in  his
    passport.  There was no evidence to  show  that  the  sponsors  of  the
    marriage were related to or even known to the  appellant  and  the  EEA
    sponsor.  The appellant had submitted a letter from a person at Ghana's
    judicial service which had a security feature (a hologram)  in  a  poor
    state, which appeared to be a sticker of the sort which a  child  could
    scratch onto paper and not to  form  an  integral  part  of  the  paper
    itself.

 9. To sum up, the judge said at sub-paragraph (viii),  the  appellant  had
    not shown that she was married at all to the EEA citizen, had not shown
    she followed the necessary steps for a  lawful  customary  marriage  in
    Ghana and had not shown that the judge could rely upon the registration
    certificate.

10. In sub-paragraph (ix) the judge cited the  following  proposition  from
    Kareem:

         "It should be assumed that, without independent  reliable  evidence
         about the recognition of the marriage under the  laws  of  the  EEA
         country and/or the country  where  the  marriage  took  place,  the
         Tribunal is likely to be unable to find  that  sufficient  evidence
         has  been  provided  to  discharge  the  burden  of  proof.    Mere
         production of legal materials from the EEA country or country where
         the marriage took place will be insufficient evidence because  this
         will rarely show how such law is understood  or  applied  in  those
         countries.  Mere assertions as to the effect of such laws will, for
         similar reasons, carry no weight."

11. The judge continued:

         "Here, I have detailed  the  difficulties  upon  the  face  of  the
         documents submitted and the other evidential difficulties and  have
         been asked to paw over legal materials  in  a  paper  determination
         when the appellant could have been in no  doubt  from  the  refusal
         letter that independent reliable evidence was required.  The appeal
         bundle makes no reference at all to Kareem."

12. The judge went on to hold in paragraph 15(x) and in paragraph  16  that
    as the appellant had failed to show that she was a family member of  or
    related to an EEA spouse, she had no right of appeal in accordance with
    Regulation 2006.   He  summarised  his  decision  at  paragraph  17  as
    follows:

         "There is no right of appeal by reason of the  appellant's  failure
         to produce proof  that  she  is  related  as  claimed  to  the  EEA
         national."

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

13. On 23 June 2014 Judge  Osborne  granted  the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal on the sole ground that the judge had erred in finding that  the
    appellant did not have a right of appeal:

         "The  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   made   findings   within   the
         determination which, if sustainable, would  have  been  capable  of
         forming the basis of the appeal being dismissed, but I find that to
         say that she had no right of appeal is an arguable error of law and
         accordingly permission to appeal is granted."

The Rule 24 Response

14. On 1 July 2014 Asli Celik-Oglu of the Specialist Appeals Team settled a
    detailed Rule 24 response opposing the appellant's appeal.  In summary,
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had directed himself  appropriately  with
    his self-direction at paragraph 10.   Further,  having  considered  all
    available evidence, it was reasonable and open to  the  judge  to  find
    that the appellant had failed to discharge the burden of  proving  that
    it was either a customary marriage that  was  lawful  in  Ghana  or  in
    Belgium, or that she was the  family  member  or  relative  of  an  EEA
    national.  The grounds raised no material arguable errors  of  law  and
    were a mere disagreement with a negative outcome of  the  appeal.   The
    judge rightly raised concerns about  the  quality  of  the  appellant's
    evidence in his findings, and made all the findings he could based upon
    a thorough evaluation of the small bundle of documents relied on by the
    appellant, with cogent reasons to support those findings.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

15. In advance of the hearing before me, there was received at Field  House
    on 31 July 2014 from the appellant's legal  representatives,  Universal
    Immigration  Chambers,  a  five  page  document  headed   "Grounds   of
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal".   In  this
    document,  the  representative  sought  permission  to  appeal  due  to
    "adverse or irrational findings or lack of findings on core issues".

16. On the day of the hearing there was received at Field House an unsigned
    letter from the appellant's representatives stating as follows:

         "We have just received notification from  our  above  named  client
         regarding her health conditions.  She might not be able  to  attend
         the hearing because of her bad health condition.

         We respectfully invite the court to adjourn  this  hearing  and  to
         give us a new direction."

17.  The  notice  of  hearing  was  sent  to  the  appellant  and  to   her
    representatives by first class  post  on  30  June  2014.   The  notice
    informed the appellant and her representatives that if a party  or  his
    representative did not attend the hearing, the Tribunal might determine
    the appeal in the absence of that party.

18. Given that the appellant had previously eschewed the option  of  giving
    oral evidence in support of her appeal, and given that the issues to be
    resolved did not require the appellant's attendance, I  proceeded  with
    the hearing.  I was not satisfied that the appeal could  not  otherwise
    be justly determined.  Indeed, not only was I of the view that  it  was
    not in accordance with the overriding objective to adjourn the hearing,
    but I was also not satisfied that a proper adjournment application  had
    been made.

19. I asked Mr Harrison to address me on the point on which  the  appellant
    had been granted permission to  appeal,  and  also  on  the  additional
    grounds recently raised by Universal Immigration Chambers.

Discussion

20. In the notice of decision which accompanied  the  refusal  letter,  the
    appellant was informed that she was  entitled  to  appeal  against  the
    decision under Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 and Regulation 26 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.  She was informed that the appeal must be made on one
    or more of the following grounds, which include  the  ground  that  the
    decision breaches rights which she had as a member of an EEA national's
    family under community treaties in relation to entry to or residence in
    the United Kingdom.

21. Regulation 26(1) provides that subject to the following  paragraphs  of
    this Regulation, a person may appeal under these Regulations against an
    EEA decision.

22. Regulation 26(3) provides that if a person claims to be a family member
    ... or relative of an EEA  national  he  may  not  appeal  under  these
    Regulations unless he produces -

    (a)  a valid national identity  card  issued  by  an  EEA  state  or  a
    passport; and

    (b)  either -

         (i)  an EEA family permit;

         (ii)     proof that he is the family member or relative of  an  EEA
         national ...

23. The problem with the judge's approach is that in cases where Regulation
    26(3)(a) is satisfied, as here, the question arising  under  Regulation
    26  (3)(b)(ii)  is  the  same  question  as  that  which  arises  under
    Regulation 7 or 8.  In short, it is necessary to determine  the  appeal
    under Regulation 7 or  8  on  its  merits  before  non-compliance  with
    Regulation  26(3)(b)(ii)  can  be  established.   Since  this  is   the
    necessary and logical procedure where proof of family membership is  in
    issue, it follows that a finding on the merits must precede  a  finding
    under Regulation 26(3)(b)(ii).  It is only because  the  appellant  has
    failed to show that she is not the direct or extended family member  of
    an EEA national, and thus her appeal  falls  to  be  dismissed  on  the
    merits, that the judicial decision maker is in the position to  make  a
    finding  under  Regulation  26(3)(b)(ii).   So  I  conclude  that   the
    appropriate course in such cases is for the appeal to be  dismissed  on
    the merits, and not on the ground that  retrospectively  the  appellant
    did not have a right of appeal in the first place.

24. I am fortified in this conclusion by consideration  of  the  2002  Act.
    Section 84(1)  provides  an  appeal  under  Section  82(1)  against  an
    immigration decision must be brought on one or more  of  the  following
    grounds, which grounds include:

         "(d)     That the appellant is an EEA national or a member  of  the
             family of an  EEA  national  and  the  decision  breaches  the
             appellant's rights under the community treaties in respect  of
             entry to or residence in the United Kingdom"

    While Regulation 26,  which  is  secondary  legislation,  requires  the
    appellant to satisfy certain evidential requirements in order to show a
    right of appeal, the satisfaction of such  evidential  requirements  is
    not a prerequisite of the appellant exercising a right of appeal  under
    the statute.

25. However, I do not consider that the judge's error is  material  to  the
    outcome, as the appellant has not been deprived of a fair  hearing  and
    the judge's findings of fact lead inexorably to the conclusion that the
    appeal should be dismissed.

26. The thrust of the recent document submitted by  the  appellant's  legal
    representatives is that the judge's findings  on  the  merits  are  not
    sustainable.  But the Rule 24 response, of which  the  recent  document
    makes no mention, effectively refutes this line of argument.  The judge
    has given adequate reasons for  finding  that  the  appellant  has  not
    discharged the burden of proving that she contracted a  valid  marriage
    by proxy to her sponsor that is recognised either by Ghanaian law or by
    Belgian law.  Moreover, as the  judge  found,  the  appellant  has  not
    discharged  the  burden  of  proving  that  the  marriage  was  validly
    registered.

27. The original application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    was settled by Counsel, who argued that the judge had also erred in law
    in not addressing an alternative claim under Article 8.  Judge  Osborne
    did not grant permission to appeal on this  ground,  and  there  is  no
    suggestion in the witness statement of the appellant, relied on  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, that she is advancing an Article  8  claim  in
    the alternative.

28. The appellant was last admitted to the United  Kingdom  on  27  October
    2009 with valid entry clearance as a student, expiring on  31  December
    2011.  She acknowledges that  she  is  an  overstayer  in  her  witness
    statement.  So, on the face of it, the appellant does not have a viable
    private life claim under Rule 276ADE, and (in the light of the  judge's
    sustainable findings of fact under the Regulations 2006),  she  has  no
    family life claim under Appendix FM.  On the  evidence  available,  the
    appellant does not meet the threshold test approved in Gulshan, and  so
    there was no error in the judge not asking himself the question whether
    the interference consequential upon the refusal of a residence card  is
    proportionate.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  contain  an  error  of  law
such that it  should  be  set  aside.   So  the  decision  stands,  and  the
appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
