

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/01341/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 January 2017                            |On 19 January 2017           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                               GANGADEEP SINGH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:      Mr S Bellara, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


       1. In  a  decision  dated  9  August  2016  the  First-tier  Tribunal
          dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  dated  26
          January 2016 to refuse  him  leave  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
          Migrant.  Although the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  acknowledge
          it, both representatives before me agreed that the appeal  was  on
          human rights grounds only.

       2. The grounds of appeal can  be  succinctly  stated:  the  appellant
          complains that in proceeding to consider his case on  the  papers,
          when he made it clear that he wished for it to  be  determined  at
          an oral hearing, the First-tier Tribunal has acted unfairly.


       3. The relevant chronology can be summarised as  follows:  on  9  May
          2016 the First-tier Tribunal sent out a hearing  notice  informing
          the appellant that his appeal would be considered  on  the  papers
          and he had until 6 June 2016 to provide any further  evidence  and
          submissions he wished to rely upon; the appellant claims  that  in
          a fax dated 27 May 2016 he requested an oral hearing;  it  appears
          that although his solicitors received a confirmation that the  fax
          was sent to the First-tier Tribunal,  it  was  not  received;  the
          First-tier Tribunal did receive a  further  letter  dated  8  July
          2016 referring to the fax and re-requesting an oral  hearing  with
          an undertaking to pay the relevant fee; on 18 July 2016 the First-
          tier Tribunal  responded  that  it  was  unable  to  'action'  the
          request to change hearing type as  the  appeal  had  already  been
          sent to a judge on 14 July 2016.


       4. The First-tier Tribunal did not consider the appeal on the  papers
          until 2 August 2016 and the decision was promulgated on  9  August
          2016.


       5. Mr Singh did not 'strongly oppose' the appeal  and  accepted  that
          there  seems  to   have   been   a   degree   of   confusion   and
          misunderstanding which led to the refusal of an oral hearing.


       6.  I  must  decide  whether  there  was  unfairness   in   all   the
          circumstances, not simply whether the  First-tier  Tribunal  acted
          reasonably - see Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014]  UKUT  418
          (IAC).  I entirely accept that the judge  proceeded  to  determine
          the appeal without the knowledge  that  the  appellant  wished  to
          have an oral hearing.  The judge therefore had no explanation  for
          the lack of an appellant's bundle or evidence in  support  of  the
          appeal (para 7).  The judge proceeded reasonably on the  basis  of
          the information available.  Nonetheless there has been  procedural
          unfairness.  The appellant's solicitors requested an oral  hearing
          on two occasions.   The  first  request  was  not  received.   The
          second request was made before the judge  was  provided  with  the
          papers on  14  July  2016  but  in  any  event  before  the  judge
          considered the appeal.   It is difficult to see  why  the  request
          could not be 'actioned' in these circumstances.    A  request  for
          an oral hearing must always be considered  carefully.   There  has
          been an absence of care in the consideration  of  the  request  in
          this case.  The appellant was entitled to  an  oral  hearing  upon
          payment of the appropriate fee, and there has  been  a  degree  of
          confusion that has led to unfairness.


       7. I observed at the hearing that the merits of the Article 8  appeal
          seem  to  be   weak.    Mr   Bellara   acknowledged   there   were
          difficulties.  The issue however is one of fairness.   Once  there
          has been unfairness, the error of law is a material one -  see  MM
          v SSHD [2014] UKUT  105  at  [14]  to  [18].  The  unfairness  has
          infected the First-tier Tribunal decision  such  that  it  can  be
          said to contain a material error of law.


   8. Both representatives agreed that the decision should be remade by  the
      First-tier Tribunal.  I have had regard to para 7.2  of  the  relevant
      Senior President's Practice Statement and the nature and extent of the
      factual findings required in remaking the decision, and I have decided
      that this is an appropriate case to remit to the First-tier  Tribunal.



Decision

       9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
          material error of law.  Its  decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
          aside.

      10. The appeal shall be remade by First-tier Tribunal de novo.

Directions

        1) The appeal shall be reheard de novo by the  First-tier  Tribunal
           sitting at  Hatton  Cross  (TE:  1.5  hrs)  on  the  first  date
           available.

        2) Within 14 days of the sending of  this  decision  the  appellant
           shall file and  serve  a  skeleton  argument  that  specifically
           outlines how his appeal can be successful on Article  8  grounds
           in light of the applicable current  legal  framework,  including
           the provision that little weight can be attached to the  private
           life established when his leave in the UK has been precarious.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
17 January 2017

