
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01523/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 June 2013                                |On 16 July 2013              |
|Prepared 7 June 2013                          |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                          (No Anonymity Direction)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           suzon frederick rozario


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hossain, Counsel instructed by Hossain Law
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. For the purposes of this determination, although  the  application  for
    permission to appeal was made by the respondent I shall  refer  to  the
    parties as they were referred to in the First-tier Tribunal, that is Mr
    Rozario as the appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The appellant was born  on  31  December  1979  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh.  He appealed against the decision of the  respondent  dated
    31 March 2013 refusing his application for leave to remain in the UK as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the points-based system.

 3. The appellant made an application on 20 July 2012 for leave  to  remain
    in the UK to study  an  MA  degree  in  Theology  (Franciscan  Studies)
    starting on 1 October 2012 which was expected to  end  on  13  December
    2013.  Confirmation of Acceptance of Studies was assigned  on  20  July
    2012.

 4. The appeal was heard by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal J M
    Lewis who dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules on the basis
    that the appellant could not show that he  had  the  requisite  minimum
    scores in his IELTS certificate.

 5. However the judge allowed the  appeal  under  Article  8  human  rights
    grounds after applying Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  Permission to appeal was
    granted by Designated First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Zucker  who  granted
    permission to appeal to the respondent on the basis  that  the  judge's
    approach to the determination of the appellant's Article 8  rights  was
    flawed because there was no consideration of the change of Rule and  in
    particular  insufficient  regard  was  had  to  the  public   interest.
    Further, it was arguable that any  private  life  established  was  not
    sufficient to justify the appeal being allowed.

Conclusions

 6. At the hearing Mr Walker confirmed that he was not relying on the first
    ground of appeal made by the respondent.  That  first  ground  set  out
    that the judge's assessment on Article 8 by reference to case law which
    predated the relevant provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   I  can
    accept that the Immigration Rules, and in particular  Appendix  FM  was
    introduced prior to the appellant's application but further  to  Izuazu
    (Article 8 - new rules) [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC) and Green (Article 8  -
    new rules) [2013] UKUT 00254 (IAC), I am not persuaded  that  all  case
    law which predates the Immigration Rules is otiose.

 7. I find no error in the judge's assessment that the appellant's  private
    life had been established as he has been studying, and, as the test has
    a low threshold for deciding whether  the interference has consequences
    of such gravity, this second limb of Razgar was satisfied.  Further  to
    the immigration rules the refusal was in accordance with the law and on
    the face of it necessary to uphold the rights and  freedoms  of  others
    through the maintenance of immigration policies.  However in  assessing
    proportionality   sufficient  weight  must  be  given  to  the   public
    interest.

 8. I turn to the judge's assessment of proportionality and  note  that  he
    was correct to state at paragraph 22 that Article 8 does not  afford  a
    freestanding liberty to depart from the Immigration  Rules.   He  added
    that a person who is admitted to follow a  course  which  has  not  yet
    ended, may build up a private life  that  deserves  respect,  and,  the
    public interest in removal before the end of the course, may be reduced
    where there were ample financial resources available and there were  no
    contrary factors based  upon  conduct.   The  judge  quoted  CDS  (PBS:
    "available": Article 8) Brazil [2010[ UKUT 00305 (IAC).  He stated that
    this "describes exactly the situation of the appellant.   I  treat  his
    Masters degree, as do the appellant and the Centre, as the  progression
    and culmination of his studies.  The public interest in the maintenance
    of effective immigration control, whilst always weighty, yields in this
    case to the personal circumstances of the appellant."

 9. The  appellant  applied  to  enter  the  UK  to  study  the  Franciscan
    International  Study  Centre's  Certificate  of  Higher  Education   in
    Franciscan Studies.  The  appellant  confirmed  that  he  entered  this
    course in June 2012.  He then proceeded to apply on  20  July  2012  to
    study for an MA.  It is not the case that removal was anticipated prior
    to the end of the appellant's  course.   Indeed  he  had  finished  his
    course and was applying  for  a  new  one  and  therefore  I  find  the
    application of CDS (Brazil) on the basis that  the  circumstances  were
    the same was mistaken and thus insufficient weight was attached to  the
    public interest.  This error  could  have  made  a  difference  to  the
    outcome and as a consequence I find there is an error of law.

10. I  also  note  that,  although  not  pleaded  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal or identified by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Zucker, the decision by the respondent was  a  combined  decision
    which included a decision under Section 47 removal.   This  is  not  in
    accordance with the law and I permitted the grounds to  be  amended  to
    include this.

11. I therefore find that the decision  cannot  stand  in  respect  of  the
    findings at paragraphs 20 to 22 only.

12. The first four limbs of Razgar  were  answered  by  the  judge  in  the
    affirmative.  The appellant has been in the UK since October 2011 only.
     I accept he is a diligent and successful student and committed to  his
    course.  He came to the UK in order to study a specific  course,  which
    he finished, and on a limited visa whereby  his  leave  expired  on  29
    August 2012.  He had no legitimate expectation  to  consider  that  his
    studies may continue beyond this date and  was  always  aware  that  he
    would have to re-apply for further leave to remain in the  UK  and,  if
    necessary, for his further study of  a  different  course,  albeit  one
    which followed on.

13. The appellant gave evidence that his class is  finished  in  two  weeks
    time and the remainder of his time on the course would be spent writing
    a dissertation.  As the judge states CDS (Brazil) "does not  provide  a
    general discretion in  the  Immigration  Judge  to  dispense  with  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules merely because of  the  way  they
    impact on an individual case may appear to be unduly harsh"  (paragraph
    17 of CDS).

14. I am persuaded that the respondent  has  shown  that  the  decision  to
    refuse  to  vary  the  appellant's  leave  is  not  a  disproportionate
    decision.  He has only been in the UK since 2011 and confirmed  at  the
    hearing that he had studied extensively already in Bangladesh.  I  note
    that he cannot continue his MA in Franciscan Studies in the UK  but  he
    will have completed his classes, where physical presence  is  demanded,
    and there is no reason why  he  cannot  complete  his  dissertation  in
    Bangladesh.

15. There was also a failure by the First-tier Tribunal  judge to  consider
    the legality of the respondent's Section 47 decision and this  amounted
    to an error on a point of law such that it had to be set aside and  re-
    made. I find that the s.47 decision was not in accordance with the  law
    following the Court of Appeal decision in SSHD v  Javad  Ahmadi  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 512 (which confirmed Ahmadi (Section  47  decision:  validity;
    Sapkota) [2012] UKUT 00147 (IAC) and  Adamally and Jaferi  (section  47
    removal decisions: Tribunal Procedures) [2012] UKUT 00414 (IAC)).

Order

16. I therefore remake the determination in  respect  of  the  decision  to
    refuse leave to remain and dismiss the appeal.

17. The appeal is allowed in respect of the S47 decision alone.






Signed                                  Date 13th July 2013


Judge Rimington
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

