
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/01379/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 January 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Mrs Saleha Khatoon Choudhury
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Shaw, Counsel instructed by Charles Simmons
                    Immigration Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is a challenge with permission granted to the decision  of  First-
    tier Judge  Povey  in  July  last  year  allowing  the  appeal  of  the
    appellant, Mrs Choudhury, against the  respondent's  decision  refusing
    her application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

2.   The Secretary of State challenged the decision on the basis first  that
    the judge had not taken into  account  the  mandatory  public  interest
    considerations set out in section 117B of the 2002  Act  (amended)  and
    also argued that the judge  had  made  a  finding  that  the  appellant
    suffers from memory loss despite there being no  medical  diagnosis  to
    that effect and also was concerned that there was a failure to consider
    whether there were alternative care arrangements that could be accessed
    in Bangladesh such as home nursing, and I read the grant of  permission
    as a grant of permission on all grounds whether this is specifically  a
    reference to section 117B or the alternative  care  provisions  matters
    that featured in the decision of the judge granting permission.

3.   To an extent Mr Jarvis has amplified those grounds by an argument  that
    although it was conceded  that  the  appeal  could  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules and therefore would fail to be considered outside the
    Rules there is a context  nevertheless  provided  by  the  Rules  which
    needed to be taken into account in coming to a decision on such matters
    as alternative care arrangements.

4.   On the other hand Ms Shaw argues that the  judge  clearly  referred  to
    section 117B in the relevant consideration thus far and guided  himself
    on the law at paragraph 16 and at paragraph 20 went on to state that he
    had given regard to all the evidence both oral and documentary and  set
    out the evidence of the appellant's health conditions and  support  she
    receives in the United Kingdom and the lack of support as it  was  said
    to be in Bangladesh because her  daughter  there  has  health  problems
    which are confirmed although not I think a matter  of  dispute  in  any
    event, and as a consequence  the  judge  concluded  that  the  proposed
    interference with respect to the appellant's  family  life  was  not  a
    proportionate one, bearing in mind the needs that she has.

5.   I think that  the  essential  difficulty  with  this  decision  is  the
    primary point relied on by the Secretary of State which is the  failure
    to give consideration to the paragraph 117B  consideration  and  it  is
    clear from 117A that these are mandatory matters which have to be taken
    into account.  They cover various issues in respect of which the public
    interest is said to be satisfied, the ability to speak  English,  being
    financially independent, little weight given to private life issues and
    perhaps that is relevant in this case but I do not think, with  respect
    to Ms Shaw, that it can be said to be an answer to this that the  judge
    referred to the Act in setting out  what  the  relevant  law  was.   He
    needed to go further and address these issues as, as I say, a mandatory
    matter in assessing the public interest side  of  the  balance  in  the
    proportionality consideration that the judge undertook.

6.   To a lesser extent I think there is merit in  the  further  points  and
    that there was no medical evidence as regards the memory loss the judge
    accepted was the case and there is a  lack  of  detailed  consideration
    about alternative care possibilities that would  exist  in  Bangladesh.
    But the main reason is, in my view, the failure  to  address  the  117B
    factors.

7.   So I conclude there is a material error of law in this decision  and  I
    agree with the submission made that it makes  sense  in  light  of  the
    deteriorating situation of the appellant's health, as Ms Shaw tells  me
    on instructions is  the  case,  that  it  is  appropriate  for  further
    evidence to be given and in the circumstances  as  the  decision  would
    have to be remade it is appropriate for the matter to be remitted  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

