
IAC-TH-LW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02977/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January 2015                            |On 15 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                                     S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The history of the appeal is set out in  my  decision  of  24  November
    2014 which contains my  reasons  for  having  set  aside  the  original
    determination of the appeal.  My present decision  should  be  read  in
    conjunction with that decision, whose contents it  does  not  therefore
    repeat.

2.   In the rehearing of the appeal in relation to paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of
    the Immigration Rules, the sole issue is whether, at the  date  of  the
    decision on 13 December 2013, the Appellant  had  "no  ties  (including
    social, cultural or family)" with Nigeria, as that criterion  has  been
    judicially understood.  These issues are set out in paragraphs 5  to  7
    of  my  first  decision.   Although  the  relevant  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules have now changed, the appeal is to  be  re-determined
    by reference to the Immigration Rules as they stood at the date of  the
    decision.  Article 8 of the 1950 Convention for the Protection of Human
    Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, which would be the qualified right  of
    the Appellant to respect for her private and family  life,  is  not  in
    point.  Nor therefore are paragraphs 117A-D introduced  into  the  2002
    Act by Section 19 of the 2014 Act.

3.   The burden of establishing the absence of ties with Nigeria rests  upon
    the Appellant, to the standard of the balance of probabilities.

The Hearing

4.   The Appellant attended the hearing.  She was  accompanied  by  eighteen
    people and three infants.  All were  present  throughout  the  hearing,
    except that a few of them left and returned at different points.

5.   At the time of the hearing  on  10  November  2014  the  Appellant  was
    represented  by  Counsel  instructed  by  Lifeline  Options   Community
    Interest Company of Birmingham.  Later, on  6  January  2014,  Raj  Law
    Solicitors of London SW17 wrote to the Tribunal to say that  they  were
    no longer representing the Appellant.  At the outset of the  hearing  I
    clarified with the Appellant that she was not legally represented.

6.   In my earlier decision I permitted at paragraph 13  the  submission  of
    further evidence not later than fourteen days before the  date  of  the
    hearing.  On the morning of the hearing the  Appellant  handed  to  the
    usher a folder containing a  statement  by  herself,  statements  by  a
    number of other people which  were  essentially  testimonials  to  her,
    copies of the passports of various people and some medical booklets.  I
    invited Miss Isherwood to look at this material  and  to  say  anything
    that she wished to about whether it should  be  received  in  evidence.
    Having done so she said that the Appellant had failed  to  submit  this
    evidence for the first hearing, some of it took  matters  much  further
    and she would like to see the original passports, of which  there  were
    photocopies.  That said she was trying to be fair and  was  content  to
    leave to the Tribunal the decision whether to accept the evidence.

7.   I asked the Appellant why this evidence had not been submitted  sooner.
     Her answer related to the difficulties which she said that she had had
    with both firms of solicitors.

8.   Having considered the matter I said to her  that  I  had  to  strike  a
    judicial  balance  between  fairness  to  her  and  unfairness  to  the
    Respondent.  I was willing to accept  her  own  statement,  which  gave
    further information about her situation.  I was not willing  to  accept
    the remainder of  the  evidence,  because  it  was  not  fair  for  the
    Respondent to be confronted with it without  notice.   I  returned  the
    folder of material to  her.   Subsequently  copies  were  made  of  the
    passport and residence permit of one of her daughters and the residence
    permit of another, and I accepted them into evidence.

The Evidence

9.   Miss Isherwood asked the Appellant a total, according to my record,  of
    54 questions.  I then invited the Appellant to add any evidence of  her
    own.  She said that she was pleading to be allowed to stay in the UK to
    work and to contribute to the wellbeing of the UK  with  her  children.
    Miss Isherwood then made  submissions.   I  invited  the  Appellant  to
    respond.  She said that she always goes to see her  children  at  least
    every two weeks; she cannot ask her  first  daughter  whether  she  has
    contact with her  father;   she  always  goes  to  her  doctor  to  get
    medicine; and there is nobody in Nigeria for her to go  back  to.   She
    pleaded for mercy.  I reserved my determination.

10.  Miss Isherwood put to the Appellant that she had had no status  in  the
    UK since 2007.  The Appellant said  that  she  had  always  put  in  an
    application to the Home Office in 2009 or  2010.   She  had  spent  the
    majority of her life in Nigeria and had no problems with  the  language
    there.  Most of the people who had come to the hearing today to support
    her were originally from Nigeria.  If she had to  go  back  to  Nigeria
    they could not support her.  Having made a political  asylum  claim  in
    1996 she had been afraid when she went back to Nigeria in 2003 but  had
    done so in order to look after her only sister, who was shortly to die.
     She has a lot of family members in the UK.  They do  not  go  back  to
    Nigeria and she does not know  why.   She  had  not  been  employed  in
    Nigeria.  She could not put to use in  Nigeria  the  employment  skills
    that she had acquired in the UK because she would  not  be  allowed  to
    work there and, having left a long time ago, does not know how to do it
    again.

11.  In the UK the Appellant looks after  her  children  and  grandchildren.
    Her daughters do not work.  If she returned to Nigeria they  could  not
    continue to look after their children because they have to work.  After
    giving birth one of her daughters had wanted to  commit  suicide.   The
    Appellant had had to stay beside her.  If the Appellant were  not  here
    her daughter would commit suicide.  Nowadays the  Appellant  takes  her
    grandchildren to the park, to school  and  to  football.   Nobody  else
    would do this for her.  All of her four children have the same  father.
    Her oldest daughter is the only one who knows him.  The Appellant  does
    not know when that daughter last saw her father.   The  Appellant  does
    not have anything to  do  with  him.   She  moves  around  between  her
    daughters, staying with each of them for  two  or  three  weeks.   They
    could not manage without her.  The Appellant suffers from diabetes  and
    high blood pressure.  She does not know when her daughters were granted
    leave to remain in the UK.

12.  The Appellant said that she does  not  accept  that  she  has  ties  of
    family and friendship to Nigeria.  She does not have contact  with  the
    father of her daughters, nor anybody to talk to  in  Nigeria,  and  her
    daughter would not be able to  help  her  through  own  connections  in
    Nigeria.  If she is allowed to stay in the UK she will work.  She could
    work at night, and help her family with the children  during  the  day.
    She could not go back to Nigeria with her family members  who  are  not
    entitled to stay in the UK because there is nobody at home for them.

13.  In her statement the Appellant narrates her immigration  history.   She
    worked in her aunt's shop for about four years.  Later she worked as  a
    care assistant with elderly people, and  studied  NVQ  and  English  at
    college.  Her extended family live in London, Birmingham,  Reading  and
    Manchester.  She used to go to church with her aunt and now goes to the
    mosque.  Her children have grown up in the UK and are not able to adapt
    to life in Nigeria.  Her family are doing well in the UK.

14.  The Appellant was a hesitant and nervous  witness,  to  whom  questions
    had often to be repeated.  In submissions Miss Isherwood challenged her
    credibility.  Her manifest wish to remain  in  the  UK  influenced  her
    responses.  I found her an unreliable witness. I  accept  her  evidence
    about what she does and has done in the UK, which she has no reason  to
    misrepresent.  I accept that she has no contact with the father of  her
    children and no relatives or home  in  Nigeria.   I  do  not  otherwise
    accept her evidence about why she and those members of her  family  who
    are not entitled to remain in the UK could not return to Nigeria.

15.  In evidence, as stated, are the  Nigerian  passport  and  UK  residence
    permit of one of her daughters, showing her to have  leave  to  remain,
    with work permitted, until 21 February 2016, and the  residence  permit
    of another of her daughters showing her to have leave  to  remain  with
    work permitted, until 2 February 2015.

Determination

16.  In reaching my determination I have  paid  regard  to  the  submissions
    made to me by both parties.

17.  As stated in my first decision, the Appellant was born in  Nigeria  and
    lived there for the first 37 years of her  life  until  leaving  as  an
    adult in 1996.  Now aged 55, she spent the next  eighteen  and  a  half
    years of her life in the UK.  During that time she has returned once to
    Nigeria in 2003.  Save for the  father  of  her  children  she  has  no
    relatives, home or work history there.  In  the  UK  two  of  her  four
    daughters have the right to remain and the other two have permission to
    remain, one for three more weeks and the other  for  a  little  over  a
    year.  She has a large extended family  in  the  UK.   Apart  from  her
    daughters, there is no evidence of their immigration status.  If any of
    them do not have permission to remain,  they  should  be  returning  to
    Nigeria and so are potential family members for her there.

18.  In the light  of  the  judicial  guidance  in  Ogundimu  I  assess  the
    evidence holistically.  As stated in paragraph 11 of my first decision,
    the Appellant lived in Nigeria for the first  37  years  of  her  life,
    exposing her to the cultural norms of Nigeria, whose language, English,
    she speaks.  Although she has no contact with him, the  father  of  her
    four children lives there.  On the evidence presently available, two of
    her four daughters will have to return to Nigeria, one of them, who can
    accompany her, imminently and the other within shortly after one  year.
    The Appellant has not established by evidence that any or  all  of  her
    extended family are entitled to remain in the UK.   If  they  are  not,
    they too have to return to Nigeria.

19.  The Appellant has to establish, on the balance of  probabilities,  that
    she has no ties,  including  social,  cultural  or  family  ties,  with
    Nigeria.  Viewing the evidence holistically I find  that  she  has  not
    established this.  It follows that at the date of the decision she  did
    not comply with the Immigration Rules.  Desperate to remain in the  UK,
    she invokes compassion.  However, the Immigration Rules  represent  the
    law,  and  the  Appellant  does  not  comply  with  them.   The  appeal
    accordingly fails, and is dismissed.

20.  In my  first  decision  I  erred  at  paragraph  14  in  setting  aside
    paragraph 46 of the original  determination,  which  is  the  anonymity
    direction.  This I reinstate.

Notice of Decision

21.  The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

22.  The appeal remains dismissed under the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

23.  Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify her or any member of her  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

24.    As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.



Signed   Dated: 14 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

