
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02739/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 February 2016                           |On 8 April 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                         Hafiz Zia Ul Mustafa Sayyam
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Markus, instructed by Prolegis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mr Hafiz Zia Ul Mustafa Sayyam, was born  on  14  August
    1985 and is a male citizen of Pakistan.  The appellant had applied  for
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of  ten
    years' lawful  continuous  residence.   His  application  was  refused,
    directions made for his removal on 19  December  2014.   The  appellant
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Britton)  which,  in  a
    decision promulgated  on  25  June  2015  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the appeal should be allowed.  I have reached that decision
    having heard the submissions in court of Mr Markus, for the  appellant,
    and also Mr Diwnycz, a Senior  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  who,
    although he did not concede the appeal indicated that  he  agreed  with
    the submissions of Mr Markus.  In the circumstances, my  reasons  shall
    be brief.

 3. I find that the appeal should be allowed in respect of grounds 1 and 2.
     The first ground of appeal asserts that the judge  wrongly  summarised
    the effect of and/or failed to deal with the  appellant's  unchallenged
    evidence in respect of the funds which he had in  his  account  at  the
    time of his "in time" application for further leave to remain which was
    made on 31 January 2008.  Further, the judge  wrongly  considered  that
    the appellant's application had been rejected by the respondent because
    the appellant had "input his card details incorrectly  when  trying  to
    make payment."  The judge [17] had recorded  the  appellant  as  having
    said that he had given "the wrong details of his bank."  However,  that
    was not the case.  Throughout his evidence and in his witness statement
    the appellant had explained that he had given correct details  for  his
    bank and that he was also in funds at the relevant  time.   The  second
    ground of appeal concerns the burden of proof in relation to  rejection
    of the appellant's 31 January 2008 application.  The  appellant  relies
    on Basnet (validity of application - respondent) [2012] UKUT 113 (IAC).
     And also BE (application fee: effect of non-payment) [2008] UKAIT  89.
    The burden  of  proof  rested  on  the  respondent  to  show  that  the
    application had been properly rejected as invalid.  The  judge  in  the
    instant appeal at [19] found that  "the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
    appellant and the standard of proof is  a  balance  of  probabilities."
    The judge had concluded [20] that the "respondent had fully set out the
    reasons why the appellant's application was  rejected...the  respondent
    had shown that the appellant's application was properly rejected."   Mr
    Diwnycz, for the respondent, did  not  dispute  the  assertion  that  a
    concession had been made by the Presenting Officer  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to the clear effect that the  respondent  was  unable  to
    adduce evidence (such as to discharge of the burden of proof upon  her)
    that the application made by the appellant on 31 January 2008 had  been
    validly rejected.  The appellant, on the other hand, had established  a
    prima facie case that the correct information had been  submitted.   It
    follows that the judge erred in law by going behind the concession made
    before him by the Presenting Officer  and  finding,  contrary  to  that
    concession, that the application had not been properly  submitted.   In
    any event, the judge misapplied the  burden  of  proof  in  respect  of
    proving of that fact.  In the light of those observations, I find  that
    the First-tier Tribunal decision should be set aside.

 4. As regards the remaking of the decision, Mr Markus submitted  that  the
    Tribunal was in a position to allow the appeal against the Secretary of
    State's decision outright (see grounds of appeal [34]).  I  agree.   Mr
    Diwnycz, for the respondent, did not demur from Mr Markus's  submission
    that the appeal should be allowed outright.

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 25 June 2015  is
    set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The appellant's appeal against
    the decision of the respondent dated 19 December 2014 is allowed  under
    the Immigration Rules.

 6. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 24 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

