
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02909/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 February 2016                   |On 17 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                           MR SALAH-UD-DIN SALLAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Jones QC (the Immigration Judge) to dismiss  his  appeal
    against the respondent's decision to  cancel  his  leave  to  enter  or
    remain in the UK.

2.   The appellant was previously represented by  Makka  Solicitors  Limited
    but at the hearing before the Upper Tribunal represented himself.

3.   Judge of the Upper Tribunal Grubb  gave  the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal on 16 October 2015 because the Immigration
    Judge had determined the appeal solely on the basis that the  appellant
    relied upon Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    (ECHR).  This was incorrect, as the respondent now concedes.

4.   By virtue of Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 (the  2002  Act),  the  appellant  is  entitled  to  appeal  a
    cancellation of his leave which is treated as a  refusal  of  leave  to
    enter at a time when he was in possession of current entry clearance on
    the basis that the decision is not in accordance with  the  Immigration
    Rules or is otherwise unlawful.  Further, the appellant was issued with
    a "One-Stop Warning" under Section 120 of the 2002  Act  on  the  basis
    that the appellant was asked to state any reasons  why  he  thought  he
    should be allowed to stay in the UK in form IS.82C, i.e. the notice  of
    refusal of leave to enter.

Background

5.   The appellant first came to the UK as a student to study at Ealing  and
    Hammersmith College with valid leave from 16 October 2013 to 26 October
    2015.  However, as a result of  information  from  Educational  Testing
    Services ("ETS"), it came to light that he had  used  a  false  English
    language certificate as part of his application for leave to remain  as
    a student when this was granted on 16 October 2013.   As  a  result  of
    this the scores that he obtained from the test taken on 21 August  2013
    at Eden College were cancelled by ETS.  This information came to  light
    following a broadcast by the  BBC  of  its  Panorama  programme  on  10
    February 2014 in which undercover reporters gained  access  to  several
    test centres in the UK  and  revealed  that  the  tests  undertaken  by
    persons subject to immigration  control  were  subject  to  significant
    fraud.  The fraud included persons other than  the  stated  individuals
    taking the required tests.

6.   It appears that the appellant returned to see his  family  in  Pakistan
    on 15 December 2014.  When he returned to the UK on 16 January 2015  he
    was refused leave to enter and his  visa  was  cancelled.   A  detailed
    explanatory statement has been supplied by the respondent dated 7 March
    2016 explaining the full circumstances.

The Hearing

7.   As the appellant was  unrepresented  I  called  on  the  respondent  to
    explain the background to the appeal.  Mr Staunton referred me  to  the
    explanatory statement dated 7 March.  He explained that under  the  ETS
    system the appellant was supposed to have taken  an  examination  which
    formed the basis of his leave.  The ETS system had been abused in  that
    individuals had taken the test for them.  I suggested that  as  it  was
    accepted by the respondent  that  the  Immigration  Judge  had  made  a
    material error of law in relation to the appellant's appeal rights,  it
    was appropriate to set aside the decision and to hear  the  appellant's
    substantive response to the allegations.  Both  the  appellant  and  Mr
    Staunton were keen for the matter to be dealt with at the first hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal rather than adopting the more usual course of
    adjourning for witness statements to be filed and for oral evidence  to
    be given on a later date. I therefore allowed  the  appellant  to  give
    brief oral evidence to answer  the  allegations  which  had  been  made
    against him.

8.   I then proceeded to hear brief oral evidence from  the  appellant  with
    his explanation  for  the  alleged  fraud.   I  am  satisfied  that  he
    understood the nature of the allegations against him,  having  received
    the explanatory statement and supporting  witness  statements  from  Mr
    Millington and Ms Collings.

9.   I then explained to the appellant that I was going  to  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  He indicated that he was keen  to
    proceed with his case on the day of the hearing.  He explained that  he
    said that he had undertaken the test in order to  obtain  his  visa  in
    2012.  The relevant test is described as a "TOEIC" test.  The appellant
    confirmed that he "took the test  (himself)".   However,  when  he  was
    interviewed at the airport it was sometime  after  the  test  had  been
    taken and he could not remember all the details.  He said that  he  had
    not been shown "any evidence" but he had done his best  to  respond  to
    the questions asked of him.  He said he had  been  detained  for  eight
    hours.  He was convinced that he could "prove himself" to be  innocent.
    He said as a result of the respondent's decision he had  been  deprived
    of the opportunity to complete his course which would  require  him  to
    undertake approximately one year of additional study.

10.  The respondent relied on the witness  statements  of  Rebecca  Collings
    and Peter Millington.  Mr  Staunton  said  that  in  carrying  out  its
    investigation considerable detail had been gone into and the tests from
    the ETS had been analysed  but  found  to  be  invalid.   Plainly,  the
    examinations were invalid.  The witnesses explained how the  tests  are
    validated.  Voice recognition was used to confirm  that  the  appellant
    had not been the person taking the  relevant  tests.   Details  of  the
    institution at which the appellant studied (Eden College) were given in
    Appendix G.

11.  I then called on the appellant to make any submissions.  He  reiterated
    that he  had  taken  the  test,  he  thought,  in  2013.   This  was  a
    considerable time before his arrival into the UK in January  2015  when
    he had been stopped.  He may have been confused.  He did  not  remember
    the name of the college or date when he took the test.

12.  The respondent simply relied on  the  reasons  fully  set  out  in  the
    explanatory statement.  He said that the exams were clearly subject  to
    fraud, as the Panorama programme had exposed.  It was  clear  from  the
    interview record that the appellant could not remember the date when he
    took the exam which tended to suggest that he had not taken it.  I  was
    referred to paragraph 321A (2) of the Immigration Rules.  This  allowed
    the  respondent  to  cancel  leave   in   circumstances   where   false
    representations had been made.

13.  I allowed the appellant a last word.   He  said  he  wished  to  "prove
    himself" by completing his course.  He wished for another chance.

14.  At the end of the hearing I  reserved  my  decision  as  to  the  final
    outcome of the appeal having found the error of law.

Discussion

15.  When the events giving rise to the cancellation of leave  came  to  the
    respondent's attention the  appellant  was  a  student  at  Ealing  and
    Hammersmith College with valid leave  from  16  October  2013  till  26
    October 2015.  The respondent was satisfied that false  representations
    had been used to obtain that leave.  In particular, the ETS had  issued
    him with a TOEIC as part of his student  application.   It  seems  that
    using the voice verification software ETS was able  to  detect  that  a
    single person was undertaking multiple tests.  ETS undertook a check of
    the appellant's test as well as a number of others and confirmed to the
    respondent that there was "significant evidence" to conclude  that  the
    certificate  issued  in  his  case  had  been  fraudulently   obtained.
    Accordingly, the scores issued from the test which  the  appellant  had
    taken (in fact on 21 August 2013 at Eden  College)  were  cancelled  by
    ETS.  As a result of the information supplied by  ETS,  the  respondent
    was satisfied that false representations had been used for the purposes
    of obtaining a Tier 4  (General)  Student  leave  to  remain  residence
    permit.  Accordingly, the appellant had  his  leave  cancelled  in  the
    slightly dramatic manner described above.  It is now necessary to  look
    at that evidence in greater detail to see whether that was justified as
    the First-tier Tribunal, erroneously, failed to consider the appeal  on
    its merits, thinking that the only matter that could be considered  was
    the appellant's human rights.  No appeal is made against  the  decision
    of the FtT to dismiss the appellant's human rights appeal, if any.

Conclusions

16.  The appellant had full appeal rights under Section 82(1)  of  the  2002
    Act as Judge Grubb noted. Having carefully considered the merits of the
    respondent's case and the appellant's response to it I will now set out
    my conclusions.

17.  The substantive allegation is that the appellant fraudulently  obtained
    an English language certificate to which  he  was  not  entitled.   The
    examination, taken in September 2013, was administered by  ETS,  a  non
    profit making organisation.  The BBC exposed the nature  of  the  fraud
    perpetrated in February 2014.  It appears that the modus operandi  were
    for proxy test takers to take the test.  On  some  occasions  the  true
    candidate would attend the test centre but a proxy would then take  the
    test after the candidate was photographed.  The  candidate  would  then
    leave the test centre.

18.  The Immigration Rules entitle the respondent to cancel leave  where  it
    is established that any misrepresentation had been used to  obtain  the
    leave (321A  (2)).   The  respondent's  evidence  consists  of  hearsay
    evidence, some of it double hearsay.  However, the techniques  utilised
    by ETS to investigate the fraud included computerised voice recognition
    and test centres were subject to independent investigations by ETS.  Ms
    Collings and Mr Millington provide full details in their statements.

19.  The burden rests on the respondent to show that  the  requirements  for
    cancelling the appellant's leave were satisfied.  This must be shown on
    the ordinary civil standard of proof.  I am satisfied having considered
    the evidence filed in support of the case  that  false  representations
    were made in the form of the test results supplied in  support  of  the
    application for further  leave.  Unfortunately,  the  appellant's  test
    results cannot be relied upon.  He was unable  to  give  any  plausible
    explanation for the apparent fraud, indeed, had  limited  knowledge  of
    the test he had taken.  He was unable to say in interview, for example,
    where he had taken that test.

20.   In  the  circumstances,  I  am  satisfied  that   all   the   material
    circumstances were taken into account. I  am  satisfied  to  the  civil
    standard of proof that applies to these proceedings that the  appellant
    did make false representations to  obtain  his  English  language  test
    certificate  and  that  the  grounds  for  cancelling  his  leave  were
    satisfied.

My Decision

Having found a material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, it is necessary to set aside that decision.

I substitute a decision of the Upper Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
appeal against the respondent's decision to cancel his leave.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award in this case.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

