
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/02495/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 24 April 2018                              |On 2 May 2018                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                            MRS HALIMA AL RASHEDY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Chowdhury
For the Respondent:    Ms Pal


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Nash ("the FTTJ") promulgated on  22  January  2018,  in
    which the FTTJ dismissed the appellant's appeal against the curtailment
    of her leave to remain on the basis she had made false  representations
    in her application for entry clearance as  a  Tier  4  General  Student
    migrant. The decision  was  made  pursuant  to  paragraph  323(i)  with
    reference to 322(2) of the Immigration  Rules  so  that  her  leave  to
    remain was to expire on 10 November 2014. That decision was made by the
    respondent on 11 November 2014, by which time the appellant had already
    left the United Kingdom on 19 September 2014.


 2. The appellant sought leave to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal out  of
    time. Time was extended by the First-tier Tribunal to enable her to  do
    so. Her appeal was dismissed.

 3. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal and none has
    been requested before me. I make no such direction.

Background

 4. On 26 September 2013  the  appellant  made  an  application  for  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 General  Student.  On  1  October  2013  she  was
    granted leave to enter the UK in that capacity until 30  January  2015.
    With her application,  the  appellant  submitted  a  TOEIC  certificate
    issued by Educational Testing Service ("ETS").  The respondent noted in
    her reasons for curtailment of leave:

         "ETS has a record of your speaking test. Using  voice  verification
         software, ETS is able to detect when a single person is undertaking
         multiple tests. ETS undertook a check of your test and confirmed to
         the SSHD that there was significant evidence to conclude that  your
         certificate was fraudulently obtained.


         Your scores from the test taken on 16 July 2013 at  Apex  have  now
         been cancelled by ETS.


         On the basis of  the  information  provided  to  her  by  ETS,  the
         Secretary of State is satisfied that there is substantial  evidence
         to conclude that your certificate  was  fraudulently  obtained.  In
         light of this information the Secretary of State is satisfied  that
         that [sic] you have utilised deception to gain leave  to  enter  in
         the UK.


         Had the Home Office been aware  of  these  facts  at  the  time  of
         considering your immigration status in the UK on 01  October  2013,
         you would not have been granted leave as a Tier 4 General student.


         According to Home Office records you left the UK  on  19  September
         2014 and have not since returned. When you left the UK,  you  still
         had valid leave to enter. The Home Office  is  satisfied  that  the
         submission of fraudulently obtained  documents  in  support  of  an
         application  to  obtain  entry  clearance  was  done  in  order  to
         circumvent the UK's Immigration Rules and therefore as a result  of
         this it is not considered that the circumstances in your  case  are
         such that discretion should be exercised in your favour.


         The Secretary of State therefore curtails your leave to  remain  in
         the United Kingdom under paragraph 323(i) with reference to  322(2)
         of the Immigration Rules so as to expire on 10 November 2014."

 5. The appellant appealed against that decision. The  FTTJ  dismissed  the
    appeal on the ground that  the  decision  was  not  in  breach  of  the
    Immigration Rules. He found that the appellant "has not discharged  the
    burden upon her",  the  respondent  having  discharged  the  evidential
    burden.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal and this was  granted.  Hence
    the matter comes before me.

Submissions

 7. For the appellant, Ms Chowdhury adopted the grounds of appeal  to  this
    tribunal.   That  said,  she  made  certain  concessions  in  her  oral
    submissions.  She accepted that, while the appellant did not  have  the
    respondent's bundle at the date of drafting her witness  statement  for
    the appeal, the appellant had not been disadvantaged by this: she  knew
    the case against her and  Ms  Chowdhury  conceded  there  had  been  no
    application for an adjournment to consider the  respondent's  evidence.
    She accepted there was no prejudice to the appellant's  position  as  a
    result of late production of the respondent's evidence.   This  was  an
    appropriate concession given the detail  in  the  respondent's  reasons
    letter regarding the curtailment of her leave to remain. The  appellant
    could have been in no doubt as to the  issues  to  be  decided  in  the
    appeal, particularly given she was legally represented.


 8. Ms Chowdhury also accepted, contrary to the grounds of appeal, that the
    respondent's evidence, including the generic witness evidence and  look
    up tool, was sufficient to discharge the initial evidential  burden  on
    the respondent; she did not  challenge  the  FTTJ's  findings  in  that
    regard. She submitted the crux of the appellant's  case  was  that  the
    FTTJ had failed to give due weight to the significant evidence  adduced
    by the appellant to demonstrate her "grasp of  the  English  language".
    Ms Chowdhury accepted the absence of the appellant from the UK and  her
    consequent inability to give oral evidence at the  hearing  was  not  a
    material issue in the light of paragraph 28  of  the  FTTJ's  decision;
    that said, she submitted it was inappropriate for the the FTTJ to  draw
    adverse inference from the failure of the appellant  to  state  in  her
    witness statement that she had taken the test. It was  submitted  that,
    if the appellant had been present and this had been  put  to  her,  she
    would have been able to give a definitive answer to the question.  As a
    consequence the FTTJ had made an adverse finding based on  her  failure
    to assert she had taken the test (albeit  she  had  denied  deception).
    The appellant's evidence was sufficient to discharge the burden on her.



 9. In summary Ms Chowdhury  submitted  that  this  appeal  was  about  the
    failure of the FTTJ to give appropriate weight to the evidence  of  the
    appellant, particularly the letter  from  her  supervisor  at  Coventry
    University.  That  should  have  been  given  greater  weight  in   the
    assessment of the appellant's evidence.

10. For the respondent, Ms Pal submitted  that  the  FTTJ  had  taken  into
    account all the evidence, including that of the appellant.  There  were
    specific references to the evidence of the appellant's supervisor. That
    evidence had not been ignored. The FTTJ  had  taken  into  account  the
    appellant was disadvantaged by not being able to give oral evidence  at
    the hearing. However, she had been aware of the issue  since  2014  and
    had had opportunities to rebut the  respondent's  position.  She  could
    have asked for a copy of the voice recording taken at  the  test.   The
    mere assertion by the appellant that she had not engaged  in  deception
    was not sufficient to discharge the burden on her; she had not provided
    an explanation as to what had taken place on the day of  the  test.  Ms
    Pal  asserted  the  FTTJ  had  taken  all  the  evidence  into  account
    appropriately.

Discussion

11. It was  appropriate  for  Ms  Chowdhury  to  concede  the  respondent's
    evidence, including the look up tool which referred to the appellant by
    name, was sufficient to discharge  the  respondent's  burden  of  proof
    (Shehzad and Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615).


12. The nub of the appellant's case in this appeal is that the  FTTJ  erred
    in law in failing to attribute sufficient weight to her  evidence.   Ms
    Chowdhury made it clear in her submissions that it  was  accepted  that
    the respondent had discharged the initial burden of proof by  producing
    the three witness statements and the look up tool. I  agree  with  her;
    this was an appropriate concession, given the legal authorities on  the
    issue.


13. There is no suggestion before me that the  FTTJ  failed  to  take  into
    account any evidence; it is a matter of  whether  the  FTTJ  attributed
    appropriate  weight.   It  is  worth  identifying  that  the  appellant
    provided an 80 page bundle for the hearing before the FTTJ.


14. It is submitted that the appellant, being outside the UK and unable  to
    return for the hearing, was disadvantaged in that she did not have  the
    opportunity to set out her evidence as to how the test took place. I do
    not accept that. The appellant had known since 2014 that she  had  been
    investigated by the respondent and found to  have  acquired  her  TOEIC
    qualification fraudulently: there is an email from  her  solicitors  at
    the time, Genesis Law, to the University addressing the issue. This  is
    dated 14 October 2014. While, given the passage of time, it would  have
    been difficult for her to obtain independent evidence  to  support  her
    claim that she had not used to deception  to  obtain  the  certificate,
    there was nothing to stop her describing how she travelled to the  test
    centre, its location and other detail relating to her taking the  test.
    These are matters within her own knowledge.  She could have provided an
    explanation.  It was put to  me  by  Ms  Chowdhury  that,  because  the
    appellant was not at the hearing, she had been unable to explain  these
    matters. That is not the case: the appellant could  have  adduced  such
    evidence in her witness statement and, given that she  was  advised  by
    solicitors, I would  expect  such  information  to  have  been  in  her
    statement prepared for hearing. Those advising her knew that the burden
    of  proof  might  shift  to  the  appellant  to  provide  a  reasonable
    explanation to rebut the respondent's case.  It was not suggested  that
    the absence of the look up tool or the generic evidence until the  date
    of hearing disadvantaged the appellant in any way; indeed Ms  Chowdhury
    accepted the appellant was not prejudiced by late  production  of  such
    evidence. There was no excuse for  the  failure  of  the  appellant  to
    explain the circumstances in which she had taken the test. Instead  she
    had merely made a bare assertion that she had not used deception.  This
    is not an explanation.  The FTTJ appropriately took  into  account  the
    difficulties for the appellant of adducing evidence to demonstrate  she
    had attended the test centre.


15. The FTTJ took into account the nature and quality  of  the  appellant's
    masters course and the   letter  dated  September  2014  from  Dr  Mark
    Elshaw, her supervisor on a particular project at Coventry  University.
    He bore in mind the positive terms of the letter which is described  as
    a "reference".  This document was not prepared for the appeal  hearing;
    it has the appearance of an academic reference.  It  does  not  address
    the quality of her English language skills albeit it  can  be  inferred
    that they were good at that time. Indeed the FTTJ finds at [54] that Dr
    Elshaw's statement "is  consistent  with  a  good  command  of  English
    language". I infer the  FTTJ  is  referring  here  to  the  appellant's
    English language ability. The FTTJ  also  notes  the  letter  is  dated
    September 2014 "not a long period after  the  contested  test  in  July
    2013".   It is simply not correct for the appellant to  assert  (as  in
    her grounds of appeal) that "no weight" was given to this  document  by
    the FTTJ.

16. At paragraph 49 of MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49, 24 November 2010 it was
    said that "Where  a  tribunal  has  referred  to  considering  all  the
    evidence, a reviewing body should be very slow to  conclude  that  that
    tribunal overlooked some factor,  simply  because  the  factor  is  not
    explicitly referred to in the determination concerned". McCombe  LJ  in
    VW (Sri Lanka) C5/2012/3037 said  "Regrettably, there is an  increasing
    tendency in immigration cases, when a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
    given a judgment explaining why he has reached a  particular  decision,
    of seeking to burrow out industriously areas of evidence that have been
    less fully dealt with than others and then to use this as a  basis  for
    saying the judge's decision is legally flawed because it did  not  deal
    with a particular matter more fully.  In  my  judgment,  with  respect,
    that is no basis on which to sustain a proper challenge  to  a  judge's
    finding of fact".

17. This is not a case where the FTTJ gave  little  or  no  weight  to  the
    evidence of the appellant. He considered it in the round  and  give  it
    the evidential  weight  he  considered  appropriate.   That  weight  is
    consonant with the quality of the evidence before him.  Given that  the
    appellant was well aware of the issues to be  decided  (her  solicitors
    having been alerted by the various legal authorities such as MA (ETS  -
    TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 000450  (IAC)  and  others),  the  FTTJ  was
    entitled to assume that the appellant had put  her  best  case  in  her
    witness statement  which  was  drafted  specifically  for  the  appeal.
    Despite the seriousness of the allegation against her,  she  failed  to
    address the specific allegation of the respondent that she  cheated  in
    the test. She merely denied deception. That is not enough to amount  to
    an innocent explanation such as to discharge the burden on her.

18. The FTTJ's decision is grounded in the evidence;  it  is  reasoned  and
    sustainable. It does not contain a material error of law. I uphold  the
    decision of the FTTJ.

Decision

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error of law.


20. The decision of the FTTJ is upheld.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Dated: 27 April 2018


