
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02512/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th November 2015                |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MRS N R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 1st January 1991.  She
    appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  30th  December
    2014 refusing to grant her leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the
    partner of IAK.  Her appeal  was  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Sullivan.  He dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules
    but allowed it on human rights grounds (Article 8) in  a  determination
    promulgated on 25th June 2015.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mark Davies on 1st  October
    2015.  The permission states that it is arguable  that  unfairness  has
    been caused to the Respondent by the judge's  decision  to  decide  the
    appeal on the papers, as the Respondent was never put  on  notice  that
    that was going to happen so she had no opportunity to  object  to  that
    course of action and had no opportunity to  decide  whether  she  could
    agree to it going ahead without a hearing.

 4. There were other grounds which are not referred to in  the  permission.
    In the Respondent's decision it is stated that the Appellant has failed
    to meet the requirements of paragraph 319C(i) because  her  partner  is
    not a government-sponsored student and is not undertaking a  course  of
    study with a Sponsor who is  either  a  recognised  body  or  a  higher
    education institution.   His  previous  leave  was  not  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student or a student and the Appellant's previous  leave  was
    not as the partner of a Tier  4  (General)  Student  or  as  a  student
    undertaking a course of study longer  than  six  months.   The  grounds
    state that the matter was not considered by  the  First-tier  Judge  in
    terms of Appendix FM and neither did he  use  his  residual  discretion
    outside the Rules.  The grounds state that the First-tier Judge  should
    have considered the Appellant's family life under Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  but  instead,  moved  straight  to  a  freestanding
    assessment under Article 8 of ECHR.  The grounds state that by  failing
    to consider the position of the Appellant  through  the  prism  of  the
    Immigration Rules the judge failed to import the appropriate weight  as
    he did not take into account  the  public  interest  considerations  in
    which the Respondent has a legitimate role.  The grounds go on to state
    that the judge also misdirected himself as to the ambit of Section 117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  which  deals  with
    public interest.  The judge states in the decision  that  there  is  no
    evidence of the Appellant's English language ability  and  the  grounds
    state that this is a material consideration which has to be taken  into
    account when proportionality is assessed.

 5. The Appellant did not appear for the hearing of this  appeal.   Neither
    did her representative.  Her representative was telephoned and he asked
    for the claim to be decided without the Appellant or her representative
    being present.

The Hearing

 6. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge should not  have  dealt
    with the appeal on the papers without giving notice to  the  Respondent
    that that was being done as this caused unfairness to the Respondent as
    she had no opportunity to object to that course of action  and  had  no
    opportunity to decide whether she  could  agree  to  the  appeal  being
    decided without a hearing.

 7. I considered the papers on file.  There is a letter dated 11th November
    2015 by the Appellant's  representatives  asking  for  the  hearing  to
    proceed on  the  papers,  based  on  the  documents  submitted  to  the
    Tribunal.  A reply was sent to the  representatives  on  16th  November
    2015 refusing this adjournment request and stating that the appeal  was
    to remain listed for an oral hearing on 18th November 2014.   The  Home
    Office  did  not  provide  a  representative  for  the  hearing  so  no
    submissions were made on behalf of the Respondent.   Had  a  Presenting
    Officer attended the hearing he would have been able to put forward his
    submissions.  In these circumstances there was  no  unfairness  to  the
    Respondent.

 8. I explained to the Presenting Officer that I found there to be no error
    on this issue.

 9. The Presenting Officer then dealt with Article 8  submitting  that  the
    judge made himself the primary decision maker by  not  considering  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules but instead going ahead and  dealing
    with the matter on a freestanding Article 8 basis.  I was  referred  to
    the case of SS Congo [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  He submitted that  Part  5A,
    Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act 2002 was  not
    considered by the judge and the fact that the Appellant has no language
    test certificate was not considered by the judge.

10. He submitted that these are errors  of  law  and  when  taken  together
    constitute a material error of law.

11. It is clear from the determination that  the  judge  accepts  that  the
    terms of paragraph 319C (i) of the Rules cannot be satisfied.  Once the
    judge  decided  this  he  failed  to  consider  Article  8  within  the
    Immigration Rules.  Had the Appellant considered Article 8  within  the
    Immigration Rules he would have found that the terms of the Rules could
    not be satisfied.  Not only did the judge not consider the  Appellant's
    family life with reference to Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules,  he
    also failed to consider this issue when assessing proportionality.  The
    only mention of public interest is at paragraph 23 of the determination
    and it is not considered  fully.   When  proportionality  is  assessed,
    failure to meet the terms of the Rules is an important issue, as is the
    Appellant's lack of an English language certificate which  is  referred
    to by the judge in paragraph 23 of his decision.

12. In the said case of SS Congo it is stated that there has to be  a  fair
    balance between an individual's protected  interests  and  the  general
    public interest so public interest considerations have to  be  properly
    assessed.  This is a case where public interest  is  important  and  at
    paragraph 33 of SS Congo it is stated that the general position is that
    compelling circumstances need to be identified to support a claim for a
    grant of leave to remain outside the Rules and Appendix FM.  It goes on
    to say that very compelling reasons are required before a claim outside
    the Rules and Appendix FM can succeed.

13.  At  paragraph  25  of  the  determination  the  judge  refers  to  the
    Appellant's right to family and private life and  public  interest  but
    the proportionality assessment has not been properly dealt with.

14. By the judge making himself the  primary  decision  maker  and  by  him
    failing to consider Appendix FM there is a clear material error of  law
    in the judge's decision.

15. When I take into account what was before the judge  when  he  made  his
    decision, there was  not  sufficient  evidence  for  the  appeal  under
    Article 8, in terms of the Rules, to be satisfied and there was no good
    arguable case for considering the claim outside the Rules.

16. As there are no  very  compelling  reasons  for  allowing  this  appeal
    outside the Rules and because there is a material error of law  in  the
    judge's decision I am dismissing this appeal without the necessity of a
    further hearing.

Notice of Decision

I find there to be a material error of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
decision.  The First-tier Judge's decision must therefore be set aside.

I dismiss this Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules and  on  human
rights issues.

Anonymity has been directed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray
