
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/02599/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29th September 2014                        |On 30th September 2014       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                             Mr Abdallah Bakhsh
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Chohan, instructed by Greenfields Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  19th  June  1976.   He
    appealed against  the  decision,  dated  16th  December  2013,  of  the
    respondent to refuse to vary his leave remove him from the UK by way of
    directions.

 2. First Tier Tribunal Judge Mallins dismissed the appeal with  regard  to
    the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 3. An application for permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First  Tier
    Tribunal Judge P J G White in the following terms

    'the Gulshan Nagre approach to  Article  8  adopted  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 13.2 in finding that there are no good  arguable  grounds  to
    consider Article 8 outside the Rules is arguably wrong in the light  of
    MM [2014] EWCA Civ 985'

    The judge's findings concerning the Appellant's connections with Saudia
    Arabia (paragraph 11 (j)) and the judge's suggestion that the appellant
    should be removed to Saudi Arabia rather than Pakistan (paragraph 13.3)
    is contradictory to the judge's findings  that  the  appellant  retains
    ties to Pakistan (paragraph 11(k) given the  Presidential  guidance  in
    Ogundimu (article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060'.

 4. In particular the ground of appeal  noted  that  the  judge  failed  to
    correctly record the dates pertaining to  the  appellant's  immigration
    history and referred to the appellant  arriving  in  1999  rather  than
    1998, made a reference in the determination to South  Africa  when  the
    appellant has never had an association  with  South  Africa,  and  then
    refers to an entry in 1978.  These indicate  that  the  judge  did  not
    appreciate the full factual matrix and conceivably  applied  the  wrong
    facts.

 5. In addition the judge refers at 11(k) to the fact  that  the  appellant
    had a Pakistani passport and ID card recently obtained  and  that  'his
    father has connections in Pakistan (despite his having  been  in  Saudi
    Arabia for over 50 years) but the judge continues that  'clearly  there
    are undisclosed facts relating to the appellant's and his family's ties
    to Pakistan.  In the circumstances I am unable to find as a  fact  that
    the appellant has shown on the balance of probabilities that he has  no
    ties to Pakistan'.  The judge appears to have come to a  conclusion  on
    the  basis,  even  in  part,  of  'undisclosed  facts'  which  suggests
    speculation.   Notwithstanding  that,  the  judge  makes  contradictory
    finding at 13.3 that 'the better course of action would be for  removal
    directions to be set to Saudi Arabia where the appellant would  despite
    his long absence in my judgment feel at home with his large family,  no
    doubt childhood and student memories and connections where  his  native
    Arabic tongue is spoken'.

 6. I find  that  there  were  factual  errors  in  the  determination  and
    contradictory findings with respect to his links with Pakistan.  As the
    judge states she accepts much of what the appellant stated as true  and
    she recorded in the evidence that he had never been to Pakistan,  could
    not speak Urdu and  spoke  as  his  first  language,  Arabic.   He  had
    obtained the Pakistan passport through  his  father's  connections.  As
    Ogundimu asserts, ties imports a concept involving something more  than
    merely remote or abstract links to the country of proposed removal  and
    that there should be a rounded assessment of his links with Pakistan to
    inform any decision as to  whether  there  were  either  arguably  good
    grounds to consider the matter outside Gulshan, and a consideration  of
    proportionality

 7. I find an error of law and the determination is set aside.  The  matter
    is to be re-listed in the First Tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.

Signed                                              Date    29th   September
    2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington





































