
IAC-BH-PMP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02800/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 27th November 2014                 |On 14th January 2015                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                         EMMANUEL ACHEOMPONG GYAMFI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mohzam, Solicitor of Burton & Burton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 18th September 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Caruthers  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Sangha who dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent to refuse to issue a residence  card  as  an
    extended family member of an EEA national applying  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 8(5) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
    2006 on the basis that the appellant was in a durable partnership  with
    his sponsor.

 2. When granting permission Judge Caruthers  noted  that  the  grounds  of
    application did not seek to suggest that the appellant could succeed by
    reference to human rights issues, the appeal being pursued on the basis
    that the appellant was in a  "durable  relationship"  with  his  Polish
    partner as provided for under paragraph 8 of the 2006 Regulations.

 3. Judge Caruthers noted that the grounds complained that  the  judge  had
    used the phrase "no evidence" when he probably meant that there was  no
    documentary evidence; had drawn an inappropriate inference  from  email
    exchanges between the appellant and his partner; and  had  not  applied
    the principles  set  out  in  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of
    convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC).

 4. Whilst Judge Caruthers thought that some of  the  judge's  points  were
    valid, but that the judge may have erred in some of  the  ways  alleged
    and so there  was  sufficient  in  the  grounds  to  make  a  grant  of
    permission appropriate.

Submissions

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Mohzam confirmed that the durability of the
    relationship was the sole issue, it having  been  accepted  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal that the appellant did not meet the proxy  marriage
    requirements for his relationship with the  sponsor.   The  grounds  of
    application were relied upon.  He made reference to paragraph 18 of the
    decision which, he thought, suggested that the judge  had  reached  the
    conclusion that the appellant's evidence was contrived when  there  had
    been no allegation of deception made by the respondent particularly  in
    relation to the addresses at which the parties had lived.  Further,  he
    contended that the judge had made no  proper  credibility  findings  in
    relation to the oral evidence.  He argued  that  the  totality  of  the
    evidence should have led to a  conclusion  in  the  appellant's  favour
    although the judge had not made it clear whether or  not  the  parties'
    evidence had been found to be credible.

 6. Mr McVeety drew my attention to the response of  30th  September  2014.
    He argued that the grounds seeking  permission  amounted  simply  to  a
    disagreement with the cogently reasoned  findings  of  the  judge.   He
    pointed out that the parties were not, at present, at risk  of  removal
    so  the  remedy  was  for  them  to  make  a  fresh  application   with
    documentation which  could  not  be  questioned.   The  judge  had  not
    concluded that the documents submitted were false simply that they were
    unreliable and so could not be  accepted  to  support  the  appellant's
    claims.  The decision was not perverse and the judge  was  entitled  to
    reach the conclusion that the appellant had not shown that  he  was  an
    extended family member as a partner in a durable relationship.

 7. Mr Mohzam concluded by arguing that the documentary issue had not  been
    put to the parties by the judge who had failed to consider the totality
    of the evidence.

Conclusions

 8. After considering the matter for a few moments I announced that  I  was
    not satisfied that the decision showed any material errors on points of
    law and should stand.  I now give my reasons for that conclusion.

 9. The decision  is  comprehensive  and  well  reasoned,  particularly  in
    relation to the salient issue which was the durability of  the  claimed
    partnership between the appellant and his Polish  sponsor.   Where  the
    judge refers to having no evidence of cohabitation (paragraph  17),  he
    was clearly referring to  evidence  from  before  June  2013  when  the
    parties had started living  together  in  March  2013.   The  judge  is
    careful to draw attention to the documentary evidence which might  have
    supported the relationship after that date including a letter regarding
    electoral registration.  As to the reference to there being no evidence
    of communication between the parties since December 2012, the judge was
    evidently referring to documentary evidence because that is the context
    in which the paragraph was written.  Indeed, the judge goes on, in  the
    same  paragraph,  to  refer  to  the  oral  evidence  relating  to  the
    circumstances in which the parties met and their living arrangements.

10. Although it is suggested that the judge may  have  reached  conclusions
    about matters which were not raised in the refusal, he was entitled  to
    refer to inconsistencies in the evidence making it unreliable and  thus
    leading to the conclusion that the parties had not shown that they were
    in a durable relationship. That issue  was  clearly  in  issue  as  the
    respondent's refusal made clear  so  the  appellant  cannot  have  been
    disadvantaged by the judge's consideration of it in the  decision.  The
    judge's   conclusion   that,   having   regard   to   the    evidential
    inconsistencies, the documentary evidence of cohabitation was contrived
    was a conclusion  open  to  him  imparting  unreliability  rather  than
    falsity in the document itself.  It cannot be said that the  judge  did
    not reach a clear finding on credibility as that is  self-evident  from
    the judge's analysis of the evidence examined, including the claim that
    the parties had used social media to further  their  relationship,  and
    the inconsistencies found.  Further, the findings  of  the  judge  were
    open to him for the reasons given and the grounds of application amount
    to no more than a disagreement with  those  conclusions.   No  material
    error is shown.

11. No human rights issues arise as removal of the parties is not  imminent
    and a further application can be made if necessary.


NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show a material error on  a
point of law and shall stand.


Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested before me nor do I consider  it  appropriate  to
make a direction to that effect in this appeal.



Signed        Date 13/01/2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
