
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
ia/02311/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 21 March 2018                          |  On 11 April 2018                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                              MISS MILITA GHOSH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Shah, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Doyle  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent to refuse further leave to remain in the  UK
    as the partner of a Tier 2 migrant under the points- based system.  The
    Respondent made her decision on 20 June 2016.

2.   The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on  27  November  1987.
    On 18 April 2011 she was granted leave to enter the  UK  as  a  Tier  2
    student until 31 October 2012.  On 29  April  2013  the  appellant  was
    granted leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 student until 31 December
    2014.  On 26 June 2013 the appellant's leave to remain in the UK  as  a
    Tier 4 student was curtailed so that it expired on 25 August 2013.   On
    24 August 2013 the appellant made a combined application for  leave  to
    remain in the UK as a Tier 4 student.  On 20 June 2016 the  appellant's
    application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 student was refused.


3.   In the meantime, the appellant had on 21 February 2014  applied  for  a
    residence card as the extended family member of an EEA  national.   The
    appellant appealed the refusal of this  application.   The  appeal  was
    listed for hearing  on  4  February  2015.   On  30  January  2015  the
    appellant withdrew the appeal.


4.   On 4 February 2015 the appellant  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the UK as the spouse of a Tier 2 migrant.   That  application
    was refused on 26 June 2016.  It is  against  this  decision  that  the
    appellant appeals.


5.   The judge noted at paragraph 11(a) that the respondent's focus in  this
    case was entirely on the validity of the English language test produced
    by the appellant in support of the application she made  on  24  August
    2013 for leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 student.  The  appellant
    had relied on a TOEIC certificate  from  Educational  Testing  Services
    (ETS).  That test certificate said that the appellant sat and passed an
    English language test at Colwell College on  19  September  2012.   The
    test provider subsequently declared the test certificate to be invalid.


6.   The  judge  made  the  following  findings  in  respect  of  the  TOEIC
    certificate:


    (i)  At paragraph 11(a) the judge said that no evidence in relation  to
         the test that the appellant insists that she took  and  passed  was
         produced.  However, at paragraph 11(b) the judge made a finding  of
         fact that the appellant was cross-examined about attending the test
         centre, sitting the various parts of the English language test, and
         her journey to and from the test centre.  The judge said  that  the
         appellant  answered  each  question  without  hesitation,  and  her
         answers were not challenged.  This finding  seemed  to  suggest  as
         argued by Mr Shah and  endorsed  by  Mr  Jarvis  that  this  was  a
         positive acceptance of the appellant's evidence.


    (ii) At paragraph 11(e) the judge found that the  appellant  failed  to
         produce reliable evidence that  she  sat  and  passed  the  English
         language test and that he had  taken  account  of  the  appellant's
         evidence as at the date of the hearing.


7.   I find that it is difficult to  reconcile  the  findings  made  by  the
    judge. I agree with Judge Robertson, who granted  permission,  that  it
    was no clear from the decision, what in particular of  the  appellant's
    evidence as to where and when she took the test, resulted in the  judge
    finding that  she  had  failed  to  provide  an  innocent  explanation,
    particularly when her  responses  were  not  challenged  by  the  HOPO.
    Consequently, the judge's findings amount to an error of law.


8.   There is the Article 8 issue.  On 20 June 2016, the respondent  refused
    the appellant's application for further leave to remain in  the  UK  as
    the partner of a Tier 2 migrant.   On  2  June  2016,  the  appellant's
    partner was granted indefinite leave to remain.   He was therefore  not
    a Tier 2 migrant as at the date of the respondent's decision and at the
    date of the hearing on 17 November 2017.   The appellant was not  grant
    permission to argue paragraphs 10 and 11 of her grounds  because  Judge
    Robertson, relying on Odeola [2009] UKHL 25, held that  the  judge  was
    required to look at the date of decision when assessing the appellant's
    application.  At the date of decision, the appellant's husband  was  no
    longer a Tier 2 migrant. Judge Robertson said that even  if  the  judge
    did err in considering the position at the date of hearing in  relation
    to the appeal under Tier  2,  this  would  not  materially  affect  the
    outcome of the decision. .


9    Judge Robertson however granted permission in respect of paragraphs  12
    - 16 of the appellant's grounds. The  grounds  argued  that  the  judge
    applied incorrect legal tests and case law in respect  of  section  55,
    and that the judge failed to follow  the  guidelines  applicable  to  a
    qualified child under section 117B(6)(a).


10.  Judge Robertson said that there was nothing within the  decision  which
    suggested that the respondent, who should have been aware  of  her  own
    policies, took into account her guidance as to decisions which affect a
    British  national  child.   As  stated  above,  at  the  date  of   the
    respondent's decision the child had not been born. It was not  apparent
    from the documents that the respondent was made aware when she made her
    decision that the appellant  was  expecting  a  child.  Therefore,  the
    respondent could not have erred in this matter.  However, I  find  that
    there  was  nothing  within  the  decision  which  suggested  that  the
    respondent's policy was  drawn  to  the  attention  of  the  judge  and
    considered by him pursuant to SF and Others  (guidance  post-2014  Act)
    Albania  [2017]  UKUT 120 (IAC). This was an error of law.   I was told
    by Mr Jarvis that the guidance referred to in SF and Others  was  still
    in force at the date the judge heard the decision.   The  guidance  has
    since changed.  The new guidance came into force in February 2018.


11.  In the light of the errors that I have identified  above,  the  judge's
    decision cannot stand.


12.  The appellant's appeal is remitted to Taylor House for rehearing  by  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle


Signed                                  Date: 9 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
