
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02108/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |   Decision and Reasons          |
|                                          |Promulgated                      |
|On 16 December 2014                       |   On 9 January 2015             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

               tHE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR DANIEL NANA BOATENG
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Claimant: Mr P Saini (Counsel)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Gillespie)  who,   in   a   determination
    promulgated on 22 September 2014 allowed the Claimant's appeal  against
    a decision made by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  to  grant  a
    residence card as confirmation of his right to  reside  in  the  UK  in
    accordance  with  the   Immigration   (EEA)   Regulations   2006   (EEA
    Regulations).

2.   The Claimant whose date of birth is  23  December  1984  and  he  is  a
    citizen of Ghana.



Background

3.   In a Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 16 December  2013  the  Secretary
    of State considered the Claimant's application  and  refused  the  same
    under Regulation 7  EEA Regulations and thereafter  considered  whether
    or not there was a durable relationship  under  Regulation  8(5).   The
    Secretary  of  State  considered  that  there  was   no   evidence   of
    cohabitation prior to the date of the  customary  marriage  certificate
    and no evidence that the parties knew each other or had  met  prior  to
    that date.  The only evidence provided was  of  photographs,  a  shared
    address and emails from 2008/2009.

4.   In a decision the First-tier Tribunal found that the evidence  did  not
    establish that the marriage  entered  into  was  valid  and  recognised
    either according to Ghanaian or  Polish law.  The  appeal  was  refused
    under Regulation 7.  However, the Tribunal  went  on  to  consider  the
    applicability of Regulation 8(5) and 17(4) of the EEA Regulations.  The
    Tribunal  found  there  to  be  persuasive  indications  of  a  genuine
    relationship between the parties  including  an  extended  exchange  of
    emails prior to  the  marriage,  a  comprehensive  set  of  photographs
    showing dates from 2011 to 2012 together with oral  evidence  from  the
    Claimant and his spouse.  There was no issue as to whether the  Sponsor
    was an EEA national and a "qualified person" for  the  purpose  of  the
    Regulations.  Having determined that the  parties  were  in  a  durable
    relationship the Tribunal allowed the appeal outright .

Grounds of Application

5.   The Secretary of State submitted that the finding as to  the  existence
    of a durable relationship was founded on  insufficient  evidence.   The
    issuance of a residence card to an extended family member  was  at  the
    discretion of the Secretary of State and as such was  a  matter  to  be
    remitted for her consideration.

Permission

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge De  Haney
    as follows:

         "the grounds of appeal amount to no more than  an  attempt  to  re-
         argue that which was before the judge and was already  set  out  in
         the refusal letter.  However the point that the appeal should  have
         been allowed, on the basis that the decision was not in  accordance
         with the law, and  therefore  should  have  been  remitted  to  the
         respondent to exercise her discretion, is valid;  Ihemedu  (OFMs  -
         meanings) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC)."

The Hearing

7.   This matter came before me for  consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there was a material error of law in the Tribunal's decision.

8.    Ms  Holmes  confirmed  that  the  Secretary  of   State   specifically
    considered Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations in the  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter.  She conceded that the Tribunal made findings  of  fact
    that the parties were in a durable relationship and that thereafter the
    matter ought to have been  returned  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    consideration of a  grant  of  a  residence  card  in  accordance  with
    Regulation 17(4) EEA Regulations 2006.

9.   Mr Saini agreed and submitted that the findings made  by  the  Tribunal
    should stand and should inform the consideration  of  the  grant  of  a
    residence card under Regulation 17(4).  He submitted that there was  no
    material error of law rather that the Tribunal failed to expand on  the
    nature and extent of the appeal allowed on immigration grounds.

Decision

10.  Both parties were in agreement that the Tribunal had  properly  reached
    findings that were open to it on the evidence before it in finding that
    there was a durable relationship between the parties in accordance with
    Regulation 8(5) of the EEA Regulations 2006.

11.  The Secretary of State in her grounds argued that there  was  an  error
    of law to the extent that the issue of a residence  card  to  a  family
    member was at the discretion of the Secretary of State and as such  the
    matter ought to have been referred back  to  her  for  reconsideration.
    All parties accepted that this was the correct  course  of  action  and
    that the decision should have been worded in terms.  Accordingly I find
    no material error of law in the Tribunal's decision which shall  stand,
    save for the fact that I add to the decision a direction for the matter
    to be remitted to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  consideration  under
    Regulation 17.

Decision

12.  There is no error of law disclosed in the Decision  which shall  stand.



13.  The appeal is allowed on immigration grounds under Regulation  8(5)  of
    the EEA Regulations and the matter is to be remitted to  the  Secretary
    of State for consideration of the  grant  of  a  residence  card  under
    Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.


     No anonymity order made.



Signed                                  Date 5.1.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT - FEE AWARD

The appeal was allowed and a fee award in the total amount is payable.





Signed                                  Date 5.1.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

