
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02012/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 February 2016                            |On 19 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            miriam loyola edralin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Allen, instructed by Gupta Law Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the SSHD. I shall  refer  to
    Ms Edralin as the claimant herein. The claimant is  a  citizen  of  the
    Philippines born on 2 July 1961.  This decision is made in relation  to
    an appeal brought to the Upper Tribunal with the permission  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson,  granted  on  11  December  2015,
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge James  of  13  August
    2015 allowing the claimant's appeal.



FtT's decision

 2. It is important for the purposes of my decision that I set out in  some
    detail the following reasons and conclusions of Judge James:

         "9.  There are numerous errors in the reasons  for  refusal,  which
             include:

                . The Appellant is from the Philippines but the reasons  for
                  refusal refer to returning her to Nigeria;

                . It is accepted that the Appellant has  submitted  evidence
                  of her relationship with her British  partner,  such  that
                  "it is accepted that your client does have a  genuine  and
                  subsisting relationship" and then it is stated it  is  not
                  accepted the  Appellant  has  submitted  evidence  of  her
                  relationship with her partner or that she  has  a  genuine
                  and subsisting relationship;

                . On the Respondent's bundle is evidence  of  the  Appellant
                  residing with her partner since 2004, which appears to  be
                  ignored;

                . The reasons for refusal refer to the Appellant as  a  'he'
                  and 'his' when she is a 'she' which creates confusion  and
                  lack of confidence the  decision  maker  has  the  correct
                  information before her;

                . There is a litany and repeating of the rules and a generic
                  assertion that the Appellant does  not  meet  these  rules
                  without explanation or referring to the relevant paragraph
                  she fails to meet;

                . The reasons for refusal confirm the  Appellant  meets  the
                  suitability and eligibility criteria but then refused  the
                  Appellant her applications stating that she does not  meet
                  the eligibility criteria;

                . The reasons for refusal conflate the  criteria  under  the
                  parent and partner route then refuse on the  parent  route
                  based on the partner route criteria e.g. referring to  the
                  Appellant's partner under EX.1(a)(ii) which  concerns  the
                  child not the adult partner;

                . The Appellant made no application for leave to remain as a
                  parent;

                . The female Appellant's partner is referred to as  a  'she'
                  and 'her' when it is a man;

                . The reasons  state  that  the  Appellant  entered  the  UK
                  lawfully in 2003 but then later states  that  she  entered
                  the UK unlawfully;

                . It is then stated the Appellant has not formed  a  private
                  life beyond the usual relationships formed  after  stating
                  there is a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  her
                  partner;

                . It is then stated the Appellant has not formed  a  private
                  life beyond the usual relationships formed  after  stating
                  there is a genuine and subsisting  relationship  with  her
                  partner;

                . It is stated the Appellant has never held any lawful leave
                  to enter the UK whilst also stating that she entered on  a
                  visit visa i.e. lawfully;

                .  Although  being  aware   of   the   partner's   cognitive
                  deterioration  as   evidenced   by   the   NHS   documents
                  nevertheless the Respondent fails to consider this  matter
                  under  the  derivative  rights  set  down   in   the   EEA
                  Regulations regarding an overseas person who is caring for
                  a dependent adult as a primary carer.

         10.  As the Respondent chose not to be represented at the  hearing,
             it was not possible to clarify what matters remained at  issue
             due to the cumulative contradictory  statements  made  in  the
             reasons for refusal.

         11.  The cumulative impact of the number  of  errors  and  type  of
             errors made in the reasons  for  refusal  are  such  that  the
             negative conclusion and decision is not viable and  cannot  be
             relied on by the Respondent.   Furthermore  despite  being  on
             notice that this was a potential case that fell within the EEA
             Regulations regarding derivative residence  permit  rights  as
             the primary carer of a debilitated partner, the Respondent has
             not considered  this  case  under  what  may  be  the  correct
             regulation.  This is a further fundamental error.

         12.  Thus in summary the  Appellant's  appeal  is  allowed  to  the
             extent that the incorrect Immigration Rule has been applied in
             her application and the cumulative impact of the contradictory
             errors in the reasons for refusal renders it so  confusing  as
             to be void.  The consequent effect  of  that  decision  is  to
             vitiate the entirety of the Respondent's decision, which as it
             stands is unlawful.

         13.  I find that the  Respondent's  decision  in  relation  to  the
             Appellant remains outstanding  with  the  Respondent  and  she
             awaits a lawful decision on her  applications.   I  allow  the
             appeal to this limited extent.

         Conclusion

         14.  I have given careful consideration to all the documents before
             me and to the evidence and submissions, which are set  out  in
             the Record of Proceedings.

         15.  The general burden of proof is on the Appellant and the  civil
             standard of balance of probabilities applies.  On the totality
             of the evidence before me,  I  find  that  the  Appellant  has
             discharged the burden of proof upon her and the reasons  given
             by the Respondent do not  justify  the  refusal  of  leave  to
             remain.   Therefore  the  Respondent's  decision  is  not   in
             accordance with the law and the applicable  Immigration  Rules
             or Regulations."

Summary of submissions

 3. Mr Clarke contended that paragraph 9 of the FtT's decision discloses  a
    sufficient number of inaccuracies to require its  decision  to  be  set
    aside. In the alternative, it was submitted that the matters identified
    by the FtT were not such so as to render the substance  of  the  SSHD's
    decision ("the decision letter") unlawful, and the FtT's conclusion  to
    the contrary is irrational. Unsurprisingly, Ms Allen took  an  opposing
    view and submitted that there were sufficient errors in  the  Secretary
    of State's decision letter so as  to  entitle  the  FtT  to  rationally
    conclude as it did. Both parties took me through the points set out  in
    paragraph 9 of the FtT's decision in some detail.

Discussion

 4. The FtT's decision makes an  unpromising  start,  paragraph  2  thereof
    identifying the decision under appeal in the following terms:

         "This appeal is brought under section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  against  the  decision  of  the
         Respondent dated 28 March 2012 to refuse to grant leave  to  remain
         as the partner of a person present and settled  in  the  UK,  under
         private and family life under Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  of
         the Immigration Rules HC395."

 5. The papers before me do not disclose there ever having been a  decision
    of 28 March 2012 made in relation to this claimant.  Not  only  is  the
    date of the decision under appeal incorrectly identified by the FtT but
    it also incorrectly states that  the  decision  under  challenge  is  a
    decision to refuse the claimant leave to remain. In fact  the  decision
    under appeal is a decision dated 8 December 2014 to remove the claimant
    - a decision which was not in the papers before the FtT  and  was  only
    supplied to me upon request after the hearing.

 6. Of itself the aforementioned error in the FtT's decision would have led
    me to set it aside. The entirety of the FtT's decision  is  focused  on
    the reasons given by the SSHD for refusing leave to remain  and  it  is
    this decision which the FtT finds to be unlawful. For reasons which are
    obvious, the FtT does not address anywhere the  issue  of  whether  the
    SSHD's decision to remove (the decision under appeal) is unlawful. This
    is material because as of the date the  SSHD  made  her  decision,  the
    claimant was not lawfully in the UK, which of itself  founds  a  lawful
    basis for that decision.

 7. In any event, putting to one side all that I say above, I  nevertheless
    find that the FtT's decision is vitiated by legal error and must be set
    aside; ostensibly for the reasons commended to me by Mr Clarke  at  the
    hearing.

 8. Whilst the FtT was correct in stating that at one point in  the  SSHD's
    decision letter  [paragraph  40(iii)  thereof]  reference  is  made  to
    returning the claimant to Nigeria, when in fact she is  a  national  of
    the Philippines and it is to the Philippines that she would be removed,
    this was plainly no more than a slip. That this is so is  evidenced  by
    the heading to the decision of 3 December which identifies the claimant
    as a national of the Philippines,  as  well  as  the  numerous  further
    references within the decision letter to the return of claimant to  the
    Philippines (see for example paragraphs 16, 18, 23, 26, 32 and 43).

 9. As to the matters raised in the second bullet point in paragraph  9  of
    the FtT's decision, it is absolutely clear from  reading  the  decision
    letter as a whole that the Secretary of State accepts that the claimant
    and Mr Halabi are in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  (see  for
    example paragraphs 11 and 34 of the decision).

10. Moving on, in my view there is nothing in the decision  letter  capable
    of supporting the FtT's conclusion that the evidence  provided  by  the
    claimant as to her residence with her partner (Mr  Halabi)  since  2004
    was ignored by the SSHD. On the contrary, it is highly likely  to  have
    been as a consequence of this  evidence  that  the  SSHD  accepted  the
    claimant to be in a genuine and subsisting relationship with Mr Halabi.

11. The fourth bullet point in paragraph 9 relates to  the  gender  of  the
    claimant and the ninth bullet point to the  gender  of  the  claimant's
    partner.  The FtT was correct in identifying that on numerous occasions
    throughout the decision letter the  gender  of  the  claimant  and  her
    partner is incorrectly specified. However, it is plain from reading the
    decision letter as a whole that the SSHD was aware of both the claimant
    and her partner's gender.  In any event, it is difficult to  comprehend
    how any misidentification of gender could impact on the  lawfulness  of
    the underlying decision to refuse leave.

12. Moving on to the matters alluded to by the  FtT  in  its  fifth  bullet
    point. The conclusions therein  are  simply  inaccurate.   The  refusal
    letter does not contain a "litany and repeating of the rules";  rather,
    the SSHD properly  sets  out  the  provisions  of  the  relevant  rules
    necessary for determining the claimant's application, as well as  those
    relating to one rule which was not relevant  to  such  a  consideration
    (i.e. E-LTRPT of Appendix FM).

13. As to bullet point 6, again in my conclusion the FtT's observations are
    clearly wrong.  Duly analysed the decision letter does not  disclose  a
    passage in  which  the  SSHD  confirms  that  the  claimant  meets  the
    suitability  and  eligibility  criteria  of  the  Rules.    The   FtT's
    observation is, it would appear, based on a misreading of paragraphs  9
    and 11 of the letter.  In paragraph 9  the  SSHD  correctly  identifies
    that the claimant does not meet all of the eligibility requirements  of
    Appendix FM E-LTRP. However, if certain specified requirements of  that
    rule are met (i.e. those contained in E-LTRP  1.2-1.12  and  2.1)  then
    consideration must be given to the question  of  whether  an  applicant
    meets the additional requirements set out in paragraph EX.1 of Appendix
    FM.  In paragraph 11 of  the  decision  the  SSHD  concludes  that  the
    aforementioned  specified  eligibility  requirements  (i.e.  those   in
    paragraph E-LTRP 1.2-1.12 and 2.1) have been met by the claimant. There
    is nothing inconsistent in these conclusions.

14. As to the observations in the seventh bullet point in  paragraph  9  of
    the FtT's decision  the refusal letter does not,  as  the  FtT  states,
    conflate the parent and partner routes; it deals  separately  with  the
    eligibility  requirements  of  each  and  then  properly  goes  on  and
    considers the requirements of paragraph EX.1 - for  reasons  identified
    in the previous paragraph herein.   The  same  point  can  be  made  in
    relation to those matters identified in bullet point 8.

15. Continuing, I agree with Ms Francis that the FtT was correct to observe
    that in paragraph 40(ii) of her decision letter the SSHD wrongly states
    that the claimant had never held any lawful leave to enter or remain in
    the United Kingdom and subsequently treats this as  a  relevant  factor
    adverse to her.  A contrary factual conclusion is to be found elsewhere
    in the decision letter, as identified by the  FtT  in  the  penultimate
    (twelfth) bullet point in paragraph 9.

16. Turning to the eleventh bullet point. I observe, although the  FtT  did
    not, that immediately following the reference in the decision letter to
    the fact that the claimant had not produced any evidence of  a  private
    life which extends beyond the usual relationships which may  be  formed
    whilst residing in the  United  Kingdom,  is  a  consideration  of  the
    claimant's  relationship  with  Mr  Halabi  (see  paragraph  34).   The
    decision of the SSHD must be considered as a whole. If paragraphs 30 to
    36 thereof are considered in the round it is clear that  the  SSHD  did
    take account of the relationship between the  claimant  and  Mr  Halabi
    but,  nevertheless,  concluded  that   claimant's   removal   in   such
    circumstances would not lead to a breach of Article 8.

17. The final bullet point refers to a failure  of  the  SSHD  to  consider
    whether the claimant is entitled to any derivative rights "set down  in
    the EEA Regulations".  As identified by  Mr  Clarke  the  claimant  has
    never made an application under the EEA Regulations and,  consequently,
    there was no requirement on the SSHD to consider  this  matter.  It  is
    certainly not unlawful for the SSHD to make a removal  decision  absent
    giving consideration to such a matter in circumstances where there  has
    been no application made to her in this regard.

18. It is clear from all I have said above that in my  view  the  FtT  took
    into account numerous materially  irrelevant  factors  when  concluding
    that the SSHD's decision to refuse leave, dated 3  December  2014,  was
    not in accordance with the law.  As a consequence its decision must  be
    set aside for this reason.

19. There is no dispute between the  parties  that  having  set  the  FtT's
    decision aside the right course is for the matter to be  remitted  back
    to the FtT for that Tribunal to determine  the  appeal  on  a  de  novo
    basis.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision contains  an  error  of  law  capable  of
affecting the outcome of the appeal and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined de novo.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

