
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02707/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court Birmingham               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23rd July 2014                               |On 04th Aug 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                kelvin oteng
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Awal of The Law Clinic

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals against a determination of Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Aziz dated 18th April 2014.

 3. The Claimant is a Ghanaian citizen born 26th July 1976 who applied  for
    a residence card as confirmation of a right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom, as the spouse of Mavis Danso, a Dutch national  (the  Sponsor)
    exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.   The  parties  claimed
    that they had married by proxy on 10th July  2013.   The  marriage  had
    taken place in  Ghana  although  both  the  Claimant  and  Sponsor  had
    remained in the United Kingdom.

 4. The application for a residence card was refused on 18th December 2013.
     In brief summary the Secretary of State did not accept that the  proxy
    marriage had been properly executed and did not  comply  with  Ghanaian
    law, and therefore the marriage was not valid, and the Claimant was not
    a spouse of an EEA national, and  therefore  not  a  family  member  as
    defined by regulation 7 of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the 2006 regulations).

 5. The Secretary of State went on to consider whether the  Claimant  would
    be recognised as an extended family member of an EEA national,  on  the
    basis of being an unmarried partner  in  a  durable  relationship,  and
    therefore entitled to a residence card pursuant to regulation  8(5)  of
    the 2006 regulations.  The Secretary of State found  that  insufficient
    evidence had been submitted to prove that the parties were in a durable
    relationship.

 6. The Secretary of State did not consider Article 8 of the 1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention) as  it  was  contended
    that for this to be considered, a separate  application  needed  to  be
    made.

 7. The Claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal,  and  requested  that
    his appeal be determined on the papers.   It  was  contended  that  the
    Secretary of State had been wrong to find that a proxy marriage was not
    valid.  There was no appeal against  the  decision  to  find  that  the
    parties were not in a durable  relationship,  and  Article  8  was  not
    raised as a Ground of Appeal.

 8. The appeal was considered on the papers by Judge Aziz (the  judge)  who
    found that the proxy marriage was  valid,  and  therefore  because  the
    parties were validly married, the Claimant was entitled to a  residence
    card as the spouse of an EEA national.   The  judge  did  not  consider
    regulation 8(5) of the 2006 regulations, or Article 8, as these  issues
    were not raised as Grounds of Appeal.

 9. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was contended that the judge had erred in  law
    by failing to take into account the guidance  given  in  Kareem  (Proxy
    marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024  (IAC).   It  was  contended  the
    judge should have decided, as a starting point,  whether  the  marriage
    was contracted between the Claimant and the EEA national, according  to
    the national law of the EEA country which in this  case  would  be  The
    Netherlands.  The judge had therefore erred by focusing on the validity
    of the marriage in relation to UK law, and should have decided  whether
    the proxy marriage was valid in Dutch law.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted.

10. Following the grant  of  permission  the  Claimant  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending in summary, that the determination disclosed  no  error
    of law and the judge was correct to find the proxy marriage was valid.

11. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Error of Law

12. Mr Smart relied upon Kareem, and TA & Others [2014] UKUT 316 (IAC).  Mr
    Awal confirmed that he was familiar with the case law.  Mr Smart relied
    upon the grounds contained within the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal.  I was asked to find that because the judge had not  given  any
    consideration to whether the proxy marriage was valid in Dutch law, the
    determination was wrong in law and must be set aside.

13. Mr Awal disagreed and relied upon his rule 24  response,  and  skeleton
    argument dated 22nd July 2014.  I was  referred  to  paragraph  68b  of
    Kareem which indicated that the production of  a  marriage  certificate
    issued by a competent authority would usually be sufficient.   Mr  Awal
    argued that the judge was satisfied that the  marriage  certificate  in
    this case had been issued by a competent authority,  and  therefore  he
    did not need to consider Dutch law,  because  the  marriage  was  valid
    according to Ghanaian law.

14. I decided that the judge had materially erred in law by not taking into
    account the guidance given in Kareem  which  was  promulgated  on  16th
    January 2014 and published on 23rd January 2014, although  he  was  not
    assisted by the fact that this appeal was determined on the papers, and
    neither party drew his attention to the decision.

15. Kareem makes it clear that where there is a proxy  marriage  the  judge
    should as  a  starting  point,  decide  whether  a  marriage  would  be
    recognised as  valid  under  the  national  law  of  the  EEA  national
    concerned.  In this case the judge should have considered  whether  the
    marriage would be recognised under the law of The Netherlands.  He  did
    not do so and that was a material error.  The decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was set aside.

Re-Making the Decision

16. Both representatives indicated that they were ready to proceed  to  re-
    make the decision.  Mr Awal indicated that he did not  intend  to  call
    further evidence.

17. I firstly heard from Mr Smart.  I was asked to find that there  was  no
    evidence before the Tribunal that indicated that  this  proxy  marriage
    would be recognised under Dutch law.  The validity of the marriage  was
    the only issue before the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  the  absence  of  any
    evidence that the proxy marriage would be recognised under  Dutch  law,
    the appeal must be dismissed.

18. I then heard from Mr Awal who  submitted  that  this  appeal  could  be
    distinguished from Kareem, but in any event paragraph 68(b)  of  Kareem
    indicated that if a marriage certificate was produced  which  had  been
    issued by a competent authority, then this  would  be  sufficient,  and
    there was no need to go on and consider Dutch law.

19. Mr Awal also contended that paragraph 29 of  Kareem  indicated  that  a
    proxy marriage would be recognised by Dutch law.

20. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

21. In re-making this decision, I remind myself that the burden of proof in
    relation to the 2006 regulations is on the Claimant, and  the  standard
    of proof is a balance of probabilities.

22. I have taken into account all the evidence placed  before  me  by  both
    parties,  and  taken  into  account  the  oral  submissions   of   both
    representatives.

23. The only issue before me relates to the validity of the proxy  marriage
    said to have taken place in Ghana on 10th July 2013.  It is clear  that
    neither the Claimant nor the Sponsor attended that ceremony.

24. In my view it is relevant to consider the guidance in both  Kareem  and
    TA & Others, and I set out the head note to TA & Others below;

         "Following the decision in Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014]
         UKUT  24,  the  determination  of  whether  there  is   a   marital
         relationship for the purposes of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations
         2006 must always be examined in accordance with  the  laws  of  the
         Member State from which the Union citizen obtains nationality."

25. It appears that in TA & Others a  submission  was  made  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, in similar terms to that made by Mr Awal, in that  production
    of a marriage certificate  issued  by  a  competent  authority  in  the
    country where the marriage took place is sufficient.   That  submission
    is contained in paragraph 9 of the determination in TA which I set  out
    below;

         "9.  Mr Akohene submits that it is clear that there is a two  stage
             process in the determination of  whether  a  marriage  can  be
             considered  to  be  valid  for  the  purposes  of   the   2006
             regulations.  Where a marriage certificate has been issued  by
             a  competent  authority,  this  would  usually  be  enough  to
             demonstrate the  validity  of  the  marriage  under  the  2006
             regulations [paragraph 68(b) of Kareem]."

26. It was submitted that if a marriage certificate has been  issued  by  a
    competent authority, it is not necessary to move on to the second stage
    of the consideration, which is relevant only where there is doubt about
    whether the marriage has  been  lawfully  contracted,  as  set  out  in
    paragraph 68(b) of Kareem.  It is only in the second stage  that  there
    needs to be consideration of whether the marriage has  been  contracted
    in accordance with the law of the country in which the EEA Sponsor is a
    national.  The Upper Tribunal dealt with that submission  in  paragraph
    20 which I set out below;

         "20. Given that which I set out above, it is difficult to  see  how
             the Upper Tribunal in Kareem could have been  any  clearer  in
             its conclusion that  when  consideration  is  being  given  to
             whether an applicant has undertaken a valid marriage  for  the
             purposes of the 2006 regulations, such consideration has to be
             assessed by reference to the laws of the legal system  of  the
             nationality of  the  relevant  Union  citizen.   Mr  Akohene's
             submissions to the contrary are entirely misconceived and  are
             born out of a failure to read the determination in Kareem as a
             whole."

27. In my view the correct approach to consideration of proxy marriages  is
    set out in Kareem, and TA & Others.  In this case  there  has  been  no
    evidence adduced that a proxy marriage would be recognised under  Dutch
    law.  I reject  Mr  Awal's  submission  that  paragraph  29  of  Kareem
    indicates that such a marriage would be recognised by Dutch law.  I set
    out below paragraph 29 of Kareem;

         "29. The passages  we  cite  are  silent  on  whether  a  proxy  or
             customary marriage would be recognised in The  Netherlands  or
             whether such a  marriage  would  be  incompatible  with  Dutch
             public order.  We do recognise,  however,  that  Article  1:66
             permits marriage by representation in  certain  circumstances,
             which would suggest that marriage in the absence of one of the
             parties would not be contrary to Dutch Public Order.  However,
             as we have indicated, we have not received evidence  on  these
             complex issues and have been given no help on  how  Dutch  law
             might apply."

28. I therefore do not find that the above paragraph assists the  Appellant
    in this case as no evidence has been submitted to indicate  that  Dutch
    law would recognise this proxy marriage.  The burden of proof is on the
    Claimant and that burden has not been discharged.

29. I conclude that the appeal must be dismissed.  The  issues  of  durable
    relationship and Article 8 were not appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    and so were not before the First-tier Tribunal, or the Upper Tribunal.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
was set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is dismissed.





Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no
request for anonymity and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity order.

Signed                              Date: 25th July 2014




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.

Signed                              Date: 25th July 2014




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


