
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/02959/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 20 November 2015                  |On 29 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                                     rlk
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SecretARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Joseph Edwards, Counsel, instructed by Just Legal
Group
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  taken  on  14
    January 2015 to refuse to grant further leave to remain and  to  remove
    the appellant from the UK.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of India born in 1982. She  entered  the  UK
    legally on 23 October 2003 as the spouse of a  UK  citizen,  KG.  Their
    child, K, was born on 1 November 2004 and she  is  a  UK  citizen.  The
    appellant left the family home in December 2004. She claims to  be  the
    victim of domestic violence and the parties were divorced on  4  August
    2005. The appellant was granted indirect contact with K  in  2008.  The
    appellant claims that she has been torn between her desire to be with K
    and conceded to indirect contact to avoid K being put under stress. The
    appellant was granted discretionary leave to remain on 25 November 2011
    but the respondent refused her application under the domestic  violence
    concession. The appellant  made  an  application  in  2013  for  direct
    contact with K. CAFCASS recommended that the  indirect  contact  should
    continue. It was difficult to establish if direct contact  was  in  the
    best  interests  of  the  child  because  she  would   be   emotionally
    destabilised, at least in the short term. K said that she did not  wish
    to meet the appellant.  The  appellant  withdrew  her  application  for
    direct contact on 10 December 2013 because she did not wish to upset K.
    Indirect contact was to continue no more than 6 times a year.

 4. The  appellant  applied  on  28  October  2014  for  active  review  of
    discretionary leave to remain in the UK on the basis of her family  and
    private life in the UK. The respondent decided that the previous  grant
    of discretionary leave was to allow  the  appellant  to  pursue  direct
    contact  with  K  and  was  not  satisfied  that  those  grounds  still
    persisted. The application for further discretionary leave was refused.
    The appellant did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph
    267ADE of the Immigration Rules.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an  oral
    hearing at Stoke on 21 April 2015. She was represented  by  Ms  Dasani,
    Counsel. Ms Dasani conceded that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM and that she had no family life in the  UK.
    The First-tier Tribunal judge found that the appellant had  no  contact
    with K by virtue of a court order and that  she  had  no  intention  of
    seeking any direct contact for another three years. The  judge  decided
    that removal of the appellant would not prejudice the best interests of
    K and that, following a full Article 8  assessment;  it  would  not  be
    disproportionate to remove the appellant to India. There was inadequate
    reliable evidence that the appellant could be  maintained  economically
    in the UK, her private life was established when her immigration status
    was precarious, the appellant had never had  a  legitimate  expectation
    that she could make the UK her home, the appellant had a family  and  a
    house in India, she could continue relations with family and friends in
    the UK by telephone or periodic visits, it was in the best interests of
    K that the appellant had no direct contact with her, removal would  not
    prevent future applications and the appellant had not proved  that  she
    was the victim of domestic violence in the UK.





The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law. The judge erred in
    finding that there was no court order for contact as the appellant  has
    an indirect contact order since 2007 and further  consideration  should
    have been given to the  parent  route  under  Appendix  FM.  The  judge
    further erred in not considering indirect contact as  a  contact  order
    within the Immigration Rules. The judge failed to consider whether  the
    appellant was a victim of domestic violence which was  never  litigated
    as the appellant was not granted a right of appeal. There was no change
    of circumstances since the last grant of discretionary  leave.  Contact
    will be sought at some point when K is older; the  CAFCASS  report  was
    produced at a time when K was young and confused and influenced by  the
    father not to allow the appellant to see K. The  Article  8  assessment
    was inadequate.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on 20
    August 2015. The appellant's hopes should not be raised unduly  but  it
    was arguable that the judge may have erred for the reasons given in the
    grounds. Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

 8. In a rule 24 response dated 25 August 2015, the respondent stated  that
    there was a concession by the appellant's representative that the  only
    issue to be considered was Article 8. The judge considered the  factual
    matrix of the  case,  considered  the  best  interests  of  the  child,
    considered Article 8 and arrived at conclusions that were open to  him.
    There was no material error of law in the decision.

 9. Thus, the appeal came before me

Discussion

10. Mr Edwards submitted that there was an error of law at paragraph 29  of
    the decision. The appellant did have indirect  contact  and  the  judge
    failed to consider the second limb  of  E-LTRP.2.4;  the  appellant  is
    pursuing an active parenting role through letters. That is grounds  for
    a remittal. The Family Court and the First-tier Tribunal go through the
    same process for considering best interests and it is  not  correct  to
    state at paragraph 42 of the decision that the appellant was prohibited
    by court order from having direct contact. The court simply declined to
    order that direct contact take place and the order permits any  contact
    that the parties might agree. The judge did not properly consider  best
    interests or weigh the best interests in the Article  8  consideration.
    The appellant submitted the required evidence in relation  to  domestic
    violence and the judge did not address it because of the concession  at
    paragraph 22 of the decision. The errors of law contaminate the Article
    8 assessment at the very least.

11. Mr Richards submitted that the judge found at paragraph 67(xi)  of  the
    decision that the appellant had not proved that she was the  victim  of
    domestic violence. The judge  was  faced  with  an  appellant  who  was
    represented by counsel who made concessions and the judge had to act on
    those concessions (paragraphs 22 and 54 of the decision). The judge was
    only left with  Article  8  private  life  and  dealt  with  it  in  an
    appropriate manner. It was not appropriate  to  argue  the  case  on  a
    different basis today. Paragraphs 37-44 of the decision  conclude  that
    removal would not prejudice the best interests of the child,  K.  Where
    did the judge go wrong if he did what  counsel  asked  him  to  do?  No
    material error of law arises and the appeal should be dismissed.

12. Mr Edwards submitted in reply that  JA  (Meaning  of  "access  rights")
    India [2015] UKUT 225 (IAC) was only promulgated on 2 February 2015 and
    the  concessions  were  made  in  ignorance  of  that  authority.   The
    concessions on family life and Appendix FM should not have  been  made.
    The judge was wrong to accept the  concessions.  Paragraph  42  of  the
    decision is an obvious  and  fundamental  error  which  undermines  the
    judge's conclusions on best interests. The finding at paragraph  67(xi)
    is wholly unreasoned; domestic violence must have remained  as  a  live
    issue and that paragraph is inadequate.

13. I have considered JA. From paragraph 10, no distinction is made between
    "direct" and "indirect" access in the primary family legislation nor is
    any plainly indicated in the expression "access rights". If it had been
    intended to make such a distinction then that could have been included,
    expressed in unambiguous language, in the Rules.  Furthermore,  in  the
    context of family law, it is often the case that an  "indirect"  access
    order may be intended as a preliminary to the development (often guided
    by the  courts  and  CAFCASS)  of  more  extensive  access  over  time.
    "Indirect" access orders may be made when, for example, a  young  child
    has not seen a parent for a long  time  and  needs  to  re-establish  a
    relationship before  moving  on  to  spend  time  with  a  parent.  The
    expression "access rights" in E-LTRP.2.4 is  capable  of  referring  to
    both "indirect" and "direct" access. The remaining issue is whether the
    appellant is taking an active role in K's upbringing and intends so  to
    continue.

14. In this case, the judge found at paragraphs 42-43 of the decision  that
    the appellant was prohibited  by  a  court  order  from  having  direct
    contact with her child in the UK and had no intention  of  seeking  any
    such contact for another 3 years. The CAFCASS  report  of  27  November
    2012 indicated that it was not in the  best  interests  of  K  to  have
    direct contact with  the  appellant;  the  author  of  the  report  was
    concerned about the emotional impact  of  contact  upon  K  and  K  was
    adamant that she did not wish to meet the appellant. The judge did  not
    consider Appendix FM because counsel conceded that the appellant  could
    not succeed under  the  Rules.  I  am  satisfied  that  concession  was
    incorrectly made, for the reasons set out above. The  judge  cannot  be
    criticised for approaching the appeal on the basis of Article 8 outside
    the Rules only given the concession and the fact that JA was not  cited
    or available to the judge. However, the absence of any consideration of
    E-LTRP.2.4 is a material error of law which could result in a different
    outcome to this appeal.

15. I accept Mr Edward's submission that the wishes and feelings of  K  are
    not immutable. She did not wish to see the  appellant  as  of  November
    2013 when she was aged 9. However, as she grows up, her attitude  might
    change and to remove the  appellant  would  potentially  foreclose  any
    prospect of a meaningful relationship between the appellant and K.  The
    order of District Judge Nisa dated 10 December 2013  did  not  prohibit
    any form of contact. The application for direct contact  was  withdrawn
    upon the father agreeing to encourage K to engage in  indirect  contact
    taking into account her wishes and feelings  and  further  agreeing  to
    send K's annual school report to the appellant. The order  goes  on  to
    state that, "There shall be  such  further  or  other  contact  as  the
    parties may from time to time agree".

16. I also accept that the finding at paragraph 67(xi) that  the  appellant
    had not proved that she was the victim of domestic violence in  the  UK
    is not supported by an analysis  of  the  evidence.  Again,  the  judge
    cannot be criticised because the domestic violence issue  was  not  the
    central feature of the oral submissions made on behalf of the appellant
    in the First-tier which appear to have focussed on  Article  8  outside
    the Rules. However, the appellant was granted three years discretionary
    leave  to  remain  on  25  November  2011  after  her  application  for
    indefinite leave to remain as a victim of domestic violence was refused
    on the basis that there was insufficient detail in the submitted police
    report to "establish conclusively"  that  she  had  been  a  victim  of
    domestic violence. I find that there are significant issues in relation
    to domestic violence and the previous grant of discretionary  leave  to
    remain which have not so far been addressed in this appeal.

17. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules and the Human  Rights  Act  involved
    the making of an error of law and its decision cannot stand.

Decision

18. Mr Edwards invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph  7.2  of
    the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statements  I  consider   that   an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the error of law infects  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

19. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.


Signed   [pic]    Date 14 December 2015

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Judge Archer
