
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02096/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th July 2014                               |On 4th August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                           abolore suarakat banjo
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Camp promulgated on 15th April 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a male national of Nigeria born 25th November 1983 who
    on 13th June 2013 applied for a residence card as a confirmation  of  a
    right to reside in the United Kingdom.

 3. The application was made on the  basis  that  the  Appellant  is  in  a
    durable relationship with Krisztina Olah,  a  Hungarian  national  (the
    Sponsor) exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant
    therefore claimed to be an extended family member of an  EEA  national,
    and the application was therefore made pursuant to regulation  8(5)  of
    The Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  2006
    Regulations).

 4. The application was refused on  30th  November  2013.   The  Respondent
    issued a Notice of Immigration Decision of that  date  indicating  that
    the application had been refused because  the  Sponsor  had  failed  to
    prove that she is a qualified person as set out in regulation 6 of  the
    2006 Regulations.  However the Respondent's reasons for refusal  letter
    of 30th November 2013 confirms that the application was refused because
    it was not accepted that the Appellant was in  a  durable  relationship
    with the Sponsor, and therefore regulation 8(5) was not satisfied.

 5. In giving reasons the Respondent contended  that  the  Appellant  would
    need to demonstrate that he had been living together with  the  Sponsor
    for  at  least  two  years,  that  they  intended  to   live   together
    permanently, and that any previous relationship or marriage had  broken
    down, and that the parties were not related by birth.   The  Respondent
    would not normally accept that there is a  durable  relationship  where
    these criteria are not met, although each case was  considered  on  its
    merits and there would be occasions when the criteria was not met,  but
    it was accepted that a durable relationship existed.

 6. In this case it was not accepted that a durable relationship existed as
    the Appellant had not provided sufficient documentary evidence.  It was
    accepted that there was evidence to  suggest  that  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor had lived together at two separate addresses, but the  majority
    of evidence that verified the length of time that they had lived at the
    same address was from letters from one company.  Due  to  the  lack  of
    evidence submitted, it  was  not  accepted  that  regulation  8(5)  was
    satisfied.

 7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  He  requested  that
    his appeal be determined on the papers.  It was contended that  he  had
    proved that he was in a durable relationship, and that  to  refuse  his
    application for a  residence  card  breached  Article  8  of  the  1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 8. The appeal was determined on the papers by Judge Camp (the  judge)  who
    found insufficient evidence  had  been  provided  to  prove  a  durable
    relationship and the appeal was dismissed.

 9. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In brief summary it was contended that sufficient documentary  evidence
    had been provided to prove the parties are in a  durable  relationship,
    and the evidence that the parties lived  together  emanated  from  more
    than one company.  It  was  also  contended  that  the  judge  had  not
    considered Article 8, which had been raised as a Ground of Appeal.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Vaudin d'Imecourt in the following terms;


         1.   The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
             decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Camp  who,   in   a
             determination promulgated on 15th  April  2014  dismissed  the
             Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision
             to issue a residence  card  as  confirmation  of  a  right  of
             residence under European Community law pursuant to  Regulation
             8 of the 2006 Regulations.
         2.   The judge's findings which were made  on  the  papers  at  the
             Appellant's request was that on the evidence before him he was
             not satisfied that they had demonstrated that they had been in
             a durable relationship.
         3.   The Grounds of Appeal which appear to have been professionally
             drafted in effect state that the Immigration Judge  failed  to
             give reasons or any adequate reasons for findings on  material
             matters leading to an arguable error of law.  It  also  raises
             the Ground of Appeal that the judge  failed  to  consider  the
             Appellant's Article 8 rights.
         4.    The  judge's  findings  were  wholly   unreasoned   and   are
             unsatisfactory.  The  grounds  are  arguable.   Permission  to
             appeal is granted on all grounds.

11. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 stating that the application for  permission  to  appeal  was  not
    opposed as it was accepted that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    should be set aside.  It  was  suggested  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing to take place.

12. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Error of Law

13. There was no attendance on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.   I  took  into
    account rule 38 of the 2008 Procedure Rules  which  states  that  if  a
    party fails to attend a hearing, the hearing may proceed if  the  party
    has been notified of the hearing or that  reasonable  steps  have  been
    taken to notify the party of the hearing, and if it is in the interests
    of justice to proceed with the hearing.

14. I was satisfied that both the Appellant and his  legal  representatives
    had been notified of the date, time and place of the  hearing.   A  fax
    was received from the Appellant's representatives,  stating  that  they
    were without instructions in relation to the hearing on 11th July 2014.
     I decided that it was appropriate and in the interests of justice,  to
    proceed with hearing, as there had been no application to adjourn.

15. Mr Parkinson accepted that there was a material error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I set aside the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal for the reasons given in the grant  of  permission.
    There was a lack of adequate reasons given for the findings  made,  and
    in my  view,  with  respect,  the  judge  had  not  complied  with  the
    obligation set out in Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons  -  set  aside)
    [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC) which states that there is a legal duty to give  a
    brief explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on  which  an
    appeal is determined, although those reasons need not be  extensive  if
    the decision as a whole makes sense,  having  regard  to  the  material
    accepted by the judge.

16. A party who loses his appeal is entitled to know the reasons  why  they
    lost, and in this case there is  a  lack  of  adequate  reasoning.   As
    Article 8 had been raised as a Ground of Appeal, it  should  have  been
    determined.

Re-making the Decision

17. Having set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal I was  invited
    by Mr Parkinson to remake  the  decision.   I  decided  that  this  was
    appropriate, and there was no need to remit this decision back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In making  that  decision  I  took  into  account
    paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements.

18. I therefore heard submissions from  Mr  Parkinson  who  contended  that
    there was insufficient evidence to prove that the Appellant  was  in  a
    durable  relationship.   Mr  Parkinson  submitted  that   the   witness
    statements submitted by  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  were  of  little
    probative value, and evidence submitted to prove that they lived at the
    same address did not prove that they are in a durable relationship.   I
    was asked to note that neither the Appellant nor Sponsor  attended  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and there had been no attendance
    before the Upper Tribunal.  I was asked to dismiss the appeal.

19. I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

20. In re-making this decision I have taken into account  the  Respondent's
    bundle  of  documents  with  Annexes  A  -  F,   which   includes   the
    documentation  submitted  by  the  Appellant  in  connection  with  his
    application, and the Notice of Appeal.  I have also taken into  account
    the Appellant's further submissions attached to a letter from his legal
    representatives dated 19th March 2014.

21. Although there was reference in the Respondent's Notice of  Immigration
    Decision to regulation 6 of the 2006 Regulations, I conclude  that  the
    application was refused with reference  to  regulation  8(5)  of  those
    regulations, and the issue to be decided is whether the  Appellant  has
    proved that he is in a durable relationship with the Sponsor.

22. The burden of proof is on the Appellant and the  standard  of  proof  a
    balance of probability.

23. I conclude that insufficient evidence has been  provided  to  discharge
    the burden of proof.  I take into account that the Appellant if he  had
    wished, could have requested an  oral  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and he and the Sponsor, and any other  witnesses  they  chose,
    could have given oral evidence.  They did not seek to take that option.
     Neither the Appellant nor  the  Sponsor  chose  to  attend  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing and give oral evidence.

24. I note that the Respondent wrote to the Appellants by letter dated 18th
    October 2013 inviting them to be interviewed  in  connection  with  the
    application.  The interview was to take place on  13th  November  2013.
    There has been no indication from either side that  such  an  interview
    took place, and no explanation given as to why it did not  take  place.
    I draw no adverse inference against the Appellant on this, but the lack
    of such an interview contributes to  the  lack  of  evidence,  and  the
    burden of proof is on the Appellant.

25. I accept that  both  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  have  given  witness
    statements but they are brief and in the absence  of  oral  evidence  I
    attach limited weight to them.

26. As evidence of a  durable  relationship  the  Appellant  has  submitted
    photographs.  However there are only  four,  showing  himself  and  the
    Sponsor together.  It is claimed that the Appellant  and  Sponsor  have
    been living together since February 2011, and I do not  find  that  the
    production of only four photographs in  that  time,  proves  a  durable
    relationship.  There is no evidence as to  when  the  photographs  were
    taken.

27. The Appellant chose not to request an oral hearing so that  friends  or
    family members could  give  evidence  about  their  relationship.   The
    Appellant relies upon two letters from Folashade Taiwo dated  15th  May
    2013 and Kolawole Alausa dated 17th May 2013 to prove that he is  in  a
    durable relationship.  The letters are brief and without more,  do  not
    prove the couple are in a durable relationship.  In the absence of oral
    evidence from the authors of the letters, I place very  limited  weight
    upon them.

28. I accept there is evidence that the Appellant and Sponsor have lived at
    two separate addresses and there has been correspondence  addressed  to
    them at those addresses.  However with the exception of BT  bills,  the
    correspondence  is  addressed  to  them  as  individuals.    The   only
    correspondence addressed to them jointly relates to BT bills.

29. The fact that the Appellants share an address is not evidence,  without
    more, of a durable relationship.  There is no evidence  as  to  whether
    the Appellant and Sponsor own the  property  or  whether  they  have  a
    tenancy or lease in joint names.  There is no evidence  as  to  whether
    they live together in the property or whether the  property  is  shared
    accommodation for a number of people.  These are issues that could have
    been answered if there had been an interview  with  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor, or if oral evidence had been given.

30. For the above reasons I find that the Appellant has not discharged  the
    burden of proof and therefore the appeal cannot succeed with  reference
    to regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.

31. In relation to Article 8, I  must  firstly  consider  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules, although the  Appellant  has
    not placed reliance on these provisions.

32. I find that the Appellant has not established family  life  that  would
    engage Appendix FM, and this appeal cannot succeed  with  reference  to
    Appendix FM.

33. Paragraph 276ADE sets out the  requirements  for  leave  to  remain  in
    relation to private life.  I find that the  Appellant  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom (according to his  solicitor's  letter  dated  6th  June
    2013), as a visitor in October 2007.  He subsequently  overstayed.   He
    has therefore not lived in the United Kingdom for a long enough  period
    to satisfy paragraph 276ADE, with the exception of sub-paragraph  (vi).
    However the Appellant has not proved that he  does  not  have  ties  to
    Nigeria.  He accepted in section 10.12 of his application form that his
    siblings and mother still live in Nigeria.  In considering the issue of
    "ties" I have taken into account the guidance given in Ogundimu Nigeria
    [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC) in that there must be a rounded  assessment  of
    all the relevant circumstances,  and  this  assessment  is  not  to  be
    limited to "social, cultural and family" circumstances.  The  Appellant
    has not provided satisfactory evidence to prove that he has no ties  to
    Nigeria.

34. I conclude  that  the  appeal  cannot  succeed  under  Article  8  with
    reference to the Immigration Rules.  I  then  have  to  decide  whether
    Article 8 should be considered outside the rules.  I do  not  find  any
    compelling circumstances to consider Article 8 outside the rules.

35. However I have gone on to consider Article 8 outside the Rules  in  the
    alternative.  I  have  considered  Article  8  with  reference  to  the
    guidelines in Razgar [2005] UKHL 27.  I do not find that the  Appellant
    has established family life that will engage Article 8.

36. I accept that the Appellant has established a private  life  since  his
    arrival in the United Kingdom in 2007, which  will  potentially  engage
    Article 8.  Any  interference  with  that  private  life  would  be  in
    accordance with the law as the Appellant cannot satisfy the Immigration
    Rules.

37. Any interference with the Appellant's private life is necessary in  the
    interests  of  maintaining  effective  immigration  control,  which  is
    necessary in the interests of the economic  well-being  of  the  United
    Kingdom.  I find that any interference  with  the  Appellant's  private
    life is proportionate.

38. This is because the Appellant has been in the  United  Kingdom  without
    leave for a considerable period of time.  It would appear that when his
    visit visa expired, he did not seek to obtain further  leave.   I  have
    found that the  Appellant  is  not  in  a  durable  relationship.   The
    Appellant does not have children in the United Kingdom and there are no
    relevant medical issues.  The Appellant has  close  family  members  in
    Nigeria where he has lived for the majority of his life.

39. His removal from the United Kingdom will not breach Article  8  of  the
    1950 Convention.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
was set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no
request for anonymity and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity order.






Signed                              Date 23rd July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date 23rd July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

