

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/02122/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision and Reasons            |
|On 5 May 2016                            |  On 20 July 2016                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                         amith namal lembet simiyon
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms B Jones, Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant in this case  was  the  Respondent  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal and the Respondent the Appellant. For ease of reference I  refer
   to them as Secretary of State the Claimant and respectively. The Claimant
   is a national of Sri Lanka born on 25 September 1991. On 28 January  2013
   he was given leave to remain in the UK as a spouse. In obtaining leave to
   remain he submitted a TOEIC Certificate from Educational Testing Services
   (ETS) in support of his application. On  27  December  2014  at  Heathrow
   Airport a decision was made by the Secretary of State to refuse him leave
   to enter. His leave was cancelled because  the  Secretary  of  State  was
   satisfied that false representations were employed and material facts not
   disclosed for the purpose of obtaining  leave  to  enter  granted  on  28
   January 2013.


2. The Claimant appealed that decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under
   section 82 (1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.  His
   appeal was allowed under the Immigration  Rules  by  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge J Connor in a decision promulgated on 25 September 2015.

3. The  Secretary  of  State  took  issue  with  that  decision  and  sought
   permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Permission was granted on  12
   February 2016 by the First-tier Tribunal Judge on the grounds that it was
   arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had provided  insufficient  reasons
   for its conclusions. In granting permission, it was  considered  that  it
   was arguable that the Judge had made insufficient findings of fact as  to
   the Claimant's language ability at the relevant time in contradistinction
   to the Judge's finding at paragraph 30 of the  decision  that  given  the
   Claimant's English speaking ability to the Tribunal it was not  plausible
   if the Claimant had not taken a test.


   The Grounds

4. The Secretary of  State  asserts  in  the  grounds  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal had failed to provide adequate reasons for the finding that  the
   Secretary of State had not discharged the burden of proof on her and that
   she found the Claimant's  evidence  to  be  credible  given  his  English
   language ability. The Secretary of State set  out  the  sections  of  the
   statements of Rebecca Collins and Peter Millington relied on  and  argued
   that in order to be categorised as "invalid" on the spreadsheet  provided
   to the Home Office  each  case  had  to  have  gone  through  a  computer
   programme analysing speech and then two independent  voice  analysts.  If
   they were in agreement that a proxy test had  been  used  they  would  be
   categorised as invalid. A print-out of the relevant section  of  the  ETS
   spreadsheet was attached at Annex D of the  explanatory  statement  which
   identified the Claimant by name and recorded that the test  taken  on  28
   March 2013 was invalid. It  is  submitted  that  in  the  light  of  this
   evidence the First-tier Tribunal erred in finding that the  Secretary  of
   State had not discharged the burden of proof and failed to give  adequate
   reasons for  its  findings  to  the  contrary.  The  Secretary  of  State
   submitted that there may be reasons why a person who could speak  English
   to the required level would nonetheless cheat or permit a proxy candidate
   to undertake an ETS test on their behalf.


   The Hearing


5. The Claimant made an application to cite the case of Qadir &  SM  v  SSHD
   IA/31380/2014 and IA/36319/2014,  an  unreported  decision,  pursuant  to
   paragraph 11 of the Practice Directions of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum
   Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal. The  Claimant
   wished to reply on the proposition that "the generic  evidence  on  which
   the Secretary of State has relied to date  in  all  ETS  cases  has  been
   demonstrated as suffering from multiple shortcomings and frailties".

6. Mr Kandola objected to the unreported case being relied on. He  submitted
   that Qadir was fact specific and did not assist the court.  Should  Qadir
   be cited he would seek to rely on the report of Professor French to  show
   that the Secretary of State's evidence had always been good and  adequate
   which was contrary to the case of Qadir.


7. Ms Jones submitted that it could not be said that because Qadir  went  in
   it followed that the Secretary of State should be able to rely  on  fresh
   evidence. She relied on Qadir for a judicial finding. This  was  not  the
   ideal forum for a conflict of experts and the Tribunal was  concentrating
   on error of law only. The SSHD did not put in expert  evidence  in  Qadir
   until late. It was refused and it was not appropriate to undermine  Qadir
   by evidence that could and was not adduced in  that  case.  If  Professor
   French's report was admitted she would seek  an  adjournment  to  prepare
   submissions.

8. Paragraph 11.1 of the Practice Directions provides that  a  determination
   of the Tribunal  which  has  not  been  reported  may  not  be  cited  in
   proceedings before the Tribunal unless the Tribunal gives permission.  Ms
   Jones complied with the formalities and included  a  full  transcript  of
   Qadir, identified the proposition for which the determination was  to  be
   cited and certified that the proposition was  not  to  be  found  in  any
   reported determination and had not been superseded by  higher  authority.
   Paragraph 11.3 provides that permission will  only  be  given  where  the
   Tribunal considers that it would be materially assisted by  the  citation
   of the determination, as distinct from the adoption in  argument  of  the
   reasoning to be found in the determination. Such instances are said to be
   likely to be rare and that it will be rare for such  an  argument  to  be
   capable of being made only by reference to an unreported determination.

9. I decided not to give permission to cite  the  unreported  determination.
   The Upper Tribunal in Qadir heard oral evidence from Secretary of State's
   witnesses Rebecca Collings and Peter Millington and from Dr Harrison  who
   appeared on behalf of  the  Appellants.  The  conclusions  of  the  Upper
   Tribunal were based on the totality of this evidence.   In  view  of  the
   fact that I had to consider whether there was an  error  of  law  in  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal which came to its conclusions on  the
   written testimony of  those  witnesses  and  the  oral  evidence  of  the
   Claimant I concluded that the  conclusions  in  Qadir  would  not  be  of
   material assistance.

10. Mr Kandola relied on the grounds as lodged. The first  ground  was  that
   adequate reasons were not given on a material matter. The main point  was
   that the Judge did not give adequate weight to the Secretary  of  State's
   evidence. It was the combination of that evidence which went to show that
   a proxy  was  used  rather  than  looking  at  the  generic  evidence  in
   isolation. Even Dr Harrison accepted that there  was  inaccuracy  in  the
   system. Mr Millington's evidence showed that the tests  were  invalidated
   due to the proxy. If there  was  a  match  for  proxy  use  then  it  was
   invalidated.  The  combination  of  Mr  Millington's   report   and   the
   certificate showed why it  was  invalidated.  The  First-tier  Tribunal's
   conclusion was wrong on the facts and therefore it infected  the  Judge's
   conclusions on the law. The Judge then fell  into  another  error  noting
   that the evidence was vague and then  at  paragraph  28  noted  that  the
   Claimant was not able to give significant detail. He  was  vague  in  his
   evidence. The Judge concluded that given he spoke at the hearing and  had
   taken a test in 2015 it was not plausible that he had not undertaken  the
   TOIEC test. It was wrong of the Judge to concentrate on  the  ability  to
   speak English as of the date of hearing rather than when  the  test  took
   place. The Judge should have been looking at whether deception  was  used
   when the test took place rather than his English ability at the  date  of
   hearing. The test was taken in June 2012 and it was wrong of the Judge to
   concentrate on  the  Claimant's  ability  three  years  on.  It  was  not
   something that the Judge cautioned himself against doing  and  for  those
   reasons and the reasons in the grounds it  was  said  that  there  was  a
   material error of law.


11. Ms Jones submitted that generic evidence was one reason for the  Judge's
   findings. The case law which was cited in Qadir showed that forgery  must
   be shown.  First, the Claimant had discharged his part of the  burden  by
   providing  an  explanation  as  to  what  occurred.  The  technology  was
   imperfect and part of what made the evidence not  cogent.  There  was  no
   witness evidence or cogent evidence  even  connecting  the  process.  The
   evidence was unsigned and unauthenticated. There was nothing from anybody
   attesting that this Claimant went through this  process.  In  respect  of
   whether the process was satisfactory, that was discussed in in R (on  the
   application of Gazi) v SSHD (ETS - judicial review) IJR [2015] UKUT  327.
   It was obiter but nevertheless persuasive and it was clear that the Judge
   considered it at paragraph 23 and said that  the  evidence  was  lean  in
   detail and that Mr Millington had no expertise. There was  no  perversity
   challenge. It was clear why the Judge reached the conclusion that he did.
   There was no evidence linking this Claimant  with  the  process  and  the
   witness statements were generic and were insufficiently detailed to  show
   cogent evidence. The Secretary of State's  grounds  were  a  disagreement
   with the findings of fact. The fact that the Claimant could speak English
   was not the only the matter to be considered and his O' level was  passed
   well before the time he took the test. He gave evidence  about  the  test
   and that he paid in cash and it was not  as  though  that  there  was  no
   evidence The Judge had  given  sustainable  reason  why  there  was  some
   vagueness. The Judge had reached  adequately  reasoned  conclusions  that
   were open to him and set out the reasons for those conclusions  and  this
   was a disagreement with the finding that he was a credible witness.


12. Mr Kandola did not have anything to add. I reserved my decision.

Discussion and Findings

13. The Secretary of State's sole ground of challenge  is  that  the  First-
   tier Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons on a material  matter.  The
   First-tier Tribunal set out the Secretary of  State's  evidence  and  his
   findings in relation to it at paragraphs 20 to 26 of the decision. He set
   out the shortcomings  that  he  found  to  exist  in  that  evidence.  He
   considered the contents of the statement of  Rebecca  Collins  and  Peter
   Millington. He concluded that the statements were  generic  and  did  not
   state in any more than general terms  the  reasons  ETS  invalidated  the
   certificate of the Claimant.  He  considered  the  specific  evidence  in
   relation to the Claimant which consisted of a  print  out  to  show  that
   through  voice  recognition  software  the  Claimant's  test   had   been
   identified. At paragraph 25 he stated:


   "Having considered the case of Gazi, and on the evidence before me, I  am
   satisfied the evidence from the Respondent is generic and does  not  show
   the exact reason why ETS invalidated the certificate of the Appellant  in
   particular  and  provides  no  evidence  relating  to   the   Appellant's
   circumstances."


14. I do not consider that the Judge can be criticised for  his  conclusions
   on the shortcomings in the Secretary of State's evidence. He was entitled
   to take account of the comments on that evidence in R (on the application
   of Gazi) v SSHD (ETS - judicial review) IJR  [2015]  UKUT  327  that  the
   Secretary of State's evidence in relation to what actually occurred  with
   voice recognition is lean  in  detail  and  that  Mr  Millington  has  no
   relevant  credentials  in  voice  recognition.  In  the  light  of  these
   shortcomings he was not obliged to find that the Secretary of  State  had
   satisfied the burden of proving deception by way of cogent evidence.


15. He then addressed the Claimant's evidence at paragraphs 27 to 30 of  the
   decision. Although he found that the Claimant was vague in  his  evidence
   in relation to the circumstances of the test he gave adequate reasons for
   concluding that he had not practised deception. He found that his  memory
   of events was clouded by the effluxion of time, that  he  had  passed  an
   O'level in English in Sri Lanka prior to his arrival in the  UK  and  the
   ESOL skills for life speaking and listening English test  in  July  2015.
   He also found that he spoke reasonable  English  in  answering  questions
   before the Tribunal.  He found him to be  a  credible  witness  who  gave
   consistent evidence. I find therefore that the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
   not accept that the Claimant did not practice  deception  purely  on  the
   basis  of  his  oral  evidence  some  three  years  after  the   impugned
   examination result and took into account relevant factors before reaching
   a conclusion that was open to her on that evidence.


16. I find therefore that the First-tier Tribunal adequately  addressed  the
   Secretary of State's evidence and gave sufficient reasons as  to  why  he
   accepted the Claimant's innocent explanation and found that the Secretary
   of State had not discharged the burden of proof. His conclusions accorded
   with the assessment of that evidence in Gazi  and  the  approach  to  the
   burden of proof set out in the cases of Muhandiramge  (S-LTR.1.7)  [2015]
   UKUT 675.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal in those circumstances.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                             Date 20 July 2016



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
