

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
                                                               IA/02109/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 28th April 2016                           |On 6th May 2016              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                    [A P]
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     no appearance
For the Respondent:          Mr McVeety,  Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of India born on the [ ] 1977.  He  appeals
    with permission[1] the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Carlin) to dismiss his appeal against a decision to remove him from the
    United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.
    That decision followed a refusal to grant him leave to remain on  human
    rights grounds.

    Background and Matters in Issue

 2. The Appellant  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  2008  as  a  Working
    Holidaymaker. Before his visa expired he made an application for  leave
    to remain outside of the Rules. That  was  refused,  and  a  subsequent
    appeal dismissed. The Appellant became 'appeal rights exhausted' on the
    18th March 2011. He has been an overstayer since that date.


 3. On the 5th April 2014 he made an application for  leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds. The principle feature  of  that  application  was
    that the Appellant has health concerns, namely  Type  II  diabetes  and
    Bipolar Affective Disorder, and that he receives care from his  brother
    who lives in the UK.

 4. The application was refused on the 24th December 2014.  The  Respondent
    first addressed the Immigration Rules (Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE
    'private life') and finding  the  Appellant  qualified  under  neither,
    considered whether there are any exceptional  circumstances  such  that
    leave  should  be  granted  'outside  of  the  Rules'.   Although   the
    Appellant's medical issues are  noted,  the  Respondent  considered  it
    reasonable  that  he  return  to  India  where  medical  treatment   is
    available. The Appellant's assertion that  he  would  be  destitute  if
    returned to India is rejected: on his own evidence he has two  brothers
    there, and he has relatives in the United States of America and  United
    Kingdom who would be willing  and  able  to  support  him.  As  to  the
    Appellant's case that he depends on his brother in the  United  Kingdom
    for day-to-day care the Respondent relies on the findings of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rimington, made in the determination of the 2011 appeal:
    "there  is  no  evidence  of  anything  other  than  a  normal  sibling
    relationship in this case between two adult brothers. I do  not  accept
    that the appellant's right to a family life has been engaged".    Since
    the Appellant had not provided any evidence to  displace  that  finding
    the Respondent was not satisfied that there was any dependency.


 5. When the matter came before Judge Carlin there was no appearance by the
    Appellant. His representatives had written in to say that  due  to  his
    mental health issues he would not be attending.  Having  taken  account
    of the relevant Procedure Rules the  Tribunal  proceeded  to  hear  the
    appeal. The determination reaches the following conclusions:

        i) That the Appellant is not  "unduly  affected"  by  his  Bi-polar
           Disorder. This  conclusion  was  based  upon  letters  from  the
           Appellant's GP who confirmed that he is taking Setraline and his
           mood and general functioning have improved;


       ii) There was no evidence to suggest that the  Appellant's  diabetes
           had a significant effect upon him;

      iii) The Appellant  is  a  qualified  electrician  and  there  is  no
           evidence that his health would prevent him from  working  should
           he return to India;

       iv) His medical conditions are both controlled by medication that is
           available in India;

        v) Neither condition is life threatening;

       vi) He has family in India who would be able to support him;

      vii) There is no evidence to support the assertion that the Appellant
           is dependent upon his brother in the UK and  Article  8  is  not
           therefore engaged.


 6. The grounds assert that the appeal ought  to  have  been  allowed.  The
    grounds plead that the treatment for  Bi-polar  Affective  Disorder  is
    very limited in rural India and that the Appellant will not receive the
    same level of treatment as he receives in the  UK.   His  illness  will
    become  critical  and  life-threatening.   It  is  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's situation is exceptional and discretion  should  have  been
    exercised in his favour.


    Error of Law: Findings


 7. When the  matter  came  before  me  there  was  no  appearance  by  the
    Appellant. The day before the hearing the Tribunal received a fax  from
    the Appellant's  representatives  who  requested  that  the  appeal  be
    determined on its merits,  they  being  without  instructions.    Being
    satisfied that the Appellant had been sent a Notice of Hearing  to  his
    last known address in good time before the hearing, I decided  that  it
    would be contrary to the interests of justice for  the  hearing  to  be
    adjourned.


 8. I heard brief submissions from Mr  McVeety  and  reserved  my  reasoned
    decision.

 9. The grounds of appeal do not identify an arguable error of law  in  the
    determination. The grounds take issue with the findings in  respect  of
    the Appellant's health, the care and support he receives in the UK  and
    the extent of his private life here. They do not  however  identify  in
    what respects  the  Tribunal  could  be  said  to  have  erred  in  its
    assessment of those matters. The grounds assert that the  Appellant  is
    "unable to control his mood swings and to lead a normal happy life" but
    this appears to run contrary to the actual medical  evidence  that  was
    before the Tribunal.  The fact that the Appellant  is  a  man  of  good
    character who has "adopted the UK's lifestyle culture and language"  is
    not a factor capable of justifying a grant of  leave  on  human  rights
    grounds.   I bear in mind that the Appellant has not  been  represented
    before me and I have read the  determination  and  grounds  with  care.
    Having done so I am unable  to  find  any  basis  upon  which  I  could
    legitimately interfere with the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

    Decisions

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of  law.  The
    decision is upheld.


11. I was not asked to make a direction for anonymity and on  the  facts  I
    see no reason to do so.










                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                      2nd
                                  May 2016
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal refused by First-tier
Tribunal Judge Osbourne but granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Archer
on the 17th November 2015.

