
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02159/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th January 2015                         |On 23rd February 2015         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                           Mr Nadesu Satheeswaran
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASOND

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka whose date of birth is recorded
    as 29 July 1981.  He made application for an EEA Residence  Card  as  a
    "family member". On 18 October 2013 the application was  refused.   The
    Appellant appealed and on 15 September 2014 his  appeal  was  heard  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Napthine  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross.
    Though not making specific reference to it, following the  guidance  of
    the Upper Tribunal in Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - reg 8(2))  [2012]  UKUT
    79 (IAC), Judge  Napthine  found  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    establish the requisite dependency or membership of household  to  come
    within the requirements of Regulation 8 of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 and dismissed the appeal. No issue  was
    taken with that, however Judge Napthine did not address human rights.

 2. Not content with the Decision, by Notice dated  13  October  2014,  the
    Appellant made application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the  Judge  should  have  gone  on  consider
    whether the decision of the Respondent amounted to interference in  the
    Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights. On 28 November  2014  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Levin granted  permission  thus  the  matter  comes
    before me.

 3. At the commencement of the hearing I  indicated  my  view  of  the  law
    relating to this appeal which was, in short, that there  was  no  error
    because absent any decision to remove the Appellant, it  could  not  be
    argued that there was any interference. Without conceding the point, Mr
    Paramjorthy  told  me  that  the  appeal  was  brought  very  much   on
    instructions and having heard the reasons which  I  had  given  for  my
    preliminary view he would not want to make any submissions.

 4. The  majority  of  appeals  come  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    consequence of immigration decisions. They are set out in section 82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. However the  right
    to appeal an EEA decision is provided for by Regulation 26 of the  2006
    Regulations. An EEA decision is defined in the  general  interpretation
    section (regulation 2) and does not  include  human  rights.  One  also
    needs also to look to Regulation 26(7) which  makes  reference  to  the
    2002 Act and Schedule 1  to  the  2006  regulations  which  allows  for
    appeals on human rights grounds.

 5. However one should not lose sight of what is  being  appealed  when  an
    appeal is brought on  human  rights  grounds.  Article  8  provides  as
    follows:

        1.  Everyone has the right to respect for his  private  and  family
           life, his home and his correspondence.

        2. There shall be no interference by a public  authority  with  the
           exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with  the
           law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
           national security, public safety or the economic  well-being  of
           the country, for the prevention of disorder or  crime,  for  the
           protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the
           rights and freedoms of others.

 6. In a case in which an Applicant seeks what is  in  essence  declaratory
    relief, in this case a declaration that he is entitled to  a  Residence
    Card, which in the event is refused by the Secretary of State,  one  is
    bound to ask what right is being interfered with. The mere  declaration
    interferes with none of the Appellants rights. It would  be  different,
    of course were it the case that a decision had been made to  remove  or
    deport the Appellant. Such a decision can arise in  consequence  of  an
    EEC decision where a person is to be removed or deported in consequence
    of a decision arising from the provisions of Regulations 19-21 or where
    a person has failed in their claim to a derivative  right  pursuant  to
    Regulation 15A which has resulted in a decision  to  remove  under  the
    Immigration Act 1999. But in this type of appeal the decision to  grant
    relief or not does not necessarily lead to removal and in  actual  fact
    no decision to remove was made in this case; the appellant  was  simply
    informed that he should leave voluntarily.

 7. I am reinforced in my view that there can be no appeal on human  rights
    grounds in a case such as this by the fact that the decision to issue a
    Residence Card pursuant  to  Regulation  17(4)  is  discretionary:  the
    application Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340(IAC). In
    refusing the application the Secretary of State has refused to exercise
    her discretion on the basis of the application made i.e. the pursuit of
    a claimed EEA  status.  He  is  not  left  in  limbo  as  he  can  make
    application to regularise  his  stay  on  human  rights  grounds,  even
    outside the rules. What decision the Secretary of State then takes is a
    matter for her. If she decides to remove the Appellant then he may well
    have a right of appeal which he can exercise.

 8. The guidance in the case of JM v SSHD [2006] EWCA  Civ  1402,  requires
    mention. In that case Laws LJ stated that once a human rights point was
    properly before the Tribunal it should deal with it. For the reasons  I
    have stated however, on the facts of this  case,  the  issue  of  human
    rights was not properly before the  Tribunal.  The  Appellant  had  not
    applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds.  No  decision  was
    made that was, without more, capable of interfering in his  rights.  In
    the circumstances the Judge did not err and the  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal falls to be dismissed.

DECISION
The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal is affirmed.



Signed        Date 10th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

