
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02931/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13 April 2016                         |On 25 April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC



                                   Between

                             AKRAM PASHA SHAIKH
                       (anonymity directioN not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State in  relation  to  a
    decision promulgated on 12 October 2015 by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Clarke. That decision arose out  of  an  appeal  brought  by  the  then
    appellant, Akram Pasha Shaikh, a national of India, concerning leave to
    be in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student. The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge carefully considered the particular circumstances of the
    case (which I need not relate for the  purposes  of  this  appeal)  and
    concluded at paragraph 19:

         "I find that what should have happened in the Appellant's  case  is
         that the Respondent [ie the Home Secretary], in accordance with her
         own policy, should have issued the Appellant with a 60 day  letter.
         There is no evidence before me that a 60 day letter was sent to the
         appellant once his CAS had been cancelled.  It follows that I  find
         that the impugned decision is not in accordance  with  the  law.  I
         allow the appeal to the limited extent  that  the  case  should  be
         remitted back to the Respondent for a 60 day letter to be issued in
         accordance with my findings."

2.   The single error of law pursued by  the  Secretary  of  State,  and  in
    relation to which permission was granted, was that Home Office  records
    show that the then appellant departed the United Kingdom voluntarily on
    28 July 2015 (I take no point on the fact that the grounds say 23 July)
    and the Tribunal was unaware of this at the time of the hearing.

3.   Reliance  was  placed  upon  sub-section  104(4)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002.   Sub-section  104(4)  is  no  longer
    reproduced in the standard text, Phelan &  Gillespie,  Immigration  Law
    Handbook (9th edition, 2015) because it is no longer in force.  It  had
    read as follows:


         "An appeal under section 82(1) brought by a person while he  is  in
         the United Kingdom shall be treated as abandoned if  the  appellant
         leaves the United Kingdom."


    The annotation in the rubric at the foot of this  section  states  that
    the words in sub-section (4) were omitted by virtue of  Schedule  9  of
    the Immigration Act 2014 with effect from  20  October  2014.  As  this
    provision was no longer in force at the time of  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, it cannot be relied on in this appeal.

4.   Under the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014, rule 16(1) says that  a  party
    must notify  the  First-tier  Tribunal  if  they  are  aware  that  the
    appellant has left the United  Kingdom.  The  Secretary  of  State  had
    constructive notice  of  the  appellant's  departure  from  the  United
    Kingdom. I have been shown a series of screen  shots  relating  to  the
    appellant's immigration history, the most salient one of which is dated
    28 July 2015 and indicates that  the  appellant  left  the  country  on
    flight BA 0277 from London Heathrow to Hyderabad on that date.

5.   It  is  regrettable  but  I  think  entirely  understandable  that  the
    Secretary of State was not able to communicate that information to  the
    First-tier Tribunal by the date of the hearing on 31 July 2015.

6.   Sub-section 104(4A) was  introduced  by  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006. It states "an appeal under Section 82(1)  brought
    by a person while he is in the  United  Kingdom  shall  be  treated  as
    abandoned if the appellant is granted leave to enter or remain  in  the
    United Kingdom". This does not apply because  the  then  appellant  was
    never granted leave to enter or to remain.

7.   Having  considered  these  various  statutory  provisions,  Mr  Bramble
    conceded that notwithstanding the  grant  of  permission,  this  appeal
    cannot succeed and therefore the requirement that a 60  day  letter  be
    served has to remain. Whether this has any practical effect in the case
    of an  individual  who  has  voluntary  left  the  country  already  is
    doubtful. However, there is no error of law apparent on the face of the
    First-tier Tribunal decision and in the circumstances  this  appeal  is
    dismissed.


Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     22 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


                          Approval for Promulgation


|Name of Deputy Judge issuing       |Mr M Hill QC                          |
|approval:                          |                                      |
|Appellant's Name:                  |Akram Pasha Shaikh                    |
|Case Number:                       |IA/02931/2015                         |

Oral decision (please indicate)


I approve the attached Decision and Reasons for promulgation

Name:    Mark Hill QC

Date:    22 April 2016


