
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/02066/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 August 2015                    |On 28 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                               HUSNAIN QURESHI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Johnrose of Ellen Court Partnership
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnson Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 22 April 1991.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wedderspoon promulgated on 30 April 2015 which dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against a refusal  dated  22  December  2014  to
    refuse his application for an EEA Residence Card on all grounds.

 4. The reasons given in the refusal letter were, in essence, that:

      a) As a result of the marriage interview dated  4  December  2014  the
         Respondent regarded the marriage  of  the  Appellant  and  his  EEA
         sponsor Peterne  Kollar  as  a  sham  marriage  and  therefore  the
         application did not meet Regulation 2 of the Immigration  (European
         Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the EEa Regulations)

      b) The Respondent was not satisfied  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
         produced that the Appellant's Sponsor met the definition of  worker
         in Regulation 6 of the EEA Regulations and she was therefore not  a
         qualified person.

The Judge's Decision

 5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  the  grounds  of
    appeal set out the reasons why the Appellant believed that he  met  the
    requirements of the EEA regulations.

 6. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Wedderspoon  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the
    appeal against the Respondent's decision. The Judge:

      a) Set out the oral evidence that he heard from the Appellant and  the
         EEA Sponsor.

      b) Set out the law that applied including  the  definition  of  worker
         including the case of Levin v Secretary of State for Justice (1982)
         ECR 1035 that found that 'activities on such a small scale as to be
         regarded as marginal and ancillary are excluded.'

      c) He set out the guidance given in Papajorgii (EEA  Spouse  -Marriage
         of Convenience  )  Greece  (2012)  UKUT  38  in  relation  to  sham
         marriages.

      d) He found on the basis of the evidence before him  the  sponsor  and
         his wife were not credible witnesses.

      e) He found that the Sponsor was not a worker and that  whatever  work
         she had done was marginal and ancillary.

      f) He was not satisfied that the Sponsor was a job seeker.

      g) He found that the marriage between the Appellant and his  wife  was
         not a genuine one. He did not find that the explanations given  for
         the inconsistencies in the marriage interview were credible.

      h)  He  identified  a  number  of  inconsistencies  which   he   found
         significant.

      i) He did not find that the fact they had a child was determinative of
         htiers being a genuine relationship.

      j) He did not consider that Article 8 was engaged.

 7. Grounds of appeal arguing that the Judges assessment  under  Article  8
    was flawed in that he failed to consider the relationship  between  the
    Appellant and his daughter and stepdaughter; his assessment of  whether
    the Sponsor was a worker was flawed as he did  not  consider  the  wage
    slips and the evidence of  the  bank  statement;  in  relation  to  the
    marriage interview the Judge placed too much  weight  on  a  relatively
    small number of alleged inconsistencies  in  a  lengthy  interview;  he
    failed to have regard for Papajorgji where it was stated that a durable
    marriage with children and co-habitation is quite inconsistent  with  a
    sham marriage.

 8. On 7 July 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Astle  gave  permission  to
    appeal

 9. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Johnrose on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

      a) She relied on the grounds to the Upper Tribunal dated 12 May 2015.

      b) The Judge had failed to make an assessment in relation to Article 8
         in relation to his daughter and step daughter.

      c) There was no  authority  for  the  comment  that  a  sham  marriage
         precluded Article 8 being engaged.

      d) In relation to whether the marriage was a sham the Judge had failed
         to make a finding in relation to whether they were co  habiting  or
         take into account the fact that the marriage  started  well  before
         the Appellant's visa expired.

      e)  The  discrepancies  he  took  into  account  were  not  real   and
         explanations were given.

      f) In relation to whether the sponsor was a worker the Judge failed to
         take into account that the Sponsor had a  baby  in  June  2014  and
         worked up to the point when she took maternity leave.

10. On behalf of the Respondent  Ms Johnson submitted that :

      a) She relied on the Rule 24 notice

      b) Article 8 was not relevant to  this  appeal  as  there  were  other
         routes open to the Appellant

      c) If the sponsor was not a worker she had  no  right  to  remain  and
         therefore any error in relation to Article 8 would not be material.

      d) The Judge identified the  evidence  relied  on  to  show  that  the
         Sponsor was working and the wage slips dated 17 February that  were
         produced significantly post dated the decision.

      e) The evidence of work at B25 significantly  pre  dates  the  alleged
         relationship and was not relevant to the decision or the appeal.

      f) There was no documentary evidence that the Appellant took maternity
         leave or when that occurred.

      g) The Judge took account of the evidence  before  him  and  concluded
         that the marriage was a sham: it was a finding  that  was  open  to
         him.

11. In reply Ms Johnrose on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

    (a)    At page 23 of the bundle there was evidence that the Sponsor was
         in receipt of working tax credit.



Legal Framework

12. I enquired of the parties whether there was a recent case  in  relation
    to EEA appeals and EEA rights and was  told  by  Ms  Johnson  that  she
    understood there was a decision pending. Since the hearing date I  have
    noted that in the case of Amirteymour and others  (EEA  appeals;  human
    rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC) the Tribunal held:

         "Where no notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act has been  served
         and where no EEA decision to remove has  been  made,  an  appellant
         cannot bring a Human Rights challenge to removal in an appeal under
         the EEA Regulations. Neither the factual matrix nor  the  reasoning
         in JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 has any application to appeals
         of this nature."

The Law

13.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.

Finding on Material Error

15. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

16. In this case the decision of the Respondent has been to refuse to issue
    documentation sought as confirmation of the right of residence under EU
    law.  She has not taken action  to  remove  the  Appellant  ,  but  has
    reminded him that he has no right to be here, and has advised him  that
    if he wishes to remain here on some other basis, then  the  appropriate
    applications should be made using the  correct  application  forms  and
    procedure, and, on payment of any appropriate fee.

17. In relation to the Judge's claimed failure to  make  an  assessment  in
    this case under Article 8 I am satisfied that this was not an error  of
    law in line with Amirteymour. There was no  removal  decision  in  this
    case and no section 120 Notice and indeed Article 8  was  not  in  fact
    raised in the grounds of appeal before the Judge although apparently it
    was argued. It is however now clear that the Judge was not  obliged  to
    consider it in those circumstances.

18. In relation to the Judges conclusion that this was a sham marriage I am
    satisfied that this was a finding open to  him  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before him: what weight he gave to each  individual  piece  of
    evidence and whether he made findings in relation to  every  issue  are
    matters for him. This appeal is merely  a  disagreement  with  findings
    that  were  open  to  him.  The  Appellant  concedes  that  there  were
    discrepancies in the marriage interview, discrepancies that  the  Judge
    did find  were  significant,  and  gave  explanations  that  the  Judge
    rejected.

19. In determining that this appeal involved a  sham  marriage  I  am  also
    satisfied that the Judge took into account that the Sponsor had a child
    and the Respondent did not dispute that the Appellant was  the  father.
    No authority was placed before the Judge to suggest that  a  child  was
    determinative of the issue of whether a marriage was genuine or not and
    the Judge made a finding that was open to him  that  it  was  not.  The
    ratio of  Papajorgii  was  not  that  the  existence  of  a  child  was
    determinative of whether a marriage was a sham. The quotation relied on
    by Ms Johnrose from paragraph 29 of the case must be looked  at  in  an
    entirely different factual context in that the Judge was  referring  to
    the specific facts of the  case  where  there  was  clear  evidence  in
    documentary and photographic form of a marriage of 14 years standing of
    which there  were  two  children  with  everyone  living  in  a  common
    household.

20. Having found that the marriage was sham marriage and that  this  was  a
    finding that was open to him and errors or failure to consider evidence
    in relation to the Sponsor as a worker could not  have  been  material.
    Moreover I am satisfied that there were no errors. The  Judge  did  not
    find the Sponsor to be a credible witness given  the  contents  of  the
    marriage interview  (paragraph  26)  and  found  that  the  documentary
    evidence she submitted was  unsatisfactory  to  show  that  she  was  a
    worker. He gives reasons for that finding:  there  was  no  correlation
    between the pay slips and bank statements, no  contract  of  employment
    and the Sponsor did not know her employer as other than Immi. The Judge
    also considered whether the Sponsor could demonstrate that  she  was  a
    job seeker but again rejected the evidence produced  as  unsatisfactory
    (paragraph 28) as there was no evidence that she was  actively  seeking
    work.

21. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning. I  find  that  the  reasons  given  were
    adequate and the Appellant cannot be in any doubt about why the  appeal
    was dismissed.

CONCLUSION

22. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

23. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 26.8.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

