
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02732/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7 July 2016                            |On 25 July 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

         Appellant
                                      v

                           KHONDAKER BULBUL AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Claimant: Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Sultan, Legal Representative instructed by
Law Lane Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Claimant is a  national  of  Bangladesh  who  appeals  against  the
    decision by the Secretary of State dated 2  January  2015  refusing  to
    vary his leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student.   His
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy at a hearing on 18
    December 2015.

 2. The basis of the decision was that the Claimant had failed to submit  a
    valid CAS due to the fact that his former Sponsor was no longer  listed
    as a Tier 4 Sponsor when the Sponsor Register was checked on 2  January
    2015 and thus the Claimant failed to satisfy paragraph 117 of  Appendix
    A of the Rules and the application was refused under paragraph 245ZX(l)
    and (m). The Claimant was granted leave  outside  the  Rules  until  18
    March 2014 which gave him 60 days  in  order  to  find  a  new  Tier  4
    Sponsor.

 3. What then transpired is that the appeal was listed first before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Rozanski on 22 July 2015 when it was adjourned with
    the judge issuing directions stating that a Section 120 notice had been
    submitted by the Claimant   applying to vary the grounds of  appeal  on
    the basis that he had completed ten  years'  lawful  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom and was thus eligible for the grant of indefinite  leave
    to remain.  No response was received from the  Secretary  of  State  in
    respect of this Section 120 notice and grounds and no response had been
    received by the  time  the  appeal  came  before  Judge  Herlihy.   The
    Secretary of State's representative was given time to  check  with  the
    Home Office whether it would be possible for the Claimant  to  withdraw
    his current appeal and make a fresh application but the advice was that
    any new application would be refused as it would be out of time if  the
    current appeal was withdrawn.

 4. At 2.4 of her decision the judge records:

         "It was agreed that the appeal would proceed  but  the  Appellant's
         Representative accepted that the Appellant could not succeed  under
         the Immigration Rules on the basis of his initial  application  for
         further leave to remain as a Tier 4 student as he did  not  have  a
         valid  CAS  at  the  date  of  the  application.   The  Appellant's
         Representative said that he would submit  that  the  Appellant  had
         satisfied the criteria for indefinite leave to remain on the  basis
         of long residence and would make submissions on that basis."

    The judge then proceeded at 8.5 of the decision as follows:

         "I find that the decision is an interference with  the  Appellant's
         private life and is not proportionate given that the Appellant  has
         a valid claim for leave which should be properly considered by  the
         Respondent and I find that  a  short  period  of  leave  should  be
         allowed to the Appellant so that he can submit his application  for
         indefinite leave to remain based on his 10 years'  residence  which
         can be properly assessed and considered by the Respondent"

    and she allowed the appeal at paragraph 10 on human rights grounds.

 5. The Secretary of State then sought permission to appeal in time  on  21
    January 2016 on the basis that the judge materially misdirected herself
    in law firstly in failing to consider the application under  the  Rules
    pursuant to paragraph 276ADE; in giving no consideration and making  no
    findings as to why the Claimant's private life in the UK as  a  student
    outweighs the public interest in maintaining immigration control and in
    failing to assess the proportionality  of  that  decision.   The  judge
    materially misdirected herself in failing to consider  Section  117  of
    the 2002 Act and her finding that the appeal succeeds under  Article  8
    is irrational and is made  in  an  attempt  to  circumvent  the  lawful
    Immigration Rules.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on 7 June 2016 by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Page on the basis that the judge appears to have  allowed
    the appeal under Article 8 so the  Claimant  can  be  granted  a  short
    period of leave so he can make other applications.

     Hearing

 7. The appeal came before me for hearing on 7 July 2016 when the Secretary
    of State was represented by Mr  Whitwell  and  the  Claimant  by  Mr  C
    Sultan.  Mr Whitwell relied on the grounds of appeal submitting that at
    6.3 the judge found  that  the  Claimant  was  unable  to  satisfy  the
    requirements of the  Rule  and  made  findings  about  the  ability  or
    otherwise to  satisfy  ten  years'  continuous  lawful  residence.   He
    submitted that there was no reference to the private life provisions of
    the Rules or to the  jurisprudence  in  relation  to  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the Rules e.g. SS (Congo).  Nowhere in  the  decision
    was there reference  to  Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act  or  to  the
    precariousness of the Claimant's private life or his ability  to  speak
    English and essentially at paragraph 8.2 the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    was utilising Article 8 as a general dispensing power which she was not
    permitted to do.  He also drew my attention to the recent  decision  in
    Nasim which is a decision postdating Patel and where it  was  found  at
    paragraphs [12] to [20] that private life was a very limited utility in
    cases involving students.

 8. Mr Sultan responded to Mr Whitwell's submissions in general  terms  but
    ultimately submitted that the judge has a discretion and has  tried  to
    intervene in a way that the Home Office can now  reach  a  decision  in
    respect of the continuous long residence of the Claimant.

 9. In responding Mr Whitwell pointed out, correctly, that the  judge  does
    not have the discretion to ignore the Immigration Rules.  The  decision
    in this case by the Secretary of State was made on 2 January  2015  and
    by that time both Tier 4 cases were  already  subject  to  the  amended
    Section 82 grounds which came into force in  October  2014.   The  only
    grounds available to the Claimant were protection based or in  relation
    to human rights.

Notice of Decision

10. I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did err materially in law  in
    that she was not entitled to come to the decision she did  in  the  way
    that she did for the reasons set out by the Secretary of State  in  the
    grounds of appeal and elaborated upon by Mr Whitwell before me today.

11. Whilst it is the case that arguably the Claimant has  now  amassed  ten
    years' continuous lawful residence, this is an application that can  be
    made by payment of a fee on the specified form to the  Home  Office  to
    consider at any time after that period of ten years has been completed.
     In light of my finding that the judge erred  in  allowing  the  appeal
    under Article 8, I find that there is little  point  in  remitting  the
    appeal or adjourning it for further consideration given that the  clear
    way forward for the Claimant if he wishes to proceed to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom is to make an application to  the  Home  Office  in  the
    manner suggested above.  I therefore allow the appeal by the  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department with the effect  that  the  Claimant's
    appeal is dismissed.

12. I do not make an anonymity order.





Signed                                  Date 25 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

