
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/02541/2014
     IA/02546/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th October 2014                         |On 9th December 2014          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     MRS MARYAM KALEEM (FIRST APPELLANT)
                     MR SHAHID HASSAN (SECOND APPELLANT)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Jafar of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State, against  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kanagaratnam), sitting at  Hatton  Cross
    on 4th June 2014,  to  allow  an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 18th December 2013, to  refuse  the  principal
    Appellant  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier   1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the points-based system with reference  to
    paragraph 245DD of  HC  395  as  amended.   The  point  taken  for  the
    Secretary of State, and upon which  permission  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Grubb, is that  the  judge  wrongly  took  into  account
    evidence not submitted with the application, contrary to Section 85A(3)
    and (4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 2. The matter proceeded on submissions.

 3. At the commencement of the hearing I queried with  the  representatives
    if this was not the point decided by the Vice President of the Tribunal
    in the case of Ahmed and Another (PBS: admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT
    00365 (IAC). Both representatives agreed that it was and that  in  that
    case the point had been decided for the Respondent. As I  did  to  have
    the benefit of a skeleton argument I asked  Mr  Jafar  to  indicate  if
    there was any basis for my taking a different  stance  here.  Mr  Jafar
    submitted that the decision  in  Ahmed  was  wrongly  decided,  and  in
    particular that the Appellant in that case had been  unrepresented  and
    that no arguments had been made on the points that he made, namely that
    Appendix A 245DD was found within the main body of  the  Rules  outwith
    the points-based sections. Further the decision  in  Ahmed  led  to  an
    absurdity because in effect it would mean that courts could not look at
    anything not submitted  with  the  application  including  for  example
    witness statements prepared for the  hearing,  or  even  consider  oral
    evidence at the hearing, or even the account of any interview conducted
    by the Respondent of the Appellant after the application but  prior  to
    the decision.

 4. The reality is that the Appellant was represented in the case of Ahmed.
     Indeed, Mr Ockelton, at paragraph 6 of that decision,  refers  to  the
    spirited defence put forward by Mr Azmi. All of Mr Jafar's points  were
    considered by the Tribunal in Ahmed,  including  the  reliance  on  the
    Respondent's own reference in the decision  letter  to   a  non  points
    based decision as well  as  a   points  based  decision,  so  that  the
    exception  in  S85 could not apply. Mr Ockleton in the  case  of  Ahmed
    set out a clear rejection of that argument.  The head note of Ahmed  is
    clear:

         Where a provision of the Rules, such as that in paragraph  245DD(k)
         provides that points will not be awarded if the  decision-maker  is
         not satisfied as to another non-points-scoring aspect of the  Rule,
         the non-points-scoring aspect and the requirements  of  points  are
         inextricably linked and ,

         As a result, the prohibition on new evidence  in  s.85A(4)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 applies  to  the  non-
         points-scoring aspect of the Rule:  the prohibition is in  relation
         to new evidence that goes to the scoring of points.

 5. In short the judge can only look at all the material available  to  the
    decision-maker as to the genuineness and viability of  the  Appellant's
    proposals.  There is no issue that the  judge  exceeded  that  position
    here.  It follows the judge reached his conclusion taking into  account
    evidence which he was not  entitled  to  take  into  account.    It  is
    impossible to say what conclusion the judge would have reached  had  he
    not taken into account inadmissible evidence.

 6. The findings of fact are inadequate, not least for the reasons set  out
    in the original application for permission to appeal to the First tier,
    so that it is not possible to remake the decision on the basis  of  the
    factual findings made.

 7. In the circumstances I set the decision aside and remit the  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Directions

The decision is set aside and the  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal, Hatton Cross, to be  determined  by  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal other than Judge Kanagaratnam.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge



No issue of a fee award arises.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge





