
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02133/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1st September 2014                           |On 15th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                            Muhammad Irfan Mughal
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim of Counsel instructed by Eden Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Oakley promulgated on 4th June 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Pakistan born 12th March 1993 who on
    22nd February 2013 applied for further leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

 3. The application was refused on 17th December 2013 the Respondent having
    considered  paragraph  245ZX(d)  with  reference  to  paragraph  13  of
    Appendix C of the Immigration Rules.  In giving reasons for refusal the
    Respondent contended that the Appellant needed to show that he  was  in
    possession of �7,700 for a consecutive 28 day period the  end  date  of
    which must be no earlier than 31 days before the date  of  application.
    The Appellant relied upon his father's bank statement, but the  closing
    date in that statement was  more  than  31  days  before  the  date  of
    application.

 4. In addition the Appellant had not submitted a letter  from  his  father
    confirming that his funds may be used by the Appellant to study in  the
    United Kingdom, and confirming the relationship between them.

 5. The appeal was heard by Judge Oakley (the judge) on 28th May 2014.  The
    judge found that the Appellant had not submitted with  his  application
    the required  specified  documents  to  prove  that  he  satisfied  the
    requirements of  paragraph  245ZX(d).   The  judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had sent a letter to the Respondent  dated  6th  March  2013,
    after his application, which contained further  documents.   The  judge
    found that he could not  take  those  further  documents  into  account
    because they had not been submitted with the application.

 6. The judge therefore dismissed the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules,
    and went on to consider Article 8.  The judge found that the  Appellant
    could not satisfy the requirements of paragraph  276ADE  and  therefore
    considered  Article  8  outside  the   rules,   concluding   that   the
    Respondent's decision was proportionate  and  therefore  there  was  no
    breach of Article 8.  The appeal was therefore dismissed both under the
    Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the 1950  European  Convention
    on Human Rights.

 7. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and initially permission to appeal  was  refused  by  Designated  Judge
    Zucker who found that the grounds pointed to no arguable error of law.

 8. The Appellant renewed the application for permission.  Firstly  it  was
    argued  that  the  judge  although  restricted  from  considering   the
    Appellant's evidence submitted after the application by section 85A  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (the  2002  Act)  had
    erred in law because he  was  not  restricted  from  finding  that  the
    Respondent was wrong in law  either  to  ignore  or  not  consider  the
    evidence submitted  on  6th  March  2013  by  the  Appellant.   It  was
    contended that there  was  no  dispute  that  the  Respondent  had  the
    evidence attached to the letter of 6th March 2013 in her possession and
    therefore was under an obligation and the rules of natural justice  and
    fairness  required  her  to  consider  that  evidence  which  had  been
    submitted nine months prior to the decision being made on 17th December
    2013.  It was contended  that  there  is  a  public  law  duty  on  the
    Secretary of State to act fairly.

 9. The second ground contended that the judge had  erred  in  law  because
    there was evidence of the relationship between the  Appellant  and  his
    father, as a copy of the Appellant's passport had been  submitted  with
    the application and was contained in the Respondent's bundle  at  Annex
    B.  It was submitted that the judge had erred by  failing  to  consider
    the evidence properly.

10. Thirdly it was contended that the judge had erred in his  consideration
    of Article 8 because he had failed to appreciate that the  Respondent's
    decision was not in accordance with the law, because  at  the  date  of
    hearing the Appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules and
    the judge could take into account  the  evidence  submitted  after  the
    application when considering Article 8.   It  was  submitted  that  the
    judge had erred in his proportionality assessment as it was unclear how
    it could be argued that immigration control  was  maintained  when  the
    Respondent had failed to properly consider evidence in her  possession,
    and the Appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules at  the
    date of the hearing.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede in  the
    following terms:

         Having arguably accepted at paragraph 18 of his determination  that
         additional evidence was submitted to the Respondent  prior  to  the
         decision, albeit post-application, the  judge  arguably  failed  to
         engage with the point being made that the refusal  letter  made  no
         reference  to  that  evidence  and  thus  arguably  ought  to  have
         addressed the question of fairness, as raised in the grounds before
         him.

12. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  issued  a  response
    dated 13th August 2014 pursuant to rule 24 of  The  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  contending  that  the  judge  had   not
    materially erred in  law.   The  author  of  the  response  noted  that
    permission to appeal had been granted on the basis that the  judge  had
    failed to consider the issue of fairness.  The author of  the  rule  24
    response had not had access to the  Respondent's  file,  and  contended
    that even if this was an error  it  was  arguably  immaterial  and  the
    Presenting Officer who attended the First-tier Tribunal hearing and had
    the evidence before him was of the  view  that  on  this  evidence  the
    appeal could not succeed.

13. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing of the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the First-tier Tribunal
    determination should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Preliminary Issue

14. I explained to both representatives that I had read all  the  documents
    on the Tribunal file and enquired whether the representatives had  seen
    the rule 24 response.  Neither had, and therefore both  representatives
    were given an opportunity to read that response.



The Appellant's Submissions

15. Mr Nasim relied upon the grounds contained within the  application  for
    permission to  appeal.   He  contended  that  it  was  clear  from  the
    determination that the judge had accepted  at  paragraph  18  that  the
    Respondent  had  received  the  Appellant's  evidence  sent  after  the
    application.  On that basis  the  judge  should  have  found  that  the
    Respondent had acted unfairly in not considering that evidence.

16. I was provided with a copy of Naved [2012] UKUT 14 (IAC)  and  referred
    to paragraph 15 which confirms that the Respondent is  under  a  common
    law duty to act fairly in deciding immigration claims properly made  to
    her.

The Respondent's Submissions

17. Ms Pal contended that the judge had not made a clear finding  that  the
    further evidence had been sent and received  by  the  Respondent.   She
    referred to the last sentence of  paragraph  24  of  the  determination
    which for ease of reference I set out below;

         "24. He could have asked his father to email the documents  to  him
             and he was fully aware of the requirements of the rules  under
             the points-based system that  all  the  documents  had  to  be
             submitted  at  the  time  the   application   was   made   and
             significantly also he has never informed the  Respondent  that
             there were some documents outstanding due to the fact that  he
             appeared not to have received them from his father and had had
             to obtain further copies."

18. Ms Pal contended that paragraph 18  of  the  determination  was  not  a
    finding  that  the  additional  evidence  had  been  received  by   the
    Respondent.  She stated that the Appellant's letter of 6th  March  2013
    and the attached documents were not on the Respondent's  file  and  the
    Presenting Officer before the First-tier Tribunal had  confirmed  this.
    There was no  evidence  to  indicate  that  those  documents  had  been
    received by the Respondent.

19. Ms Pal contended that the judge had  erred  by  considering  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules but this was  not  material  because  the
    appeal had been dismissed.

The Appellant's Response

20. Mr Nasim objected to Ms Pal's submissions that the documents sent after
    the application had not been received by the Respondent  and  submitted
    that if this was the case this should have been included in the rule 24
    response and in making reference to the Presenting Officer  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the lack of evidence of these documents, Ms Pal
    was in effect giving evidence.  Mr Nasim submitted that  the  Appellant
    was prejudiced by the Respondent contending that the documents had  not
    been served, and if those documents had not  been  served  there  would
    have been reference to this in the determination.



21. Mr Nasim submitted that paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules should
    have been used to assist the Appellant, because if it was the case that
    documents had not been received, the Respondent was  under  a  duty  to
    notify the Appellant, and he would then have submitted those documents.
     This is  referred  to  in  paragraph  5  of  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement which for ease of reference I set out below;

         "5.  However it is apparent that no notice of these  documents  was
             taken, neither these documents were linked to my  application.
             As contended in the grounds of appeal that in the points-based
             system applications, the Respondent had the standard  practice
             of  contacting  the  applicants  for  any  missing  documents,
             however no such request was received by me,  wherein  I  would
             have had the opportunity to address this that  I  had  already
             forwarded the documents on 6th March 2013, and  I  would  have
             enclosed the copies again for ease of reference."

My Conclusions and Reasons

22. The documents that the Appellant submitted  with  his  application  for
    leave to remain did not satisfy the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

23. Firstly the bank statement submitted which belonged to the  Appellant's
    father, had a closing balance dated 4th January 2013.   This  was  more
    than 31 days before the date of the Appellant's application  which  was
    made on 22nd February 2013.  Therefore the  requirements  of  paragraph
    1A(h) of Appendix C were not satisfied.

24. Secondly, the appellant did not submit with his application any of  the
    specified documents referred to in paragraph 13B of Appendix C such  as
    his  birth  certificate  showing  the  names  of  his  parents,  or   a
    certificate of adoption showing the names  of  both  parents  or  legal
    guardian, or a court document naming his legal guardian.

25. Thirdly the Appellant did not send with his application a  letter  from
    his father giving written consent for his funds  to  be  used  for  the
    Appellant's  education  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  confirming  the
    relationship between them, as required by paragraph 13(ii)  and  13B(b)
    of Appendix C.

26.  The  judge  found  that  the  Appellant  had  sent  a  letter  to  the
    Respondent's Croydon office dated 6th March 2013 enclosing an affidavit
    from his father dated 18th January 2013, a form issued by the  Pakistan
    government confirming the Appellant's relationship with his father, and
    new bank statement from his father showing a closing balance as at 31st
    January 2013, although the Appellant's letter  dated  6th  March  2013,
    which was enclosed in the Appellant's bundle of documents submitted  to
    the Tribunal, made no reference to the bank statement.

27. The judge was  correct  to  find  that  he  could  not  consider  those
    documents in relation to the Appellant's application under the  points-
    based system.  This is because the evidence was not submitted with  the
    application and therefore could not be considered pursuant  to  section
    85A(3)(b) and (4) of the 2002 Act.



28. The judge did not consider whether the Respondent had acted unfairly in
    failing to consider the evidence submitted to the  application  because
    there was no evidence that the letter and enclosures had been  received
    by the Respondent when the decision was made.

29. I do not accept that the judge made a finding that the  Respondent  had
    the required evidence in her possession.  The  judge  in  paragraph  18
    made a finding that further evidence  was  sent  but  did  not  make  a
    finding that the evidence was before the decision-maker.  In  fact  the
    case put to the judge in the Grounds of Appeal  was  that  it  appeared
    that those documents had not been linked to the Appellant's file.  This
    is specifically stated in paragraph 5 of the grounds  in  which  it  is
    stated;

         "It now appears following the rejection  of  application  that  the
         documents sent by the Appellant were not allocated to his file."

30. In paragraph 7 of the grounds submitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  it
    is contended that if the documents  had  not  reached  the  Respondent,
    rather than refusing the application, the Respondent could have written
    to the Appellant requesting the missing information.

31. In my view Ms Pal was perfectly entitled to make  the  submission  that
    there was no evidence on the Respondent's file that those documents had
    ever been received by the Respondent until they were  included  in  the
    Appellant's bundle and lodged with the Tribunal after the  Respondent's
    decision was made.

32. I do not find that the Appellant was prejudiced by Ms  Pal  taking  the
    stance that the judge had not made a finding that  the  Respondent  had
    received the documents.  It is clear from the grant of permission  that
    Judge Kebede  stated  that  the  judge  had  'arguably'  accepted  that
    additional evidence was submitted to the Respondent, but  Judge  Kebede
    did not give any indication that it was accepted  that  the  Respondent
    had received those documents.

33. Mr Nasim  contended  that  if  the  Respondent  had  not  received  the
    additional documents, then paragraph 245AA dictated that the  Appellant
    should have been contacted in advised of this.  I  do  not  agree.   In
    summary paragraph 245AA states that when specified  documents  must  be
    provided, the decision-maker will only  consider  documents  that  have
    been submitted with the application, unless sub-paragraph (b) applies.

34. Sub-paragraph (b) is set out below;

         (b)  If the applicant has submitted specified documents in which:
             (i)  Some of the documents in the sequence have  been  omitted
                  (for example, if one  bank  statement  from  a  series  is
                  missing);
             (ii) A document is in the wrong  format  (for  example,  if  a
                  letter is not on letter head paper specified); or
             (iii)    A document is a copy and not an original document; or
             (iv)  A  document  does  not  contain  all  of  the  specified
                  information;
             the Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer or  Secretary
             of State may contact the applicant or  his  representative  in
             writing, and request the  correct  documents.   The  requested
             documents must be received at the  address  specified  in  the
             request within 7 working days of the date of the request.

35. This is not a case where sub-paragraph (b) applies.  In this  case  the
    Appellant did not submit specified documents  which  should  have  been
    submitted with the application.  Sub-paragraph (c) of  paragraph  245AA
    states that documents will not be requested where a specified  document
    has not been submitted.

36. I therefore conclude for the reasons given above, that  the  judge  did
    not err in failing to consider whether the Respondent had acted fairly.
     The judge did not make a finding that the  documents  submitted  after
    the application, were before the decision-maker and had been ignored.

37. The second Ground of Appeal contends that the judge erred in failing to
    properly consider evidence of the relationship  between  the  Appellant
    and his father.  There is no merit in this  ground.   Although  a  copy
    passport was submitted, this does not satisfy paragraph 13 of  Appendix
    C.  The judge did not err on this issue.

38. The third Ground of Appeal to  be  considered  relates  to  Article  8.
    Having decided to consider Article 8 outside the rules, the  judge  did
    not err  in  his  Article  8  assessment.   I  find  no  merit  in  the
    Appellant's  submission  that  the  judge   should   have   found   the
    Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law because at the
    date of hearing the Appellant met the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  If this  submission  was  accepted,  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules would be irrelevant and an Appellant would be able to
    submit evidence and have this evidence accepted after he had  submitted
    his application and even after the Respondent had made a decision.   As
    stated by the Supreme Court in paragraph 57 of Patel [2013] UKSC 72;

         57.  It is important to remember that Article 8 is  not  a  general
             dispensing  power.   It  is  to  be  distinguished  from   the
             Secretary of State's  discretion  to  allow  leave  to  remain
             outside the rules, which may be  unrelated  to  any  protected
             human right.

39. The judge did not accept that the Respondent  had  failed  to  properly
    consider evidence in her possession and  was  correct  to  conclude  in
    paragraph 25 that there should be no reason why the Appellant's failure
    to submit the documents which were required

         "should in these circumstances trump  the  rules  and  I  therefore
         conclude in all those circumstances that the decision  relating  to
         the Appellant was not disproportionate."

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
law.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.



Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no  request  for  anonymity  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  makes  no  anonymity
direction.






Signed                              Date 3rd September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date 3rd September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

