
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02142/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th August 2014                             |On 8th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                     mr Ahmed Elsayed Abdelgalil Shahba
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Al-Rashid (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M A Khan, promulgated on 5th June 2014, following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on  16th  May  2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Ahmed Elsayed Abdelgalil Shahba.  The Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen  of  Egypt,  who  was  born  on  1st
    January 1983.  He  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 19th December 2013, refusing his  application
    for a residence card, on the basis of his marriage to a Czech national,
    namely, Mrs Martina  Ferkova,  under  Regulation  7  and  8(5)  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is married to his  wife,  Mrs  Martina
    Ferkova, by way of a proxy marriage which was conducted  in  Egypt,  as
    well as by way of a religious ceremony  which  was  carried  out  in  a
    mosque in Doncaster.  He is validly married.  The Respondent  Secretary
    of State has misunderstood the marriage.  The Respondent refers to  the
    religious marriage at a  mosque  in  Doncaster  as  a  proxy  marriage,
    whereas in fact, it is  the  marriage  in  Egypt  which  is  the  proxy
    marriage.  The Respondent in her  refusal  letter  has  considered  the
    former but  has  not  considered  the  latter.   Had  the  latter  been
    considered, it was clear that the marriage  was  a  valid  marriage  by
    virtue of the laws of Egypt such that the Appellant was entitled to  be
    issued with a residence card on account of  his  marriage  to  a  Czech
    national.

The Immigration Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that, whereas  it  was  true  that  the  Respondent  had
    referred to the Doncaster marriage as a proxy marriage when in fact  it
    was the marriage in Egypt that was a proxy marriage, the fact was  that
    there was little evidence of the Appellant's wife having  travelled  to
    Egypt for the purposes of this marriage (paragraph 28).  He  held  that
    it was for the Appellant to provide original  documents.   He  had  not
    done so.  He had not discharged the burden of proof.   The  judge  also
    considered whether the parties  had  a  durable  relationship  for  the
    purposes of EEA law and held that the documents  provided,  such  as  a
    Vodafone bill and the partner's employer's letter, did not establish  a
    durable  relationship  as  required  by  Regulation  8(5)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006.  Therefore the parties  could  not  succeed  on  this
    basis either (paragraph 30).

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application assert  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  by
    concluding that the Appellant's marriage, conducted by proxy in  Egypt,
    was not  valid,  because  he  failed  to  take  into  account  material
    evidence.  Furthermore, the judge had  erred  in  not  considering  the
    evidence in relation to the parties' durable marriage.

 6. On 25th June 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

 7. On 2nd July 2014, a Rule 24 response was  entered  by  the  Respondent.
    This made two essential points.  First, that the judge was entitled  to
    question whether the evidence demonstrated whether a marriage by  proxy
    had been conducted.  However, this was, in any event, irrelevant  given
    the  recent  Tribunal  determination  of  Kareem,  which  required  the
    Appellant to produce evidence that demonstrated that the  marriage  was
    lawful between himself and Mrs  Martina  Ferkova  in  the  relevant  EU
    member state, namely, in the Czech Republic.   Second,  the  judge  was
    entitled to find that there was insufficient  evidence  before  him  to
    demonstrate that there was a durable relationship between the  parties.



Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 18th August 2014, Mr  Al-Rashid,  appearing
    as Counsel on behalf of the Appellant, submitted that given  the  Upper
    Tribunal determination in Kareem in January 2014 this year, the  proper
    course of action was to make a finding of an error of law and to  remit
    this matter back to the First-tier Tribunal, such that evidence can  be
    produced from the Czech Republic confirming their recognition of  proxy
    marriages.  He submitted that this was  the  proper  course  of  action
    because this was a case where the Respondent  Secretary  of  State  had
    proceeded on an entirely wrong footing and  this  error  had  continued
    right the way through to the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal.



 9. The Respondent Secretary of State had treated the  Doncaster  marriage,
    which was a religious marriage, as a proxy marriage.  It was  not.   It
    was the marriage in Egypt, where  the  Appellant's  partner  had  gone,
    which was the proxy marriage.  There was evidence that this marriage in
    Egypt was conducted according to Egyptian law.  Now  that  we  had  the
    determination in Kareem, however, the proper course of  action  was  to
    make a finding of an error of law and to remit this matter back to  the
    First-tier Tribunal where evidence can be produced about  the  position
    under Czech law.

10. For his part, Mr Wilding submitted that this could not be  right.   The
    reason was that the refusal letter was dated December 2013 when  Kareem
    had not been decided by the Upper Tribunal, judgment being handed  down
    there only on 15th January 2014.  The Appellant was  appealing  against
    the refusal of a residence card by virtue of his  alleged  marriage  to
    Mrs Martina Ferkova.

11. Even if the Appellant's case was that he was  relying  upon  the  proxy
    marriage in Egypt, the question  was  whether  this  was  performed  in
    accordance with Czech law, because it was Czech  law  that  had  to  be
    considered, for the purposes of a valid marriage, that would  withstand
    the scrutiny of European law.  Kareem had made it clear that the  issue
    could only be decided under the laws of the  relevant  EU  state.   The
    case of TA and Others had confirmed this approach.

12. There was no reason, if the Respondent's  decision  had  been  made  in
    December 2013, why by the time of the appeal before Judge Khan  in  May
    2014, evidence from the Czech Republic had not been produced, so as  to
    comply with the requirements of Kareem.

13. Nor, had there been any request for an adjournment before the  Tribunal
    of Judge M A Khan.  The Appellant had chosen to run his  appeal  as  he
    saw fit.  Kareem had been ignored.  The Appellant  had  not  taken  the
    chance of seeking to comply with Kareem and producing evidence from the
    Czech Republic.

14. As for the question whether there was  a  "durable  relationship,"  the
    judge had considered  this  at  paragraph  30  and  had  rejected  this
    submission.  The Appellant had given evidence  but  his  wife  had  not
    given evidence, and it was unsurprising in the circumstances  that  the
    judge was not satisfied that there was a durable relationship.

15. In reply, Mr Al-Rashid submitted that there should be a finding  of  an
    error of law because the judge himself did not address the requirements
    of  Kareem.   Kareem  was  ignored  by  the  judge.   The  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer did not raise Kareem.

16. Second, the main complication in this appeal was that the EEA national,
    Mrs Martina Ferkova, was not prepared to give evidence.  She was not at
    the hearing.  She is not at the hearing today.  She was presently  with
    her children looking after them.

17. Third, the Czech Authorities have been contacted but are  reluctant  to
    provide evidence until and unless  they  have  sight  of  the  original
    marriage certificate.  That marriage certificate is with the Respondent
    Secretary of State.  Therefore, the Appellant has been disadvantaged by
    not being able to show that his marriage complies with the  laws  of  a
    European country.

18. Finally, there should  have  been  a  positive  finding  under  durable
    relationship for the Appellant because both his brother and  sister-in-
    law gave evidence at the hearing.

No Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside this decision.  My reasons are
    as follows.  Whereas it is clearly desirable for a  reference  to  have
    been made to  Kareem  in  the  determination,  the  question  for  this
    Tribunal is whether any error, such as it is, is  a  "material"  error.
    I am not satisfied it is.

20. This is because the determination in Kareem, which was  promulgated  on
    15th January 2014, was not referred to by  either  representative  from
    either side, although it is difficult to see how they could  have  been
    unaware of it.  Mr Al-Rashid, who has conducted this appeal as best  as
    he could, submits that his clear instructions  were  not  to  refer  to
    Kareem, because the Secretary of State had fundamentally  misunderstood
    the facts that had been presented before  her,  thus  enabling  him  to
    point to an error in the decision making process  in  any  event.   The
    judge did not refer to it.

21. However, had there been a reference to Kareem, it is clear  that  there
    could only have been one answer, and that was that the  Appellant,  who
    bears the burden of showing that his  marriage  with  an  EEA  national
    complies with the laws of the Czech state, was unable to point  to  the
    existence of such  evidence.   In  the  circumstances,  therefore,  the
    appeal could only have been dismissed.

22. As for the question of whether there was a "durable relationship" Mr Al-
    Rashid has very properly explained that the EEA national,  Mrs  Martina
    Ferkova, was reluctant to give evidence, was not present at the hearing
    before Judge M A Khan, and is not present here today.

23. Whatever evidence there was from the brother and  sister-in-law,  would
    not have been such as to enable the judge to conclude that the  parties
    were in a durable relationship.  If anything, the contrary was, in  all
    probability, the case.  This is just what the judge found.



Decision

24. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

25. No anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th September 2014

