
[pic]
IAC-HX-MC/12-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02825/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 4 March 2015                       |On 13 July 2015                       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge conway


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr JANG HYEON CHOI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell
For the Respondent:    Miss Heybroek


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Choi is a citizen of South Korea born in 1988.

 2. He appeals against a decision of the Secretary  of  State  made  on  17
    December 2013 to refuse him indefinite leave to remain under  paragraph
    276 of the Immigration Rules (the ten year rule).

 3. Following a hearing at Richmond on 13 November 2014 Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Seelhoff allowed  the  appeal  under  the  Rules  and  on
    Article 8 human rights grounds.

 4. Although in proceedings  before  me  the  Secretary  of  State  is  the
    Appellant for convenience I retain the designations as they were before
    the First-tier Tribunal,  thus,  Mr  Choi  is  the  Appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State the Respondent.

 5. The immigration history is not in dispute.  The  Appellant  arrived  in
    the UK on 26 December 2002 with leave to enter as  a  visitor  for  six
    months.  On 9 April 2003 he made an in time application  for  leave  to
    remain as the dependent child of a student which was refused on  7  May
    2003.  A further in  time  application  for  leave  to  remain  as  the
    dependent child of a student and his leave was varied  until  31  March
    2004.  On 8 March 2004 he made an in time application for further leave
    to remain as the dependent child of a student and his leave was  varied
    until 31 January  2007.   On  25  January  2007  he  made  an  in  time
    application for leave to remain as a dependant of  a  student  and  his
    leave was varied until 31 May 2008.  On 3 May 2008 he made an  in  time
    application for leave to remain as a dependant of  a  student.   On  19
    June 2008 he withdrew his application.

 6. His passport shows that he returned to South Korea on 25 June 2008.  On
    21 September 2008 he arrived in the UK with leave to enter as a student
    valid until 1 January 2012.  On 22 November 2011 he  made  an  in  time
    application for Tier 1 study leave and his leave was  varied  until  16
    December 2013.  On 15 August 2013 he lodged his current application.

 7. In refusing the application  the  Respondent  was  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant had lawful leave from his arrival in the UK  on  26  December
    2002 until 31 May 2008.  Having submitted an in  time  application  for
    further leave to remain on 3 May 2008 his  leave  continued  under  s3C
    until 19 June 2008 when his application was withdrawn at  his  request.
    His documents were collected from the Respondent on 20 June 2008 and he
    returned to South Korea on 25 June 2008.

 8. As he left the  UK  after  the  expiry  of  his  leave  his  continuous
    residence was considered  to  have  been  broken.   An  applicant,  the
    Respondent stated, who leaves the UK after the expiry of his leave  has
    a maximum of 28 days to apply for entry clearance and return to the UK,
    this includes any time spent in the UK without  leave.   He  re-entered
    the UK with valid entry clearance on 21 September 2008, a period of  93
    days after the expiry of his leave.

 9. As a result he could  not  demonstrate  ten  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence in the UK and  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276B(i)(a).

10. As indicated he appealed.  The appeal was  dealt  with  on  submissions
    there being no dispute as to the facts and there being a  single  legal
    issue, namely, the interpretation of paragraph 276A and 276B(v) in  the
    Appellant's situation where he  had  overstayed  for  six  days  having
    withdrawn his application and then been without leave for 88 days until
    he got entry clearance to return.

11. The judge noted paragraphs 276A and B including:

         '276A.   For the purposes of paragraphs 276B to 276D and 276ADE

                (a)    "continuous residence" means residence in the  United
                      Kingdom  for  an  unbroken  period,  and  for   these
                      purposes a period shall not  be  considered  to  have
                      been broken where an applicant  is  absent  from  the
                      United Kingdom for a period of 6 months  or  less  at
                      any one time, provided that the applicant in question
                      has existing limited leave to enter  or  remain  upon
                      their departure and return, but shall  be  considered
                      to have been broken if the applicant [it goes  on  to
                      list five specific circumstances  which  will  breach
                      continuous lawful residence  none  of  which,  it  is
                      agreed, have application in the present case]

                      ...

                (b)     "lawful  residence"   means   residence   which   is
                      continuous residence pursuant to:

                      (i)  existing leave to enter or remain ...

         276B.    The requirements to be met by an applicant for  indefinite
                leave to remain on the  ground  of  long  residence  in  the
                United Kingdom are that:

                (i)(a)      he has had at least 10 years  continuous  lawful
                      residence in the United Kingdom ...

                             ...

                (v)    the applicant must not be in  the  UK  in  breach  of
                      immigration  laws   except   that   any   period   of
                      overstaying for a period of 28 days or less  will  be
                      disregarded,  as  will  any  periods  of  overstaying
                      between periods of entry clearance, leave to enter or
                      leave toremain of up to 28 days  and  any  period  of
                      overstaying   pending   the   determination   of   an
                      application made within that 28 day period.'

12. The judge's conclusions are at paragraph [7] ff.  At [8]  he  commented
    that 276A(a) states that  continuous  lawful  residence  shall  not  be
    treated as being breached if an applicant has leave to  remain  at  the
    date of which they leave the UK.  'However there is an ambiguity in the
    wording of paragraph 276A(a)  in  that  it  does  not  state  that  the
    opposite situation (i.e. one in which an applicant does not have  leave
    to remain  at  the  date  of  which  they  leave  the  UK)  there  will
    necessarily be a breach in continuous residence'.  He goes on  to  note
    the five circumstances which will breach continuous residence and  that
    none of them apply to the instant case.

13. He continued (at [10]) 'Accordingly I find that there is a gap  in  the
    Immigration Rules where the condition that the Respondent  alleges  has
    led to a breach in the Appellant's continuous lawful residence might be
    implied from the wording of paragraph 276A(c) but is not expressly  set
    out in the Immigration Rules'.

14. He went on (at [11]) 'In considering the significance of  this  I  have
    then taken into account the words of  paragraph  276B(v)  which  states
    expressly that overstaying for periods of  28  days  or  less  will  be
    disregarded if it falls between periods of entry  clearance,  leave  to
    enter or remain or any period of overstaying pending the  determination
    of an application.  In this case the Appellant has overstayed  no  more
    than six days between the expiry of 3C leave when the  application  for
    leave to remain as a part of his family was  withdrawn  and  his  being
    granted entry clearance to return to  the  UK  on  21  September  2008.
    Whilst the gap between the effective expiry of leave to remain and  the
    subsequent entry clearance was a  total  of  88  days  the  overstaying
    between these two grants of leave was  just  six  days  which  is  well
    within the normally permissible amount'.

15. He ends on this matter (at [12]), 'Given the clear wording of paragraph
    276B and the clear intention that periods of overstaying of  less  than
    28 days would not lead to a breach in the continuous lawful residence I
    do not consider that it is appropriate to construe paragraph 276A(a) as
    containing the condition which the Respondent has implied into it.  The
    condition is not expressly in the rules and runs  contrary  to  express
    intentions in other sections of the relevant Rules'.

16.  The  judge  then  went  on  to  consider,  if  he  was  wrong  in  his
    interpretation of the Rules, whether the de minimis principle applied.

17. He found that that the Appellant had 'only technically overstayed' [13]
    as a result of the delay between the passports being  returned  to  him
    and his family and their being  able  to  leave.   Had  they  not  been
    trusted by the Respondent they would have received their passports  the
    same day they left at the point of departure and thus  would  have  had
    leave until then.

18. He noted that it takes time to organise international journeys and that
    'for all practical purposes the Appellant and his family left  as  soon
    as they could reasonably have been expected to on the return  of  their
    passports.  Accordingly it would be irrational and  perverse  to  treat
    the Appellant and his family as having overstayed or somehow have acted
    unlawfully' [16].

19. The judge noted that the Appellant had been readmitted to  the  UK  and
    given a number of periods of leave and that 'there  has  never  been  a
    real concern about his immigration history' [17].

20. He concluded (at  [17])  'If  the  Immigration  Rules  do  contain  the
    condition that the Respondent asserts they contain, then on  the  facts
    of this case I consider that  the  de  minimis  principle  would  apply
    particularly in light of the clear intention  of  paragraph  276B  that
    applicants would not be penalised for a period of overstaying  of  less
    than 28 days ... it  is  not  rational  or  reasonable  to  regard  the
    Appellant and his family as having overstayed and that to all practical
    intents and purposes their residence was legitimate  to  the  point  of
    departure' [17].

21. The judge ended by briefly considering Article 8 outside the Rules.  He
    concluded that the Appellant does substantively  meet  the  Rules.   He
    went  on  to  state  that  the  application  would  only  fail   on   a
    technicality.  He had developed his private life in the UK  while  here
    lawfully.  There would be no significant public interest  in  excluding
    him as he was a productive member of society and had  always  tried  to
    comply with immigration control.  He  thus  allowed  the  appeal  under
    Article 8.

22. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by a judge
    on 8 January 2015.

23. At the error of law hearing before me Mr  Whitwell  adopted  the  brief
    grounds.  The judge had used 276B(v) to construe 276A(a).  That, in his
    submission, was wrong as 276A(a) is in clear terms.  The judge erred in
    reading the words of the rule as somehow being  less  restrictive  than
    they are.   Further,  his  alternative  finding  under  Article  8  was
    infected with the same error and in  any  event  was  an  impermissible
    'near-miss' argument.  In addition, he was wrong to consider any breach
    under the Rules as de minimis.  He invited me to set aside the decision
    and remake it by dismissing it under the Rules.  Article 8 was  tainted
    and would have to be remade.

24. In reply Miss Heybroek agreed that the judge  erred  in  regarding  any
    breach of the rule as de minimis.  However, he was entitled to construe
    the rule  as  he  did.   Paragraph  276A  provided  the  definition  of
    'continuous residence'.  Paragraph 276B was how it  was  applied.   The
    judge's cross-referencing was sound.  She  invited  me  to  uphold  the
    decision under the Rules.

25. Miss Heybroek submitted that if I was not with her  on  the  Rules  the
    Appellant had a compelling case on human rights.  He had come to the UK
    at the age of fourteen and  had  lived  here  effectively  ever  since.
    Whilst it was less than twenty years it was  a  significant  period  of
    time which together with his studies and the roots that he has taken up
    in society was compelling in his favour.  The s117B factors  were  also
    all in his favour.

26. I reserved my decision.

27. In considering this matter Mr Whitwell was not able to assist me in the
    construing of paragraph 276B(v) and, in particular, why  if  the  plain
    reading of paragraph 276A is  that  leave  is  required  for  a  person
    leaving from and returning to the UK the Respondent considered  in  the
    refusal letter that it was acceptable to leave without leave as long as
    entry clearance was  sought  within  28  days  of  the  previous  leave
    expiring.

28. I do not find the relevant  rules  easy  to  construe.  Paragraph  276A
    states that an applicant must have existing limited leave to  enter  or
    remain upon departure and return. The Appellant did not having existing
    leave on departure having withdrawn his latest in time application  for
    further leave and requested the return of  his  passport.  On  a  plain
    reading of it he does not satisfy paragraph 276A (a).

29. However, it seems clear from paragraph 276B (v)  that  it  is  intended
    that a period of overstaying, thus without leave, for 28 days  or  less
    is condoned. In other words someone seeking to benefit  from  paragraph
    276B (v) will not have had existing leave but,  nevertheless,  will  be
    permitted to make an application as long as it made no later  than  the
    28 days.

30. This Appellant overstayed for 6 days. Having left the  UK  he  returned
    with leave having been absent for less than 6 months. I cannot  see  it
    to be to be the case that the situation for an individual who overstays
    28 days and makes application is permitted, whereas this Appellant  who
    overstayed 6 days and who was  absent from  the  UK  for  less  than  6
    months and who returned to the UK with leave is not permitted. From  my
    reading of the rules I see no basis for the assertion  in  the  refusal
    letter that an applicant who leaves the UK after the  expiry  of  their
    leave has a maximum of 28 days to apply for entry clearance and  return
    to the UK. That is not my reading of paragraph 279B (v)  which  permits
    overstaying for up to 28 days. The  Appellant  overstayed  6  days.  As
    indicated Mr Whitwell was not able to assist me on this matter.

31. I conclude that the First tier judge's analysis by which  he  construed
    paragraph 276B(v) across 276A (a) shows no material error  of  law  and
    his decision allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules stands. In
    these circumstances I do not need to consider Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal shows no material error of  law  and
that decision allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules shall stand.



Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

