
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/02427/2016
                                                               IA/02428/2016
                                                               IA/02429/2016
                                                               IA/02430/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 November 2018                  |On 15 January 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          (1) Mr MUDASSAR MOHIUDDIN
                           (2) Mrs AFSHAN SULTANA
                             (3) Mr VASEEM AHMED
                             (4) Mrs AYESHA BANU
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Blair, Counsel, instructed by Zahra & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1     This is an appeal brought by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Malone dated 11th of  June  2018,  allowing  the  respondents'  appeals
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated  10  August  2016,
    refusing to vary the respondents' applications for leave to remain, and
    making decisions to remove  them  under  section  47,  Immigration  and
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2     The first and third respondents had applied  on  30  August  2014  for
    further leave to remain as a Tier 1 (entrepreneur) migrants. The second
    and fourth respondents  are  their  respective  spouses.  'Respondents'
    hereafter refers to the first and third respondents.

3     The respondents applied on 30 August 2014 for further leave to  remain
    under paragraph 245DD of the Immigration Rules  as  an  entrepreneurial
    team, operating a business known as Britinfo Services  Ltd,  which  the
    judge described at [38] as a 'market research and surveying'  business.
    The judge sets  out  the  history  of  the  application  at  [10].  The
    application was initially refused on 17 November 2014  on  the  grounds
    that  the  respondents'  business  advertising   did   not   meet   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules. However, on appeal the Secretary
    of State conceded that the refusal could not be justified on the ground
    put forward, and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the  Respondents'
    appeal and  the  matter  came  back  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    reconsideration. The respondents were then interviewed by the Secretary
    of State and 13 April 2016 in relation to the application, resulting in
    the decision made on 10 August 2016.

4     The judge noted that the Secretary of State  had  not  been  satisfied
    that the respondents met the requirements of paragraph  245  DD  (iii),
    i.e. as to 'the viability and credibility of your  business  plans  and
    market research into your chosen business sector'.  The  judge  further
    summarised  the  Secretary  of  State's  reasons   for   refusing   the
    applications at [14]-[16], as follows:

         "14.     The respondent was  concerned  as  to  (iii)  because  she
         considered the team, in interview, had given  "indistinct"  answers
         that "lacked specific information that we would expect the owner of
         the creditable business to be able to provide".


         15.      Her concern was also in part caused by the fact  that  the
         business plan put forward by the team contained "substantial bodies
         of text from the sample business plan" for a business called "Palms
         and Bonds". The respondent  had  found  this  business  plan  on  a
         website that provided "Business Development Sample Business Plans".




         16.      The only other matter that led to the respondent's concern
         was that the team had not used a period of  leave  that  have  been
         granted under the Tier 1 (Post study work) provisions and 31 August
         2012 until 31 August  2014  valuably.  The  team  had  acquired  no
         business experience over that period."

5     The judge then gave reasons in  the  remainder  of  the  decision  for
    finding at [44] that "the respondent had  no  sustainable  grounds  for
    refusing the team's application". The judge allowed the  appeals  under
    the immigration rules, and on human rights grounds. It is common ground
    between the parties that the judge was entitled to, and indeed obliged,
    to determine the appeal under the 'saved provisions' under part 5  NIAA
    2002 prior to the amendment of that part by Immigration  Act  2014.  It
    was also common ground that the evidential constraints  of  s.85A  NIAA
    2002 applied to the appeals.

6     The appellant Secretary of State's challenge to the  judge's  decision
    is on grounds, in summary, that the judge erred in law in allowing  the
    appeal 'primarily' on the basis of post  decision  evidence  (oral  and
    documentary)   that   was   submitted   since   the   refusal    letter
    (determination, paragraphs 18, 19,  21-24,  28,  29,  31-33,  43,  44),
    which, given that the appeal was  governed  by  the  saved  provisions,
    including s.85A NIAA 2002 (4), and following Ahmed  and  Another  (PBS:
    admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 365 (IAC) and Olatunde v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 670, was impermissible in
    law.

7     Permission to appeal was granted on 4 September 2018 by Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Doyle on the basis that the appellant's  ground  of
    appeal was arguable.

8     I heard submissions from the parties. Mr  Avery,  for  the  appellant,
    argued that the  judge  had  made  reference  within  the  decision  to
    evidence contained within the  respondents'  bundle  before  the  judge
    which clearly post-dated the date of decision, and the judge's  finding
    that he was satisfied that the immigration rules were met  was  tainted
    by the judge having taken into account such post-decision evidence. The
    evidence was not admissible by reason of any exception as  set  out  in
    s.85A NIAA, and Mr Avery argued  that  one  could  not  unentangle  the
    judge's findings based on the admissible evidence (submitted  with  the
    application or during the course of reconsideration), from the  judge's
    findings on  the  post-decision  documentary  and  oral  evidence.  The
    decision as a whole was unsustainable.

9     Ms Blair made submissions in defence of  the  judge's  decision,  with
    which I agree, and which I shall not set out; rather,  I  shall  simply
    give my reasons below.

    Discussion

10    The judge acknowledged at [12]  that  it  was  important  to  identify
    precisely why the team's application was refused. The  judge  then  set
    out at [14]-[16] (see above) his  understanding  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's reasons.

11    Indeed I find that at [14]-[16], the  judge  accurately  reflects  the
    content of the refusal letter, summarising  the  Secretary  of  State's
    position in relation to the application.

12    I now set out the way in which the judge resolved the issues that  are
    raised at [14]-[16] of the judge's decision.

13    At [17], the judge provides:

         "I addressed the last point first. On the particular facts of these
         appeals, I am not persuaded that the  team's  failure  to  use  the
         leave granted to it on the 31 August  2012  productively,  if  that
         were the case, could  validly  assist  the  respondent  in  gauging
         whether the team had been carrying  on  business  since  30  August
         2014."

14    It is correct to note that at [18]  and  [19],  the  judge  refers  to
    documentation before him  regarding  the  third  respondent's  previous
    ownership of a different company, which he had sold to  another  party,
    before setting up the present company. The judge  appears  to  consider
    documentation relating to the  third  respondent's  ownership  of  that
    previous company, which does not fall within the list of  evidence  set
    out at page 2 of 7  of  the  decision  letter  dated  10  August  2016,
    describing the evidence which was considered by the Secretary of  State
    in support of the application. At [21], however, the judge's  reference
    to the respondent's incorporation of 'Britinfo' on 20  June  2014  does
    not appear to be a reference to new evidence;  there  is  documentation
    regarding  the  existence  of  that  company  listed  as  having   been
    considered by the Secretary of State, in the decision letter.

15    However, I find that even if the judge ought not  to  have  considered
    post-decision evidence (not falling  into  the  permissible  exceptions
    under s85A), his having  done  so  was  not  material  to  the  judge's
    decision. That is because the judge had already,  at  [17],  held  that
    even if it were the case that the respondents had not used their period
    of  leave  to  remain  between  31  August  2012  to  31  August   2014
    'productively', this would not validly assist the Secretary of State in
    gauging whether the team had been carrying on  a  business  thereafter.
    There is no challenge brought in the appellant's grounds of appeal that
    that discrete finding was unsustainable in law. Paragraph [18]  of  the
    judge's decision commences  'In  actual  fact'.  When  considering  the
    content and context of paragraphs [17] and [18], this expression is, in
    my view, equivalent to the judge saying 'In any event...'. I find  that
    the judge had already rejected the third of the  Secretary  of  State's
    complaints, as set out at [16] of the decision, at  para  [17]  of  the
    judge's decision. That that sustainable finding is not affected by  any
    impermissible reference to post-decision evidence thereafter.

16    Further, the judge considers the appellant's concern that  substantial
    parts of the respondents' business plan had been  copied  from  another
    source at [34] onwards:

         "34.     The witnesses told me they had engaged a  professional  to
         draft business plan. They had been referred to him.  That  evidence
         was not challenged. The respondent had visited  a  website  showing
         sample business plans. It may well be that  some  standard  wording
         had been incorporated into Britinfo's business plan. That,  without
         more, does not  call  into  doubt  the  genuineness  of  Britinfo's
         business plan. The business plan can only show  what  the  proposed
         business was at the date of the plan.


         ...


         36.      I had little doubt that a not inconsiderable part  of  the
         business plan had been taken from sample business plans. As I  say,
         without more, there is nothing of concern about that.


         ...


         38.      While the services the team provide can, in my  judgement,
         be properly described as "market research and surveying", elegantly
         typed documents on  Britinfo's  headed  writing  paper  were  never
         contemplated and when ever created. Hence, I say the business  plan
         was somewhat overwrought. I had no evidence to lead me to  conclude
         that there was anything dishonest contained in the business plan."

17    Again, it seems to  me  that  the  judge  considered  the  appellant's
      criticism of the respondent's business plan, and the fact  that  parts
      of it had been copied from a sample business plan,  and  has  rejected
      that complaint. To the extent that the judge took  into  account  oral
      evidence in that regard, it is to be noted that the oral evidence  was
      to the effect, 'Yes, you're right,  we  did  take  it  from  somewhere
      else'. Such an admission could easily have been  made  in  grounds  of
      appeal or a skeleton argument. The fact that  such  a  concession  was
      made in oral evidence is irrelevant.

18    Again, the appellant's grounds of  appeal  to  this  Tribunal  do  not
      argue that the judge's reasoning  was,  in  itself,  unsustainable  in
      anyway. The criticism is that the judge has taken  into  account  post
      decision evidence in arriving at that conclusion. However, I find that
      this is not the case - the judge's reasoning at [34]  is  clear,  that
      the use of sample business plans did not, in the judge's mind, without
      more, undermine the  genuineness  of  the  application  for  leave  to
      remain.

19    Finally, the  judge  addressed  the  appellant's  complaint  that  the
      respondents had given indistinct  answers  in  interview  that  lacked
      specific information about their business plan and market research, at
      [39] onwards:

         "39.     The final point raised in the Refusal Letter was that  the
         team's answers in interview were "indistinct" and" lacked  specific
         information that we would expect the owner of a creditable business
         to be able to provide".


         40.      I have read the interview record. I am  unable  to  accept
         the Respondent's view of the team's answers.  For  instance,  under
         the section headed  "Contract  Questions",  appears  the  question:
         "What service/s have you provided for the contract/s?" Mr Mohiuddin
         replied: "We do marketing, we make strategy for them we given  them
         market product  knowledge  and  advertising  strategy".   Mr  Ahmed
         answered the question as follows:  "We  do  market  survey,  we  do
         marketing plan, we help set up business, find locations for  retail
         units, we do all the market surveys".


         41.      I do not find the answers given to  that  question  to  be
         "indistinct". Moreover, I do not find that  they  "lacked  specific
         information the owner of a  credible  business  would  be  able  to
         provide". The team members gave the answers they did. They were not
         invited to develop those answers. The specific  information  it  is
         alleged the team should have provided is  not  identified.  I  find
         that  the  team  members  answered  the  questions  put   to   them
         satisfactorily. There is no  force  in  the  point  the  respondent
         makes."

20    I am of the view that the passages from the judge's decision  which  I
      have set out above adequately dealt  with  the  Secretary  of  State's
      concerns. Although it is apparent from the judge's decision that  some
      post-decision evidence was referred to elsewhere, the  core  reasoning
      given by the judge for rejecting the criticisms made by the  appellant
      Secretary of State in the decision letter of 10 August  2016  was  not
      dependent on the judge's view of any of that post decision evidence.

21    Therefore, I find that when the judge held at [44] "I  have  therefore
      come to the conclusion, for the reasons I have set out above, that the
      Respondent  had  no  sustainable  grounds  for  refusing  the   team's
      application", the judge was entitled to make that  decision,  and  the
      outcome would have been the same even if the judge had not  looked  at
      any post-decision evidence.

22    I have found no material error in the judge's decision.

      Decision

      The decision did not involve the making of any material error of law.

      The appellant Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

      The decision of the judge allowing all of the respondents' appeals  is
      upheld.


Signed:                                            Date: 4.1.19
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan







