
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02542/2016 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th July 2020                    |On 10th August 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                ZAKIA SULTANA
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik, instructed by Norma & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer

This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are in
the bundles on the court file, the contents of which I have recorded. The
order made is described at the end of these reasons.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 1  January  1988.  She
    appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge P-J  S  White
    promulgated on 16 July 2019 dismissing her appeal against  the  refusal
    of leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.

2.   The Appellant entered the UK as a student in August  2009  valid  until
    January 2013. On 12 December 2012, she applied for leave to remain as a
    Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant under paragraph 245DD of the  Immigration
    Rules. Her application was refused on 22 April  2015,  under  paragraph
    322(1A), on the ground that she had submitted false documents.

3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Randall allowed  her  appeal  on  26  January
    2016 under the general grounds  of  refusal.  The  Respondent  had  not
    considered the application under paragraph 245DD and had  indicated  in
    the refusal letter that she 'reserved  the  right  to  carry  out'  the
    assessment in paragraph 245DD(b). The parties made  no  submissions  on
    the point. The appeal was  allowed  to  the  limited  extent  that  the
    Respondent had not shown the bank documents were false.

4.   The Appellant did not attend her appeal before  Judge  Randall  because
    she had recently had surgery following a car accident. The  application
    for an adjournment was refused because there was insufficient  evidence
    to show that she was not fit to attend court.  Her  representative  did
    not make submissions.

5.   In support of her appeal before Judge Randall, the Appellant  submitted
    two letters [the new evidence] from Brac Bank  signed  by  Anwar  Sadat
    (Branch Manager) dated 24 November 2015 confirming the availability  of
    the funds held in the bank accounts relied on by the Appellant, (Momtaz
    Begum and Ram Chandra Das). The letters stated that the email from  the
    bank stating otherwise was not genuine. The  Respondent  relied  on  an
    email  dated  22  February  2015  which  stated   that   the   attached
    certificates and statements were not issued by Brac Bank.

6.    Judge  Randall  stated  at  paragraph  30  of  his  decision:  "Having
    considered the evidence in this matter, I remain  concerned  about  the
    defects in the Respondent's evidence and about the absence of  a  clear
    paper trail as to what documents were in fact originally  submitted  to
    BRAC Bank for consideration, and  of  a  clear  indication  as  to  who
    originally responded for BRAC, and what was being responded to. Bearing
    in mind the quality of the new evidence  provided  [by  the  Appellant]
    that goes to genuiness, and the high  standard  of  proof  required  to
    demonstrate the falsity of a document, I have concluded that, in  light
    of the new evidence, the Respondent has not satisfied the high standard
    of  proof  and  discharged  the  burden  on  her  in  respect  of  this
    allegation."

7.   The Respondent  did  not  appeal  Judge  Randall's  decision,  but  re-
    considered  the  Appellant's  application.  On  4  August   2016,   the
    Respondent refused the application under paragraph  322(1A)  and  under
    245DD(b) of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  Respondent  stated;  "I  am
    satisfied that the [Brac Bank] documents were false because  we  sought
    to verify them on two occasions." The Appellant was awarded  no  points
    in relation to access to funds  because  the  documents  were  verified
    twice and both times were verified as false.

8.   The Appellant gave evidence at her appeal  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge White and relied on three  bundles  of  documents  including  the
    letters dated November  2015,  October  2017  and  February  2018.  The
    Respondent also relied on three bundles of documents including Document
    Verification Reports [DVR's] (dated 14 July 2016, 12 June 2018  and  27
    June 2018), emails dated 29  April  2016  and  30  May  2018  from  the
    Temporary Migration Enrichment Unit [TMEU] (identifying  the  documents
    submitted for verification) and further emails from Brac  Bank  stating
    that the documents were not issued by Brac Bank Natun Bazar Branch.

9.   At paragraph 8 Judge White stated: "I note that neither  representative
    made submissions to me about the  precise  effect  of  Judge  Randall's
    decision. Certainly it was not submitted that this was determinative of
    the questions of whether false documents had  been  submitted.  On  the
    principles set out in Devaseelan that would be correct. Judge Randall's
    decision must be my starting point and in the absence of cogent further
    evidence I should not allow a decided issue  to  be  re-litigated,  but
    evidence which was not before Judge Randall is capable of justifying  a
    different conclusion."

10.  Judge White noted that he  had  further  evidence  on  both  sides.  He
    considered  this  evidence  and  concluded  that  the  Respondent   had
    discharged the burden of proving that the  letters  of  November  2015,
    October 2017 and February 2018, submitted by the Appellant, were false.
    He was also satisfied that the original documents  submitted  with  the
    application were false. Judge White concluded  that  the  new  evidence
    justified the revisiting of Judge Randall's conclusions  and  he  found
    that the refusal under paragraph 322(1A) was made out.

11.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal on the sole ground  that
    the judge erred in law in departing from Judge Randall's  decision  and
    applying the wrong test in permitting the re-litigation of the issue of
    whether the Appellant had relied on a false Brac Bank documents.

12.  Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  on  7
    February 2020 on the ground that  the  Respondent  had  in  effect  re-
    litigated an earlier appeal decision favourable to  the  Appellant.  He
    stated "It was arguable the judge erred in law in relying on  the  'new
    evidence' (DVR's) in reaching  his  finding  contrary  to  the  earlier
    appeal decision in 2016 without  applying  the  Ladd  v  Marshall  test
    consistently with Devaseelan, Mubu (immigration appeals - res judicata)
     [2012] UKUT 00398 (IAC) and Ullah v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 550."

Submissions

13.  The  grounds  submit  that  Judge  White  applied  the  wrong  test  at
    paragraph 8. The correct test was set out in Mubu  and  Ullah.  It  was
    submitted that the nature of the issue was the same and the  Respondent
    had failed to produce relevant  evidence  before  Judge  Randall  which
    could have been produced with reasonable diligence.  It  was  submitted
    that Judge White was obliged to consider whether there  was  some  very
    good reason why the Respondent had not provided all the evidence in the
    earlier appeal before Judge Randall.

14.  Further, following Ullah, the  Respondent  could  only  rely  on  fresh
    evidence and seek to depart from earlier judicial findings if the  Ladd
    v Marshall test was met.  Judge  White  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
    consider whether the Respondent's new  evidence  could  not  have  been
    obtained with reasonable diligence for use at the hearing before  Judge
    Randall. Judge White's decision was inconsistent with the principles in
    Mubu and Ullah. It was immaterial that this point was not raised before
    Judge White.

15.  Mr Malik submitted that Judge White could not depart from  the  earlier
    findings of Judge Randall and he  applied  the  wrong  test.  Mr  Malik
    relied on paragraphs 62, 63 and 66 of Mubu and submitted the Respondent
    had not shown that  the  evidence  now  adduced  could  not  have  been
    produced before Judge Randall, whose decision settled the issue between
    the parties. Finality  of  litigation  prevented  the  Respondent  from
    gathering further  evidence  and  refusing  an  application  which  had
    previously been allowed on its merits.

16.  Mr Malik relied on paragraph 25 and  43  of  Ullah  and  submitted  the
    Respondent  was  bound  by  a  decision  which  is  not  appealed.  The
    Respondent could impugn the decision with fresh evidence of fraud  only
    where it was not previously available with due diligence.  Judge  White
    failed to apply the test in Ladd v Marshall.

17.  Mr Clarke relied  on  the  skeleton  argument,  dated  28  April  2020,
    submitted in response to Covid 19 directions. It was submitted  therein
    that there was a failure to raise Mubu and Ullah at the hearing  before
    Judge White and no submissions were made on the basis that the decision
    of  Judge  Randall  was  determinative.  The  judge  properly   applied
    Devaseelan. The Respondent did not have an opportunity  to  respond  to
    the letters dated 24 November 2015  submitted  at  the  hearing  before
    Judge Randall and therefore the Ladd v Marshall test was satisfied. The
    hearing before Judge White was more extensive that  that  before  Judge
    Randall. The Respondent produced evidence  addressing  the  Appellant's
    new evidence and the Judge White's findings were open  to  him  on  the
    evidence before him.

18.  In oral submissions, Mr Clarke submitted Devaseelan should not be  read
    as excluding post decision evidence unless Ladd v Marshall applied. The
    case of Ullah was specific to the duties of the Secretary of State  and
    did not assist the Appellant. There were  no  submissions  made  before
    Judge White about the effect of Judge Randall's decision. Mubu was  not
    concerned with post-decision evidence and res judicata did  not  apply.
    The Tribunal in Mubu considered the new evidence and found that it  was
    not probative. Judge White applied paragraph 49 of Mubu at paragraph  8
    of his decision.

19.  Following Devaseelan, facts occurring after the  first  decision  could
    always be placed before the First-tier Tribunal. Mubu was not authority
    for stating that an earlier decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    binding. There was  significantly  more  evidence  before  Judge  White
    sufficient to displace the  finding  of  Judge  Randall.  In  Mubu  the
    Secretary of State relied on evidence which pre-dated  the  hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal and there was no explanation for why it was not
    produced. The post-decision evidence  did  not  take  the  matters  any
    further. Judge White's direction at paragraph 8  was  not  inconsistent
    with Mubu.

20.  In response, Mr Malik accepted the authorities of Mubu and  Ullah  were
    not before Judge White.  He  submitted  this  was  not  material  as  a
    specialist Tribunal should be aware of them and should follow them.  In
    Ullah, the court considered the duties of the  Secretary  of  State  to
    implement a  Tribunal  decision  and  the  implications  of  an  appeal
    decision. Mr Malik submitted that paragraphs  25  and  43  applied.  He
    relied on paragraph 66  of  Mubu  and  submitted  that  the  conditions
    referred to therein applied in this case and the nature of the  dispute
    was the same. If the Respondent's submission was correct,  no  decision
    would ever be final. The Ladd v Marshall  test  was  not  met.  If  the
    Appellant's submission was correct then the appeal  Appellant's  appeal
    should be allowed outright.

Relevant law

21.  Paragraph 66 of Mubu states: "We are well aware that, in the  field  of
    public law, finality of litigation is subject always to the  discretion
    of the Court if wider interests of justice so require. We bear in mind,
    however, that the nature of  the  issue  now  in  dispute  between  the
    parties was the same issue that was determinative of the appeal  before
    Judge Tipping. We also bear in mind the failure  of  the  Secretary  of
    State to produce all of the relevant evidence  to  Judge  Tipping  that
    ought to have been, or could have been with reasonable diligence,  made
    available to him. In light of these considerations,  we  conclude  that
    the determination of Judge Tipping should be treated  as  settling  the
    issue of the relationship between the  first  claimant  and  Mr  Ernest
    Alleston."

22.  Paragraph 43 of Ullah states: "In Saribal,  however,  Moses  J  decided
    that if the SSHD wanted to take a decision of that character,  after  a
    decision of a Tribunal importing a right to ILR,  his  decision  making
    process would  have  to  apply  by  analogy,  the  principles  for  the
    admission  of  fresh  evidence  on   appeals   in   legal   proceedings
    (essentially applying the principles in Ladd  v  Marshall).  Otherwise,
    the SSHD's decision would be open to challenge on public  law  grounds.
    That decision has the approval of this court in TB and, in my judgment,
    we should follow it."

Conclusions and reasons

23.  It is clear from the decision  in  Mubu  that  res  judicata  does  not
    operate in immigration appeals. In that case, the  Upper  Tribunal  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal because the judge treated
    the earlier decision as binding  and  failed  to  apply  Devaseelan.  I
    conclude that Judge White was  not  bound  by  the  decision  of  Judge
    Randall and he properly applied Devaseelan.

24.  I find that Judge White's self direction at paragraph 8 was  consistent
    with Mubu. Judge White considered whether there was a  good  reason  to
    depart from the decision  of  Judge  Randall.  This  was  the  approach
    adopted in AS &AA (Effect of  previous  linked  determination)  Somalia
    [2006] UKAIT 00052 and endorsed  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Mubu  at
    paragraph 52.

25.  In Mubu, the Secretary of State was given ample opportunity  to  verify
    the birth certificates, prior to the first appeal, but failed to do so.
    The material before the judge at the second appeal was  not  materially
    different. In this case, there was substantial further evidence on both
    sides.

26.  The present case is not 'on all fours' with Mubu  as  submitted  by  Mr
    Malik. In this case, the Appellant relied on letters dated 24  November
    2015 at the appeal before Judge Randall which had not been  put  before
    the Respondent. The Respondent  had  no  opportunity  to  verify  these
    letters. Judge Randall found the letters to be  persuasive  and,  given
    the lack of continuity in the Respondent's evidence, he concluded  that
    the Respondent had failed to prove the bank documents were  false.  The
    judge allowed the  Appellant's  appeal  under  paragraph  322(1A).  The
    Appellant was not entitled to a grant of leave following  the  decision
    because the Respondent had not considered  the  application  under  the
    substantive Immigration Rule. The Respondent then went on to reconsider
    the application.

27.   In  Ullah  the  applicant  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    following a decision by the Tribunal allowing the  applicant's  appeal.
    The Secretary of State later discovered evidence of fraud  and  made  a
    decision cancelling the applicant's leave. In reviewing that  decision,
    the Upper Tribunal Judge applied Ladd v Marshall to the fresh  evidence
    and concluded the Secretary of State could rely on the new evidence and
    revoke the applicant's leave. The Court of Appeal concluded the Ladd  v
    Marshall criteria were not inconsistent with paragraph 35  of  TB   and
    upheld the decision of the Upper Tribunal in dismissing the applicant's
    appeal.

28.  In this case, the Appellant was  not  entitled  to  a  grant  of  leave
    following Judge Randall's decision to allow her appeal. The Appellant's
    application remained  outstanding.  This  was  not  a  case  where  the
    Respondent was attempting to circumvent the decision of Judge  Randall.
    The principles in Ladd v Marshall did not apply and did not prevent the
    Respondent from obtaining further evidence in response to that produced
    by the Appellant.

29.  Alternatively, the principles in Ladd v Marshall are satisfied. It  was
    not in despite that the  Secretary  of  State  can  impugn  a  previous
    decision on the  basis  of  fresh  evidence  of  fraud  which  was  not
    previously available. In this case, there was new  evidence  which  was
    not available at the  hearing  before  Judge  Randall.  The  Respondent
    verified the letters of  24  November  2015  as  false.  The  Appellant
    submitted  post-decision  evidence,  letters  dated  October  2017  and
    February 2018, which were also verified as false by the Respondent. The
    new evidence relied on by the  Respondent  was  not  available  at  the
    appeal before Judge Randall. Contrary to  Mr  Malik's  submission,  the
    Respondent, in the skeleton argument relied on by Mr Clarke,  submitted
    that the Ladd v Marshall test was met.

30.  I am of the view that, on the facts of this case,  the  Respondent  has
    not sought  to  re-litigate  an  earlier  decision  favourable  to  the
    Appellant. Judge Randall  found  that  the  Respondent  had  failed  to
    provide sufficient evidence to show that the documents  submitted  with
    the application were false. Judge Randall relied on  a  document  which
    was  not  submitted  with  the  application.  The  Respondent  had   no
    opportunity to verify this  document.  The  evidence  produced  by  the
    Respondent after the decision of Judge Randall was new  evidence  which
    was not available prior to the appeal. It was not  the  case  that  the
    Respondent could with reasonable diligence have discovered it earlier.

31.  Any failure by the Judge White to refer to the test in Ladd v  Marshall
    was not material because it was quite clear on the facts that  the  new
    evidence relied on by the Respondent was not available prior to hearing
    before Judge Randall. This point was not argued before Judge White.

32.  Accordingly, there was no error of law in the decision of  Judge  White
    and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction made.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 31 July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 31 July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
