
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02153/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 September 2014                           |On 18 September 2014         |
|Prepared 3 September 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR DENSON OSATO EFIONAYI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Jacks, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State appealed  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rothwell, dated 17 June 2014, whereby the judge  allowed
    an appeal against the Secretary of State's decision, dated 12  December
    2013, to refuse to issue a permanent residence card with  reference  to
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

2.   Permission to appeal was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy on  5
    July 2014.

3.   At  the  hearing  on  3  September  2014  Mr  Jacks,  as  a  result  of
    consideration of papers  not  previously  before  him  and  information
    provided by the Respondent, was able to establish that the  Appellant's
    Sponsor had  permanent  residence  at  material  times.  Therefore  the
    application that was made did not fall to be refused on  the  basis  it
    was.

4.    It is clear that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  is  in
    a number of respects lacking clarity and is in part  contradictory.  In
    those circumstances it was unsurprising that the  person  settling  the
    grounds of application on behalf of the Secretary of State  did  so  in
    the manner and way explained.   Ultimately  since  the  Respondent  was
    entitled to the residence card on the basis of his Sponsor's status  at
    the material times, there is no point in the appeal being pursued  even
    though it is clear the judge reached the right decision for  manifestly
    the wrong reasons.

5.   The appeal is therefore withdrawn with leave of the Upper Tribunal.

6.    The original Tribunal's decision dated 17 June 2014 stands.


Signed                                  Date 9 September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


