








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02412/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 27 October 2014                           |On: 11 November 2014         |
|Prepared: 6 November 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR SHWAM WAHED AHMED
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Smyth, Solicitor, Kesar and Co.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer  to  the  appellant  as  the
      secretary of state and the respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The claimant is a national of Iraq, born  on  7th  October  1992.  His
      appeal against the decision to refuse his application for  asylum  and
      human rights  and  to  remove  him  from  the  UK  was  allowed  in  a
      determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Monro, promulgated  on  6th
      August 2014.


   3. She found that if returned to Iraq there was a  reasonable  likelihood
      that he would be persecuted for his  imputed  political  opinion,  and
      that there was a real risk that his human rights under Articles 2  and
      3 of the Human Rights Convention would  be  breached.    Further,  his
      removal from the UK would breach  his  right  to  private  life  under
      Article 8. He was also entitled to subsidiary protection.


   4. On 26th August 2014, First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal. It was contended in the first
      ground of appeal that the Judge failed  to  have  due  regard  to  the
      decision of the Upper Tribunal in HM and Others (Article  15(c))  Iraq
      CG [2012] UKUT 00409 (IAC). He would be able to return to KRI  and  as
      such internal relocation would be a viable option.


   5. Ground 2 asserted that the Judge had not adequately  explored  whether
      he would be able to reside in the capital and whether relevant medical
      treatment, if required, would be available.


   6. Mr Walker relied on the secretary of state's grounds.  The  Judge  had
      found that the appellant would not be able to access Kurdistan,  since
      he does not come from that area. He submitted however that  the  Judge
      failed to have due regard to the decision in HM,  supra  and  asserted
      that the claimant would be able  to  return  to  KRI  and  accordingly
      internal relocation was a viable option. He also relied on  ground  2,
      which I have set out.


   7. Mr Smyth submitted that the secretary of state had not challenged  the
      finding that the claimant would be at considerable risk of prosecution
      in his home area  of  Makhmour,  as  found  at  paragraph  54  of  the
      determination. Neither the alternative  finding  that  he  would  have
      succeeded in his claim for subsidiary protection [58] nor the decision
      to allow his appeal under Article 8 had been challenged.


   8. With regard to the appeal under  Article  8,  the  claimant  had  also
      relied on  the  fact  and  had  shown  that  internal  relocation  was
      unreasonable or unduly harsh. That therefore  remains  an  undisturbed
      finding.


   9. He further submitted that the 'point' had been made on behalf  of  the
      claimant before the First-tier Tribunal that his home area of Makhmour
      is not a part of the KRI. The Judge found as a matter of fact that  it
      is in Iraq [44].  That finding has not been challenged.


  10. Furthermore, the Judge did have in mind the country guidance  case  of
      HM as well as MK (Documents - Relocation) Iraq CG  [2012]  UKUT  00126
      (IAC). Accordingly, the requirement as to whether a sponsor  would  or
      would not be necessary was not relevant. She noted  that  in  MK,  the
      Tribunal stated that Civil Status ID was required to effect entry into
      the KRG and that the person has to go to his home to  replace  a  lost
      ID; or to ask a friend or relative to pass the  necessary  information
      to the local Iraqi embassy. That was  not  found  to  be  a  practical
      possibility for the claimant [46]. That finding was open to the Judge,
      given the specific facts of the case. The claimant is unable to obtain
      such ID as he does not come from the KRI and does not have the support
      of any family members [56-57]. There was thus no  departure  from  the
      relevant country guidance.


  11.  He  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  also  regard  to   an   earlier
      determination of the appellant's appeal in October 2010.  Judge  Monro
      found that the Judge had  been  at  a  disadvantage  in  reaching  his
      decision as he did not have a report from Dr Conning  before  him.  He
      had also been  presented  with  a  serious  factual  inaccuracy  which
      informed his decision on credibility. In particular, he had found as a
      fact that Makhmour is in Kurdistan. The case advanced by the claimant,
      however, was that it is in Iraq. Judge Monro found  that  the  country
      material before her indicated that that was the case. She has set this
      out in full at paragraph 42 of the determination.


  12. At paragraph 44, she stated that whatever the claimant as a  child  of
      15 may have said about the geographical situation of  Makhmour,  as  a
      matter of fact, it is in Iraq. Accordingly his  credibility  had  been
      adversely  affected  on  a  wrong  basis  because  of   this   factual
      inaccuracy. The country material made it clear that since he does  not
      come from Kurdistan, he would not be able to access that part of  Iraq
      if he were returned.


  13. With regard to the second ground of  appeal,  namely  that  the  Judge
      failed to give adequate reasons for finding that  the  claimant  would
      incur the hostility of ISIS, Mr Walker submitted that  the  Judge  had
      not adequately explored whether he would be  able  to  reside  in  the
      capital and whether relevant medical treatment would be available.


  14. Mr Smyth however submitted that  this  ground  is  "misconceived".  It
      fails to take into  account  the  range  of  personal  characteristics
      highlighted at paragraph 56 of the  determination.  There,  the  Judge
      found that the claimant had certain personal characteristics which she
      found placed him in an enhanced category of risk on return to Baghdad.
      He is a Sunni Muslim; he is Kurdish; he left  Iraq  aged  15  and  has
      resided here since 2007; he does not have the support  of  any  family
      members in Iraq; he suffers from PTSD with depression and his IQ is in
      the lowest 5% of the population.


  15. Nor did he have the inner strength and life skills required to  enable
      him to survive in Iraq, where he has never lived independently. He has
      never lived in Baghdad and has no contacts there to offer him support.
      He will appear 'westernised' and thus tainted and he  will  incur  the
      hostility of ISIS. Accordingly, there was a reasonable likelihood that
      he would be persecuted for his imputed political opinion  if  returned
      to Iraq.


Assessment


  16. The grounds of appeal do not seek to challenge the alternative finding
      by the Judge that even if the asylum claim had  failed,  the  claimant
      would have succeeded in his claim for subsidiary protection.  Nor  has
      the secretary of state challenged the decision  to  allow  his  appeal
      under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


  17. The respondent has asserted that the appellant would be able to return
      to KRI and that internal relocation was a viable option.


  18. However, the evidence presented to the First-tier  Tribunal  was  that
      his home area of Makhmour was in fact not part  of  the  KRI.  I  have
      referred to Judge Monro's reasons for coming to that conclusion  which
      are fully set out from paragraphs 42-44. That  finding  has  not  been
      challenged by the secretary of state.


  19. Further, it is evident from her determination that Judge Munro has had
      regard to the country guidance cases  and  has  in  fact  set  out  at
      paragraph 48 the relevant paragraphs relating to country  guidance  in
      full.  She found that the security situation had however significantly
      changed [49].  The basis for that finding is set out  from  paragraphs
      49 - 53.


  20. Judge Monro has considered whether internal relocation to  Baghdad  is
      viable and reasonable for this claimant.


  21.  From  paragraph  56  onwards,  she   has   set   out   his   personal
      characteristics, including the fact that he  suffers  from  PTSD  with
      depression and that his IQ is in the lowest 5% of the  population.  At
      paragraphs 55-57, she thus found that he does fall  into  an  enhanced
      risk category. As a result, he could not  reasonably  be  expected  to
      relocate there. I find that she  has  given  proper  reasons  for  her
      conclusion.


  22. Moreover, her findings that the claimant would be unable to  obtain  a
      civil status ID as he did not hail from the KRI and that  he  did  not
      have the support of any family members are sustainable on the evidence
      [46] and [56-57].


  23. Finally, even if Judge Monro has made any error on the basis  asserted
      by the secretary of state, it would not be material in  the  light  of
      the fact, as already noted, that she has made reasoned findings  which
      have not been challenged, that  removal  would  breach  the  Directive
      2004/83/EC and Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


  24. As submitted by Mr Smyth, given that the claimant is at  risk  in  his
      home area, it cannot be said that he can reasonably relocate;  such  a
      move would breach his Convention rights.


Decision


      The determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  involve  the
      making of any material error on a  point  of  law.  The  determination
      shall stand.


     No anonymity direction made.







                               Signed                     Dated:  6/11/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


