
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02472/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3 June 2013                             |On 6 June 2013             |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR ASGHAR ALI
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:
                            For the Appellant: Mr C Avery a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer
                            For the Respondent: the Respondent
           appeared in person

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.  I
      will refer to her as the Secretary  of  State.  The  respondent  is  a
      citizen of Pakistan who was born on 13 December 1994. I will refer  to
      him as the claimant. The Secretary of State has been given  permission
      to appeal the determination of First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hague  who
      allowed  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision of 10 January 2013 to refuse to vary his leave to  remain  in
      the United Kingdom and to  remove  him  by  way  of  directions  under
      section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


   2. The claimant came to this country with entry clearance  as  a  Tier  4
      (General) Student Migrant for a period expiring on 15 September  2012.
      Before that period expired he applied for further leave to remain also
      as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the Points-based System.


   3. The Secretary of State accepted that the claimant was entitled to  the
      required points except those for Maintenance (Funds). These  were  not
      awarded because, whilst the appellant had  shown  that  the  necessary
      funds were held by his father and claimed that they were available  to
      him, he had not provided the type of document required under paragraph
      13B (a) of Appendix C of the Immigration Rules to prove  that  he  and
      his  father  were  related  as  claimed.  He  had  supplied  a  Family
      Registration Certificate issued by the Government of  Pakistan  not  a
      birth certificate or one of the other permitted documents.


   4. The claimant appealed and, prior to  the  hearing  before  the  judge,
      submitted his original birth certificate.  The  judge  determined  the
      appeal on the papers. He concluded  that  the  birth  certificate  was
      admissible in evidence under Section 85A (4)  C  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  The   claimant   satisfied   the
      requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and  as  a  result  the  judge
      allowed his appeal.


   5. The Secretary of State applied  for  and  was  granted  permission  to
      appeal. She argued that the judge erred in  law  by  failing  to  give
      adequate reasons for admitting the birth certificate in evidence or to
      explain how this could validate the  Family  Registration  Certificate
      submitted by the claimant with his application.


   6. I indicated to Mr Avery and the claimant that it seemed to me that the
      s.47 removal directions made by the Secretary of State were  unlawful.
      The s.47 point arises from a number of authorities leading up  to  the
      determination in Adamally and Jaferi (section  47  removal  decisions:
      Tribunal Procedures) [2012] UKUT 00414 (IAC). This states that where a
      removal decision purportedly under s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum and
      Nationality Act 2006 is made concurrently  with  a  decision  refusing
      further leave the s.47 decision is unlawful, but the decision refusing
      leave is a separate decision that requires determination.  S.85(1)  of
      the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  brings  the  two
      decisions into one appeal, but s.86 of that Act  allows  and  requires
      the determination to reflect differences in  outcome.  I  accept  that
      this is not a point  which  has  been  taken  at  any  earlier  stage.
      Nevertheless, I considered  it  to  be  an  obvious  point.  Mr  Avery
      conceded that the appeal against the s.47 removal directions  must  be
      allowed.


   7. I asked Mr Avery whether the application which led to this appeal  was
      one to which the UK Border Agency PBS Process Instruction  "Evidential
      Flexibility" applied and if so had these been considered. I showed  Mr
      Avery and the claimant a printout of these instructions from the  UKBA
      website. Mr Avery said that he was familiar with these and had no need
      to study them. He did not say that he was taken by surprise or ask for
      an adjournment to consider the point. He indicated  that  he  did  not
      wish to make any submissions in relation to this. However, he accepted
      that if I concluded that this was a relevant policy then  it  had  not
      been applied and the outcome would be for the appeal to be allowed  to
      the extent that the decision was not in accordance with  the  law  and
      the application would need to be  reconsidered  by  the  Secretary  of
      State in the light of the submission of the claimant's original  birth
      certificate.


   8. I find that in line with Rodriguez (Flexibility  Policy)  [2013]  UKUT
      00042 (IAC) the Secretary of State should have applied her policy. The
      policy is set out for caseworkers to follow in a number  of  questions
      which, if answered in the affirmative, lead on  to  another  question.
      This is a case where there is "missing evidence, or evidence  that  is
      not in an acceptable format". I find that  the  first  five  questions
      should have been answered in the  affirmative  leading  to  the  point
      where it is said that if the preceding criteria  are  satisfied;  "the
      caseworker  must  contact  the  applicant/rep/sponsor   initially   by
      telephone. The applicant/rep/sponsor should be informed that they have
      a  maximum  of  seven  working  days  to  respond  i.e.  the   missing
      information should be with the UKBA within this timeframe. We will use
      the date of receipt  at  UKBA  if  this  cannot  be  established  then
      evidence  of  the  data  posted  should  be  considered.  We  strongly
      recommend that the information requested be sent by next  day  special
      delivery. Original documentation must be provided - we will not accept
      faxed, scanned or photo copied docs......."


   9. Had the claimant been told that the  Family  Registration  Certificate
      was not acceptable and that his birth certificate was required  it  is
      clear, from subsequent events, that he could  have  supplied  it.  The
      Secretary of State would then have had the opportunity  to  study  the
      birth certificate and decide whether it was  genuine  and  proved  the
      claimed relationship between him and his father. The judge found  that
      it did.


  10. The judge found and I agree that this was a case to which section  85A
      of the 2002 Act applied. As this was an application under  the  Points
      Based System the judge was only entitled to  admit  and  consider  the
      claimant's birth  certificate  if  it  had  been  submitted  with  the
      original application or one of the other exceptions applied.  Clearly,
      as the claimant accepts,  it  was  not  submitted  with  the  original
      application. The only other exception which might apply  and  the  one
      which the judge found applied and assisted the claimant was that in  s
      85A (4) C namely that the birth certificate was "adduced to prove that
      a document is  genuine  or  valid".  I  find  that  in  reaching  this
      conclusion the judge erred in law. The Family Registration Certificate
      submitted by the appellant was not and could  never  be  the  type  of
      document required under  paragraph  13B  (a)  of  Appendix  C  of  the
      Immigration Rules. What was required, in  the  circumstances  of  this
      case,  was  the  appellant's  birth  certificate.   No   retrospective
      validation could turn the Family  Registration  Certificate  into  the
      required birth certificate.


  11. I add as a footnote that in reply to my  question  the  claimant  said
      that following the determination  by  the  judge  his  original  birth
      certificate was return to him. He will now send it to the Secretary of
      State by registered post. Mr Avery provided him with  his  address  so
      that it could be sent direct.


  12. Having concluded that the judge erred in law I set aside his  decision
      and remake it. I allow the claimant's appeal against the  S47  removal
      directions. I allow the claimant's appeal against the refusal to  vary
      his leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  to  the  extent  that  the
      Secretary of State's decision is not in accordance with  the  law  and
      must be reconsidered by her in the light of her policies.





      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 4 June
      2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

