
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02555/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 2nd November 2018                |On 23rd November 2018                   |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

     Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                         Omprakash setram kanoojiya
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Singer of Counsel instructed on a direct access
basis


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Jones promulgated on  26  February  2018,  in  which  Mr
    Kanoojiya's appeal against the decision to refuse his  application  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 student dated 2 November 2016 was  allowed.
    For ease I continue to refer to the parties as  they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal,  with  Mr  Kanoojiya  as  the  Appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. I found an error of law in Judge  Jones'  decision  promulgated  on  26
    February 2018 following the first hearing of this  appeal  on  30  July
    2018.  The background to this appeal is set out in  the  error  of  law
    decision contained in the annex and will  not  be  repeated  here  save
    where reference to the background facts is needed.   This  decision  is
    the re-making of the appeal.

The appeal

Applicable law

 3. Paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules states as follows:

      "Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave to  enter  or
      remain in the United Kingdom are to be refused

      (1A) Where false representations have been made or false documents  or
      information have been  submitted  (whether  or  not  material  to  the
      application, and whether or not  to  the  applicant's  knowledge),  or
      material facts have not been disclosed, in relation to the application
      or in order to obtain documents from the Secretary of State or a third
      party required in support of the application."

 4. This paragraph  contains  two  separate  possibilities,  one  of  false
    representations (for which dishonesty by the applicant is required) and
    one of false documents (something which tells a lie about itself).  The
    distinction between the two is summarised by the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Sumon Chanda v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 2424 in the following paragraphs:

      "11.  In AA (Nigeria) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2010] EWCA Civ 773, at paragraph 67, Rix LJ said:

         "First, "false representation is aligned in the  rule  with  "false
         document".  It is plain that a false document is one that  tells  a
         lie about itself.  Of course it is possible for a  person  to  make
         use of a false document (for instance a counterfeit currency  note,
         but that example, used for its clarity, is rather distant from  the
         context of this discussion) in total ignorance of its  falsity  and
         in perfect honesty.  But the document itself is dishonest.   It  is
         highly likely  therefore  that  where  an  applicant  uses  in  all
         innocence a false document for  the  purposes  of  obtaining  entry
         clearance, or leave to enter or to remain, it is because some other
         party, it might be a parent, or sponsor, or agent, has  dishonestly
         promoted the use of that document.  The response of  a  requirement
         of  mandatory  refusal  is  entirely  understandable  in   such   a
         situation.  The mere fact that a dishonest document has  been  used
         for such an important application is  understandably  a  sufficient
         reason for a mandatory refusal.  That is  why  the  rule  expressly
         emphasises that it applies  "whether  or  not  to  the  applicant's
         knowledge"."

      12. In JK (India) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]
      EWCA Civ 1080, it was accepted that  personal  dishonesty  was  of  no
      relevance where (as in that case) a false bank statement was provided.

      13. Both cases are  therefore  authority  for  the  proposition  that,
      whilst  the  evidence  of  deception   is   required   for   a   false
      representation, the use of a false document is itself a deception and,
      in the words of Rix LJ, "a sufficient reason for a mandatory refusal".
       ..."

Explanation for refusal

 5. The Respondent initially rejected the Appellant's application dated  23
    August 2011 for further leave to remain as invalid for  non-payment  of
    the required fee,  but  that  decision  was  withdrawn  further  to  an
    application for Judicial Review and a substantive decision made on  the
    application on 2 November 2016.

 6. The application was refused under paragraph 322(1A) of the  Immigration
    Rules on the basis that the Appellant's information as to  his  sponsor
    and Confirmation of Acceptance of Study ("CAS") were false, that  false
    representations had been made and  a  false  document  submitted.   The
    Respondent had checked the online CAS information system  and  the  CAS
    number could not be  found.   The  college  named  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant was not registered with them nor had they  issued  a  CAS  to
    him.  A CAS letter as opposed to a CAS had been issued and it  was  the
    latter which was required.  For the same reasons,  the  Respondent  was
    also  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  used   deception   in   his
    application.

 7. In addition, the Respondent refused  the  application  under  paragraph
    245ZX(a), (c) and (d) of the Immigration Rules because no points  could
    be awarded under Appendix  A  as  no  valid  CAS  had  been  submitted.
    Similarly, no points were awarded for maintenance.

The evidence

 8. The Respondent relies on the following documents.   First,  the  letter
    from London Academy  of  Learning  stated  to  be  a  'Confirmation  of
    Acceptance of Study'.  Secondly, a UKVI CAS search by  CAS  number  and
    name.  Thirdly, an email exchange between the Respondent and the London
    Academy of Learning in 2012 where the latter stated that the  Appellant
    was not registered at the London Academy of Learning and  the  CAS  had
    not been issued to the Appellant by the college.

 9. In his written statement,  signed  and  dated  14  November  2017,  the
    Appellant states that he has not submitted any false documents nor made
    any false statements to the Respondent and that he  genuinely  obtained
    his CAS from  the  college  after  obtaining  admission  and  enrolling
    himself on the course.   The Appellant states that he has not seen  any
    proof or evidence from the Respondent and can therefore only  speculate
    as to why his CAS was not accepted.

10. The Appellant attended the hearing and gave oral evidence  in  English,
    adopting and relying on his written statement dated 14  November  2017.
    The Appellant denied  submitting  a  false  CAS  certificate  with  his
    application and referred to his good immigration history to that point.

11. In cross-examination the Appellant stated that he obtained the CAS from
    the college, collecting it from someone in the admin  department.   The
    college had been recommended to the  Appellant  by  a  friend  who  was
    studying there.  He made his application, paid the money for the course
    and does not know why the CAS was not recognised or accepted.

Closing submissions

12. On behalf of the Respondent, the Home Office Presenting Officer  relied
    on  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  dated  2  November  2016.   The
    Respondent had emailed the college who  confirmed  that  they  had  not
    issued a CAS for the Appellant and that he had  never  been  registered
    with the college.  On the evidence, it was submitted  that  there  must
    have been a false representation by the Appellant because no valid  CAS
    had been submitted.  The Respondent did not  produce  any  evidence  or
    information about why the college's licence  had  been  suspending  and
    subsequently revoked.

13. On behalf of the Appellant, Counsel submitted that everyone  knew  that
    the purpose of a CAS was to show that a person  had  been  checked  and
    approved for study by a college and therefore the Appellant would  have
    been mad to submit a false CAS with his application in the knowledge it
    would be checked and discovered as false.

14. In any event, it was submitted that reliance can not be placed  on  the
    evidence from the college itself because it has  not  been  established
    that  the  source  of  the  allegation  of  fraud,  the  college,   was
    sufficiently reliable and  credible.   The  Respondent  has  failed  to
    establish that on the evidence and has failed to comply with directions
    to provide evidence of why the college's sponsor licence  was  revoked.
    The Appellant relies on the submission that poor record  keeping  could
    have been the reason for this, the revocation being within  a  year  of
    the issue of the Appellant's CAS.  It is plausible that the email  from
    the college was correct but an  unreliable  records  system  was  being
    checked such that there was a failure to register the Appellant  and  a
    failure to update the CAS system.

15. The Appellant's evidence is that he submitted a genuine  CAS  with  his
    application and that the document provided, even if in  letter  format,
    contained all the required information and was sufficient to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.   However,  Counsel  did  accept
    that if not on the online system, it was not a valid CAS.

16. Finally, the Appellant relied on previously amended grounds  of  appeal
    under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights on the basis that the Appellant had
    lived in the United Kingdom lawfully for 12 years (his  previous  leave
    to remain which expired prior to the application(s) in 2011 having been
    continuously extended by virtue of section 3C of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971) such that he would benefit from paragraph 276A1 if there  was  no
    fraud.  If there is a finding of fraud, then it was submitted that  the
    public interest is relevant as are the requirements of fairness and the
    Appellant should be entitled to a 60 day letter after the Sponsor  lost
    its licence.

Findings and reasons

 1. The first issue  in  this  appeal  is  whether  a  false  document  was
    submitted by the Appellant in his  application  for  further  leave  to
    remain as a student in 2011.  The Respondent has shown that  there  was
    no valid CAS on the online system, such that the letter  purporting  to
    be a Confirmation of Acceptance of Studies was itself false  as  a  CAS
    has to be on the online system to be valid.  That much appears to  have
    been accepted by Counsel for the Appellant in closing submissions  that
    there can be no valid CAS if it is not on the online  system.   I  find
    that evidence is sufficient to establish  that  a  false  document  was
    submitted whether or not the further evidence in the form of the  email
    exchange with the London Academy of Learning is given weight  as  being
    from a  reliable  and  credible  source  in  light  of  the  subsequent
    revocation of its sponsor licence for an unknown reason or reasons.

 2. The Appellant makes what essentially amounts to a bare assertion  about
    the genuineness of the CAS letter he submitted and at its highest,  can
    only suggest that there may have been an issue of poor  record  keeping
    at the college which affected not only the lack of a record of him with
    the college at all but also their failure  to  update  the  online  CAS
    system.  Although it is regrettable that the Respondent has  failed  to
    comply with the directions to confirm the reason for the revocation  of
    the sponsor licence, it is only speculation on the  Appellant's  behalf
    that this was for poor record keeping and further, the  submission  has
    to go further that any poor record keeping went back some eight  months
    before the revocation of the licence (the CAS  letter  being  dated  16
    December 2011 and the licence revoked on 15 August 2012) and meant that
    the Appellant's details were omitted  from  any  records  kept  by  the
    college and that the college failed to update  the  online  CAS  system
    when the certificate was issued or at any time in  the  following  year
    even for a course start date of January 2012.

 3. As set out in the error of law decision, the Respondent is not required
    to prove that the sponsor licence was not  withdrawn  for  poor  record
    keeping and  in  any  event,  poor  record  keeping  as  a  reason  for
    revocation of itself does not give sufficient  information  as  to  how
    poor it was and whether therefore likely that  in  the  previous  year,
    neither the Applicant's details nor the  online  CAS  system  with  his
    particular CAS would have been recorded/updated at all.   I  take  into
    account the Respondent's failure to submit any evidence on  this  point
    but do not find for that reason that no weight can be attached  to  the
    email exchange with the college.

 4. Due to the history of this application,  being  initially  rejected  as
    invalid  in  2011  and  then  substantively  considered  only  in  2016
    following an application for Judicial Review, both parties are hampered
    by the passage of time in terms of obtaining further or  more  detailed
    evidence for this appeal.  However,  there  is  no  evidence  from  the
    Appellant of any attempt to support his  assertion  that  the  CAS  was
    genuine and that he had successfully applied to the London  Academy  of
    Learning to study a Diploma in Business and Administrative  Management.
    There  is  for  example  no  evidence  of  the   application   or   any
    correspondence  between  the  Appellant  and  the  London  Academy   of
    Learning, no evidence of payment of the course fees of  �2500  said  on
    the CAS letter to have been paid as fees for the first year and so on.

 5. On the evidence available, I am unable to find that a genuine  CAS  was
    issued to the Appellant by the London Academy of Learning and find that
    letter purporting to be a CAS  dated  16  December  2011  was  a  false
    document submitted by the Appellant with his  application  for  further
    leave to remain.  Paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration  Rules  provides
    for a mandatory refusal of the application in  such  circumstances  and
    there can be no dispute that the substantive requirements for  a  grant
    of further leave to remain as a student set out in paragraph  245ZX  of
    the Immigration Rules could not be met either as  there  was  no  valid
    CAS.

 6. There is however a separate question as to whether the  Appellant  made
    false representations and/or was dishonest  in  his  application  given
    that these were also  reasons  for  refusal  by  the  Respondent  under
    paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration  Rules  and  for  the  purpose  of
    possible future application of paragraph 320(7B) of  the  same  to  any
    further applications for entry clearance or leave to remain.

 7. This is not a case in which it  could  be  said  that  the  CAS  letter
    submitted by the Appellant was so obviously false on its face that  the
    Appellant must have known it was false, contrary to, for  example,  the
    facts in the case of Chanda referred to above in  which  the  applicant
    could not explain clear false statements on the face of the document, a
    degree certificate, nor any evidence of study at all.  For example,  in
    the present case, it has not been suggested by the Respondent that  any
    of the information contained on the CAS letter or  in  the  Appellant's
    application for leave to remain (other than the CAS number itself)  was
    false or inconsistent with the Appellant's details.

 8. In these circumstances, there is little basis for an  inference  to  be
    drawn that the Appellant must have been  dishonest  when  he  submitted
    representations about the college and a CAS.  The  Appellant  has  been
    consistent in his account that he thought the CAS was genuine  and  had
    no reason to doubt it, which is plausible in light of  the  above.   In
    this case I find that although the Respondent had satisfied the initial
    burden of proof in relation to dishonesty, the Appellant  has  provided
    an innocent explanation to the minimum level of  plausibility  and  the
    Respondent  has  not  discharged  the  legal  burden  of   establishing
    dishonesty on the facts and evidence available in this  appeal.   There
    is insufficient evidence on the balance of probabilities to make such a
    finding and no strong inference that can be  drawn  from  the  document
    itself.  The reliance on false representations and  dishonesty  in  the
    decision  letter  can  not  therefore  be  maintained,   although   the
    application itself still falls for refusal under paragraphs  245ZX  and
    322(1A) of the Immigration Rules for the reasons set out above.

 9. At the First-tier Tribunal hearing and affirmed again  before  me,  the
    Respondent accepts that if there was no  fraud  by  the  Applicant,  he
    would satisfy the requirements of paragraph 276A1  of  the  Immigration
    Rules by reference to paragraph 276B(i), (ii) and (v) of the same.  The
    reference to 'fraud' rather than the making  of  false  representations
    and/or dishonesty is not perfectly  precise  in  the  context  of  this
    appeal and the findings above as to a false  document  being  submitted
    but not false representations or dishonesty, but I would infer that  it
    equates to the latter such that paragraph 276A1 can be satisfied by the
    Appellant as indicated  by  the  Respondent  as  there  was  no  fraud.
    However, in light  of  the  findings  above  and  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276B(ii) of the Immigration Rules  in  particular,  it  is  a
    matter for the Respondent to make a final decision on this in light  of
    this decision and the statements made to both the First-tier and  Upper
    Tribunal.

10. In the alternative, the Appellant submitted that he would at  least  be
    entitled to a 60 day letter given the withdrawal of the Sponsor licence
    in August 2012.  However, the CAS relied  upon  by  the  Appellant  was
    invalid, not because the Sponsor licence had been revoked, but  because
    it was never a valid CAS on the online system.  In these circumstances,
    the subsequent revocation of the  Sponsor  licence  is  irrelevant  and
    would not, as a matter of procedural fairness or otherwise, require the
    issue of a 60 day letter.

Notice of Decision

For the reasons given in my decision promulgated on 25 September  2018,  the
making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of
a material error of law.   As  such  it  was  necessary  to  set  aside  the
decision.

The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  and  re-made  as
follows:
Appeal dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   [pic]             Date     14th November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

ANNEX
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02555/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th July 2018                             |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         omprakash setram kanoojiya
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Singer of Counsel, instructed on a direct
access basis


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Jones promulgated on  26  February  2018,  in  which  Mr
    Kanoojiya's appeal against the decision to refuse his  application  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 student dated 2 November 2016 was  allowed.
    For ease I continue to refer to the parties as  they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal,  with  Mr  Kanoojiya  as  the  Appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a national of India, born on 30 November 1976, who was
    first granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as a student on 25 July
    2006 to 30 November  2007.   The  Appellant  was  periodically  granted
    further periods of leave to remain as a student, latterly as a  Tier  4
    (General Student) to 27 August 2011.  On 24 August 2011, the  Appellant
    applied for further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General Student) which
    was initially  rejected  by  the  Respondent  and  resubmitted  to  the
    Respondent on 19 December 2011.  Further to an application for Judicial
    Review issued by the Appellant, the Respondent agreed to reconsider the
    rejection of the Appellant's application dated 24 August 2011.   It  is
    the resulting decision dated 2 November 2016 refusing  the  application
    which is the subject of this appeal.

 3. Separate to the Appellant's application for leave to remain as a Tier 4
    (General) Student, he also sought leave to remain on private and family
    life grounds which was refused and his appeal against that refusal  was
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in a decision  promulgated  on  19
    September 2016.

 4. The Respondent refused the application under paragraph 322(1A)  of  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that the Appellant had submitted a false
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS) and for  the  same  reason
    found that the requirements of paragraph 245ZX(a)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules had not been satisfied.  The Respondent considered that  the  CAS
    was forged on the basis that the CAS letter submitted  (not  a  CAS  as
    required) included a number which did not exist and the London  Academy
    of Learning, who purported to have issued the  CAS,  confirmed  to  the
    Respondent that they did not do so and that the document was forged.

 5. Judge Jones allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 26 February
    2018.  In essence, Judge Jones was  not  satisfied  that  the  CAS  was
    fraudulent due to a lack of evidence of the same and the evidence which
    was submitted by the Respondent was very late in the day.  In addition,
    it was recorded that the Respondent had conceded that  the  Appellant's
    college, the London College of Learning, lost its sponsor's licence due
    to poor record keeping.  In the absence of fraud by the Appellant,  the
    Respondent had accepted that the Appellant had the benefit of leave  to
    remain continuing pursuant to section 3C of the  Immigration  Act  1971
    (during his appeal against the refusal) and as such had accumulated  10
    years' lawful residence in the United Kingdom which would allow for him
    to be granted limited leave to remain for  a  period  to  undertake  an
    English language and Knowledge of Life in the UK test.

The appeal

 6. The Respondent appeals on the basis that there was a  material  mistake
    of fact in the First-tier Tribunal's decision leading to  an  error  of
    law.  The Home Office Presenting Officer did not concede at the hearing
    that the London College of Learning lost its sponsor's licence for poor
    record keeping, only that that was one possible reason out  of  a  wide
    number of reasons upon which an institution may lose its licence.   The
    finding that the CAS was not fraudulent was materially based  upon  the
    incorrect assertion of a concession about why the sponsors licence  was
    lost which undermined the evidence from the London Academy of  Learning
    that the CAS was not issued by them.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Landes on 11 May 2018 on  all
    grounds.

 8. At the oral hearing, the Home Office Presenting Officer relied  on  the
    grounds of appeal that there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision and submitted in addition that the First-tier Tribunal  simply
    failed to consider the evidence of fraud before it and  the  Presenting
    Officer's submissions  which  are  recorded  in  paragraph  20  of  the
    decision.  That included an e-mail from the London College of  Learning
    stating categorically that the Appellant was not a  student  and  there
    was no evidence of poor record keeping at the college to undermine such
    evidence.  The Appellant had been aware of the issue as early as 28 May
    2012 as it was raised in a refusal letter then, so the matter  had  not
    been raised as late as suggested by the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. On behalf the Appellant, it was submitted that the error in relation to
    the stated concession by the Presenting Officer was immaterial  as  the
    Respondent offered no evidence  to  categorically  rule  out  that  the
    college lost its licence  because  of  poor  record  keeping.   It  was
    submitted that the Respondent's evidence was considered  in  paragraphs
    11 and 18 of the First-tier Tribunal  decision  (albeit  accepted  that
    this was in the section setting out the evidence rather than  expressly
    forming part of the findings).  Further, Mr Singer relied  on  what  he
    described as the  positive  credibility  findings  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  have  not   been
    challenged.

10. As a whole, it was submitted on behalf of the Appellant  that  adequate
    findings of fact were made by the First-tier Tribunal when the decision
    is read as a whole.

Findings and reasons

11. In the course of this appeal, the Appellant has accepted that there  is
    a mistake of fact in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  in  that
    the Home Office Presenting Officer did  not  concede  that  the  London
    College of Learning has lost its sponsor licence due  to  poor  record-
    keeping, to the contrary that was one reason which could be  the  basis
    for such a decision but the specific reason in this case was not known.
     However, he submits that the error was not material to the outcome  of
    the appeal.

12. It  is  necessary  considering  slightly  more  detail  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision in light of the Appellant's  submissions.   In  the
    section dealing with  the  submissions  of  the  parties,  Judge  Jones
    recorded, so far as relevant, the following:

         "11. ...  In this regard as to the CAS,  poor  record-keeping  was
         one of the grounds for the licence holder losing their  sponsorship
         credentials.  There is correspondence between the Home  Office  and
         the college which might suggest that the CAS number  could  not  be
         recognised - but it has be borne in mind that the Appellant  is  in
         no position to challenge this - and the Home Office themselves took
         this London College of Learning licence away (revoking it)  because
         of poor record-keeping.

         ...

         14.  He has not seen any evidence of these  alleged  communications
         at the time of making  his  statement  in  November  2017,  and  is
         unaware how any officer of the Respondent has been  able  to  check
         the system, and guard  against  the  risk  simply  the  collage  in
         themselves whose licence was revoked for poor record-keeping can be
         relied on.  Because of this the college has closed and he  has  had
         no opportunity of investigating these matters further himself given
         the passage of time.

         ...

         23.  It is submitted  respectfully  that  the  Appellant  has  been
         closely cross-examined as to the limited steps  he  could  take  at
         that time with the college having been closed down; and the belated
         production of the evidence which is said to establish his  "guilt".
         As a matter of fairness the Tribunal has required the production of
         this  documentation,  which  again,  only  shows   a   paucity   of
         information based on a simple email - whereby a simple error  could
         have been made in the establishment that itself was  shut  down  by
         the  Home  Office  for  poor  record-keeping.    They   are   shaky
         foundations it is submitted for the basis of decision."

13. It can be seen that there is repeated reference to the mistaken fact as
    to the reason why the London  College  of  Learning  lost  its  sponsor
    licence.  The conclusions and findings on  the  appeal  thereafter  are
    relatively brief and are contained essentially  in  the  following  two
    paragraphs:

         "26.  On the totality  of  the  evidence  before  me  I  find  that
         essentially the information provided before me does  not  make  out
         the alleged fraud as the Respondent would have it.  I am mindful of
         the decision in AA (Nigeria) and that the burden resting  with  the
         Respondent in  this  regard.   What  is  clear  to  me  though  the
         Appellant  was  closely  cross-examined;  he  was  consistent   and
         reliable to an appropriate standard as in terms  of  his  genuinely
         submitting applications and being left then in somewhat of a vacuum
         without information that has  been  provided  only  until  of  late
         (2018) concerning the alleged fraud.  This seems to  amount  to  an
         individual who is not named at  the  college  checking  a  register
         which was said to be pockmarked with errors, such that the  college
         licence was revoked for poor record keeping.

         27.  The Appellant in reality has been left in a difficult position
         in ignorance of the material facts that he was to face in terms  of
         the allegation put him, and only presented with this evidence  some
         years on, and so late in the day so as to seek to address  it  with
         the college that had long since been shut down because of its  poor
         record keeping.  I find this to be somewhat "shaky"  if  I  use  Mr
         Singer's description,  in  terms  of  this  allegation  of  fraud's
         foundations - but also I find  that  the  Appellant's  tenacity  in
         terms of pursuing the matters through Judicial Review speak in some
         measure as to his sincerity in this matter."

14. The First-tier Tribunal has clearly attached little if  any  weight  to
    the e-mail from the college  stating  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
    student there and they had not issued a CAS to him, on the  basis  that
    the college had poor record keeping as  shown  by  the  loss  of  their
    sponsor licence for that reason.  There is no apparent consideration of
    the Respondent's evidence that  the  Appellant  had  not  submitted  an
    actual CAS, only a letter and that checks on  the  Respondent's  system
    both against the Appellant's name and the CAS  number  he  relied  upon
    showed  no  results.   Against  this  evidence,  only  the  Appellant's
    tenacity in pursuing his claim is taken into account in his  favour  to
    find that the Respondent had not discharged the burden  of  proof  upon
    her.

15. The accepted mistake of fact  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    amounts to a material error of law as it infected the findings of  fact
    in relation to the CAS, being repeatedly relied upon to  undermine  the
    Respondent's evidence that the CAS was fraudulent.  In the  absence  of
    any concession by the Respondent that het London  College  of  Learning
    lost its sponsor's licence even in part for poor record keeping,  those
    findings can not be sustained.  That is particularly so in light of the
    failure to  expressly  consider  the  Respondent's  other  evidence  in
    support of the decision.

16. Counsel for the Appellant  suggests  that  the  error  of  law  is  not
    material because in any event the Respondent was put to proof that  the
    sponsor's licence was not revoked for this reason and unless  he  could
    establish that, the First-tier Tribunal was bound to allow the  appeal.
    However, that puts the  case  too  highly.   The  burden  of  proof  in
    relation to the allegation of  fraud  is  on  the  Respondent  and  the
    standard is the balance of probabilities.  The First-tier Tribunal  are
    required to assess all of the evidence as a whole to reach a finding on
    whether a CAS was fraudulent and the  Respondent  is  not  required  to
    prove anything in particular in  relation  to  the  revocation  of  the
    sponsor's licence, albeit the evidence  (or  lack  thereof)  may  be  a
    relevant factor to consider as part of that assessment.

17. Counsel for the Appellant  also  relied  on  the  positive  credibility
    findings made as a reason why the error of fact would not be  material,
    however, as can been seen from paragraphs 26 and 27 of the decision set
    out above, those findings are incredibly limited and go only so far  as
    the Appellant being consistent about the applications he submitted  and
    pursuing the claim.  There are no express positive credibility findings
    about his study or the CAS so the limited findings made do not show the
    error was even arguably immaterial.

18. For  these  reasons,  the  appeal  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision is allowed as it involved the making of a  material  error  of
    fact which amounted to an error of law and as such it is  necessary  to
    set aside the decision.  The appeal will  be  adjourned  to  a  further
    hearing in  the  Upper  Tribunal  before  UTJ  Jackson  to  remake  the
    decision.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Directions

Hearing adjourned to the first available date after 28  August  2018  before
UTJ Jackson at Field House.

The Appellant and Respondent to file and serve  any  further  evidence  upon
which they wish to rely no later than 14 days before the relisted hearing.


Signed   [pic]             Date     9th August 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson



