
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/02139/2015
     ia/02141/2015
     ia/02143/2015
     ia/02145/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 February 2016                    |On 14 March 2016                     |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SHIRLEY [P]
                                  DAVID [M]
                                    [J A]
                                    [A A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondents:   Miss S Akinyinka, from Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I refer to the parties as they were  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Thus, the Secretary of State is the Respondent and  the  claimants  are
    once more the Appellants.
 2. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Sweet (the judge), promulgated on  28  August  2015,  in
    which he allowed the Appellants' appeals on Article  8  grounds  within
    the Immigration Rules (the Rules).  Those appeals had been against  the
    Respondent's  decisions,  dated  16  December  2014,  to   remove   the
    Appellants from the United Kingdom by way of directions  under  section
    10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.


 3. The Appellants are all nationals  of  Bolivia.  The  first  and  second
    Appellants are  husband and wife and are the parents of the  third  and
    fourth.  The children have been minors at all material times.

The judge's decision
 4. In a brief decision the judge first sets out the  respective  positions
    of the Appellants and the Respondent. He  then  notes  the  submissions
    made by counsel for the Appellants.  The Respondent  was  unrepresented
    at the hearing.


 5. The judge's conclusions are contained in paragraphs 14  to  18  of  his
    decision.  In paragraph 14 he makes reference to the third  and  fourth
    Appellants' ages and the evidence  provided  that  extended  family  in
    Bolivia would not be able to assist the family unit upon return to that
    country. It is said that the third and fourth Appellants  spoke  mainly
    English, there being some communication in Spanish as well.  The  judge
    stated  that  there  would  be  "difficulties"  in  the  two   children
    integrating into Bolivian life now.

 6. In paragraph 15 the judge stated as follows:

         "I am satisfied that it would not be reasonable to expect him  [the
         third Appellant] to leave the UK, as he has been in the UK  for  at
         least seven years immediately preceding the date of the application
         pursuant to EX.1 of Appendix  FM.   In  the  case  of  Azimi-Moayed
         [2013] the Tribunal observed that seven years from the age of 4  is
         likely to be more significant to a child than the first seven years
         of life. [JA] is nearly 9.  His removal  from  the  UK  to  Bolivia
         would result in a substantial change to his life, which he has only
         known to date in the UK.  It would be unreasonable to expect him to
         leave the UK and likewise for the rest of the family."


 7. In paragraph 16 the judge refers to particular eligibility requirements
    under Appendix FM and concludes that these were not required to be  met
    by the first and second  Appellants.  There  is  reference  to  section
    117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 Act. In the
    same paragraph  the judge states:


         "It is also not clear that the  Secretary  of  State  has  had  any
         regard to the requirements to consider the  child's  welfare  under
         Section 58 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  or
         the guidance given in JO [2014] and MK [2015]."


 8. He concluded that the Appellants all succeeded on Article 8 within  the
    Rules.
 9. At paragraph 18 the judge  states  that  alternatively  he  would  have
    allowed the appeal on the basis  that  the  Appellants  could   satisfy
    paragraph 276ADE(iv) and  (vi)  of  the  Rules  because  it  would  not
    reasonable for the third Appellant to leave  the  United  Kingdom,  and
    that there would be very significant obstacles to  the  integration  of
    the first and second Appellants into Bolivian society.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission
10. The Respondent sought permission to appeal  on  three  grounds:  first,
    that the judge erred in considering section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act  in
    isolation from the rest of that section; second, that the judge  failed
    to explain what the very significant obstacles were in relation to  the
    first and second Appellants; third,  that  the  judge  failed  to  deal
    adequately with the issue of reasonableness as it related to the  third
    Appellant.


11. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on 5
    January 2016.

The hearing before me
12. Mr Whitwell raised a  preliminary  point  in  respect  of  whether  the
    second, third and fourth Appellants had in-country rights of appeal  at
    all.  He made reference to the immigration decisions issued in  respect
    of these Appellants. It is right that  these  notices  state  that  the
    right for appeal was exercisable only  from  out  of  country.  However
    after some further discussion on the point Mr  Whitwell  withdrew  this
    initial point.


13. In my view he was right to do so.  It  is  true  that  the  immigration
    decision notices say what they say. However, the  Respondent  has  said
    all along (in particular within the reasons for  refusal  letter)  that
    all of the Appellants had made combined  applications  based  on  human
    rights.  On this basis the assertion that the  rights  of  appeal  were
    exercisable out of country only  appears  to  be  incorrect.  The  true
    position is that human rights claims were made and in view  of  section
    92(4) of the 2002 Act the consequent rights  of  appeal  were  all  in-
    country.


14. Turning to the substance of the  Respondent's  challenge,  Mr  Whitwell
    relied on the grounds of appeal. He submitted that the judge was  wrong
    to have considered EX.1 of Appendix FM.  The Appellants could not  meet
    the eligibility requirements within this Appendix and  therefore  could
    not succeed under the Rules in this regard. He submitted that the  core
    issue in these appeals was that of reasonableness as it related to  the
    third Appellant.  He submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  make
    adequate findings and/or give adequate reasons on this core issue.   In
    addition, the judge had conflated the issues  for  reasonableness  with
    time spent in the United Kingdom when in fact the time spent  here  was
    simply the first limb of the overall test.  Reasonableness  had  to  be
    dealt with separately.

15.  Miss  Akinyinka  accepted  that  the  judge  had  been  wrong  in  his
    consideration  of  Appendix  FM.   However  she  maintained  that   his
    conclusions on reasonableness were sustainable.


Decision on error of law
16. In my view there are material errors of law in the judge's decision.


17. First and foremost is the judge's consideration of  the  reasonableness
    issue.  In my view, having regard to paragraphs 14, 15 and 16 there  is
    an inadequacy of findings and reasons on the issue.

18. At paragraph 14 there is reference  to  "difficulties"  but  there  are
    simply not enough findings of primary fact as to what these were,  with
    reference to whatever evidence was before the judge, and  certainly  no
    adequate reasons as to why such difficulties existed and their extent.

19. On the face of paragraph 15 it is apparent that the  judge  has  indeed
    conflated the issue of reasonableness with the time spent in the United
    Kingdom by the third Appellant.  In my view  that  is  clear  from  the
    second sentence of the paragraph and the use of the word "as".

20. Later on in the same paragraph the judge refers to substantial  changes
    to the third Appellant's life, but once again there is a lack of  clear
    fact-finding and adequate reasoning as to why  removal  at  this  stage
    would be unreasonable.  The fact that the third Appellant had  been  in
    this country for over seven years was not in and of  itself  sufficient
    to lead to a conclusion that it would not  be  reasonable  for  him  to
    return to Bolivia.

21. The erroneous consideration of  the  reasonableness  issue  is  clearly
    material to the outcome of not only the third Appellant's  appeal,  but
    those of the others as well. The decision must be  set  aside  on  this
    basis alone.

22. The judge has further  erred  in  concluding  that  the  appeals  could
    succeed under Appendix FM.  Contrary to what he  concluded,  the  first
    and second Appellants could not meet the eligibility requirements under
    E-LTRPT.2.3 and 2.4 of Appendix FM.  These  provisions  were  mandatory
    and clearly could not be satisfied on the facts of this case. Once that
    has been established and in light of the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in
    Sabir [2014] UKUT 63 (IAC), EX.1 could not be relied on.

23. With reference to the judge's comments about section 55 of the Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, he reached no firm conclusions on
    this issue and in any event the relevant factors relating  to  the  two
    children had been addressed in the reasons for refusal letter dated  16
    December 2014.

24. Finally, in respect of paragraph 18, what is apparently an  alternative
    conclusion is unsustainable on the basis that the reasonableness  issue
    has not been dealt with adequately (see above), and that there  are  no
    reasons provided as to why "very significant obstacles" existed.

25. The decision of the judge is set aside.


Disposal
26. The representatives were both of the view that these appeals should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  Having regard to paragraph  7  of
    the Practice Statement and that the usual course of events would be  to
    retain the matter in the Upper Tribunal and to remake the decision,  on
    the facts of this particular case I agree  that  the  appeals  must  be
    remitted.


27. This is because in effect the judge has failed to make any findings  on
    the core issues in the appeals, in particular that  of  whether  it  is
    reasonable for the third Appellant to leave the United  Kingdom.   Oral
    evidence will be required and very likely further documentary  evidence
    will need to be gathered.  Therefore all of the appeals are remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal for complete rehearing.

28. I set out relevant directions below.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the appeals to the First-tier Tribunal.


No anonymity direction is made.


Directions to the parties

    1. The right of appeal for all Appellants is in-country;


    2. The issues at the remitted hearing are:
                  a) Whether any or all of the Appellants can succeed  under
                     Paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules;
                  b) Alternatively, whether any of all of the Appellants can
                     succeed on free-standing Article 8 grounds  outside  of
                     the Rules.

    3. The Respondent has accepted throughout that the third Appellant  had
       been in the United Kingdom for 7 years as at the date of the  latest
       application.  Therefore,   paragraph   276ADE(iv)   is   potentially
       applicable;


    4. None of the Appellants can succeed under Appendix FM to  the  Rules,
       and this is not a live issue;

    5. The Appellants shall, not later than 28 days prior to  the  remitted
       hearing, file and serve on the First-tier  Tribunal  and  Respondent
       any further evidence relied upon;

    6. The Appellants shall, not later than 14 days prior to  the  remitted
       hearing, file and serve on the First-tier Tribunal and Respondent  a
       skeleton argument setting out relevant issues with reference to case-
       law and the evidence;

    7. Both parties shall comply with any further directions issued by  the
       First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to Administration

    1. These appeals are all remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be
       heard at the Hatton Cross hearing centre on a date to  be  fixed  by
       that centre;


    2. The appeals shall not be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet;

    3. No interpreter is required;

    4. There is a time estimate of 2 hours.



Signed                                  Date: 4 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

