
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/02380/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 September 2016                          |On 20 October 2016            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Ahmad Shibli Zahir
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal issued on 2 February 2016 allowing an appeal by the
    applicant  against  the  decision  of  5  January  2015  refusing   his
    application for leave to remain on the basis of his family life in  the
    UK.  In this decision I will refer to the parties as they  were  before
    the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  applicant  as  the  appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  on  7  April  1983.   He
    entered the UK on 21 September  2006  as  a  student  and  was  granted
    further extensions until 22 October 2010.  He was granted further leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 (Postgraduate) until 9 December  2012.   He  then
    returned to the  student  category  and  was  granted  leave  until  28
    February 2015 but this leave was curtailed as from 11 October 2014.  On
    9 October 2014 the appellant applied for further leave on the basis  of
    his marriage to a British citizen who was  pregnant  with  their  first
    child.

3.   The application was  refused  as  the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  and  the  respondent  was  not
    satisfied that there were any  exceptional  circumstances  which  might
    warrant consideration under article 8. The First-tier Tribunal  allowed
    his appeal against this decision was on  the  basis  that  he  met  the
    requirements of article 8.

4.   The respondent was granted permission to appeal against  this  decision
    arguing that the judge erred in law by  failing  to  give  any  or  any
    adequate reasons for the findings that the appellant had a genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with his child prior to that child's birth  and
    that  there  were  compelling  circumstances  warranting  consideration
    outside the rules; to follow the guidance in Singh  and  Khalid  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 74 and in  Dube  (ss117A-D)  [2015]  UKUT  90  and  by  making
    findings that were irrational.

5.   When granting permission Judge A K Simpson said:

         "It is clear that the appellant did not meet para EX.1 at the  date
         of application, and it is arguable that despite the judge's finding
         at [20], he did not meet para EX.1 at the date of  hearing  as  his
         child was still unborn at that date.  Given that the child was  yet
         to be born, there was no requirement on the respondent to  consider
         s.55 and  so  it  is  also  arguable  that  the  judge  misdirected
         [herself]  as  to  the  application  of   Appendix   FM.    Similar
         difficulties relate to  the  judge's  findings  at  [25]  that  the
         appellant has family life in the UK with his child,  as  an  unborn
         child has no legal status."

6.    On  8  September  2016  the  appellant  through  his   representatives
    indicated that he wished to withdraw his appeal as he intended to  make
    a fresh application.  The Tribunal notified him  that  as  it  was  the
    respondent who had been granted permission to appeal,  the  appropriate
    course was for the appeal to remain listed so that the judge seized  of
    the appeal could make a decision on whether there was a material  error
    of law in the decision.  It was  indicated  that  neither  he  nor  his
    representatives need attend and on that basis it would be assumed there
    was no opposition by the  appellant  to  the  respondent's  grounds  of
    appeal in relation to the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

7.   There has been no appearance today by or on behalf  of  the  appellant.
    I am satisfied that the notice of  hearing  has  been  properly  served
    evidenced by the fact that an application has been made on  his  behalf
    to withdraw the appeal.  I am therefore satisfied that I should proceed
    to decide the appeal.

8.   I am satisfied that the  respondent's  grounds  as  summarised  in  the
    grant of permission to appeal are made out and that the judge erred  in
    law accordingly.  No further representations have  been  received  from
    the appellant to resist the appeal.  I am satisfied that the  error  of
    law is material to the outcome and that the proper course  is  for  the
    decision to be set aside and re-made.  The  appellant  has  applied  to
    withdraw his appeal as he wishes to make a further application  to  the
    respondent.  I give my consent to the withdrawal under  the  provisions
    of r.17(2) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Decision:

9.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.  I record  that  the  appellant  has  withdrawn  his  appeal
    against the original decision.



Signed        H J E Latter                       Dated: 29 September 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
