
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02320/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1 July 2013                                  |On 6 August 2013           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                               HARWINDER KAUR
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of  India,  appeals  with  leave  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Crawford  dismissing  her  appeal
    against the respondent's refusal to grant her leave to remain in the UK
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the points-based system and
    to refuse her a biometric residence permit. The application was refused
    under paragraphs 245ZX(c) and (d) of the Immigration Rules  HC  395  as
    amended.

 2. The appellant did not appear or arrange  representation  at  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing.

Background

 3. The appellant was last granted leave to enter the United Kingdom  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant, which expired  on  2  November  2011.
    Her application for further leave was made out  of  time,  because  the
    appellant's first submission  failed  when  the  issuing  bank  refused
    payment on her bank card.

 4. The appellant provided a Confirmation of Acceptance for  Studies  (CAS)
    assigned by Equinox College.  By the time the respondent's decision was
    made on 2 January 2013, Equinox College was no longer a Tier 4 Sponsor.
    The appellant has never provided any other certificate of approval  for
    studies.

Permission to appeal

 5. Permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  appellant's  grounds  which
    argued that the respondent failed to apply its  policy  of  granting  a
    further 60 days' leave in order to regularise her stay.

 6. The second ground relates to a  decision  under  Section  47:  although
    there is mention of Section 47 removal in paragraph 10 of  the  grounds
    of appeal, the respondent's decision dated 4 January 2013 contained  no
    Section 47 decision.  The  appellant's  representatives  erred  in  the
    grounds of appeal and that  element  of  the  grant  of  permission  is
    erroneous.

Rule 24 Reply

 7. On 13 June 2013, the respondent served a Rule 24 reply dated 13th  June
    2013 which contains the following two relevant paragraphs:

         "3.  The First-tier Judge states at paragraph 9 that the  appellant
             did not have the required funds available in her bank  account
             to pay for her application and therefore her  application  was
             declined.  It is submitted that the appellant does not have  a
             right of appeal as leave to remain had expired by the time she
             submitted the second application.

         4.   Further or in the alternative the First-tier Judge found  that
             the appellant was not in possession of a valid CAS at the date
             of decision. Therefore the  judge  correctly  found  that  the
             appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rules."

Discussion

 8. The appellant has not attended or sent any  representative  or  written
    representations to assist the Tribunal  in  dealing  with  her  appeal.
    Both in relation  to  her  finances,  and  to  the  CAS  provided,  the
    respondent's arguments in the Reply are valid.  Her  application  could
    not succeed, even if it had been submitted at a time when the appellant
    had extant leave to remain.

 9. The appellant has not satisfied me that there is a  material  error  of
    law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination.   The   First-tier
    Tribunal determination is upheld.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
