
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02660/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6 December 2013                              |On 7 January 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                           HAWKER HUSSEIN MAHMOUD
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:        Miss B Poynor, instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Hawker Hussein Mahmud, was born on 19 June 1989 and is a
    male citizen of Iraq. By a determination  dated  28  August  2012,  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge T R P Hollingworth; Mr  M  E  Olszewski  JP)
    dismissed an appeal of  the  appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 2 February 2012 to  refuse  to  revoke  a  deportation
    order.  The appellant was granted permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal by Judge Chalkley in October 2012.  The initial  hearing  took
    place at Field House on 6 December 2013.

 2. I was assisted by the helpful submissions made by Miss Poynor and  also
    Mr  Deller.   Mr  Deller  did  not  seek  to  persuade  me   that   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal should be upheld.  I told  the
    representatives that I intended to set aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  that
    Tribunal to remake the decision.  The appeal will be reheard at  Taylor
    House on 31 March 2014.

 3. I found that there are errors in the determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which are not only sufficiently serious to justify setting  it
    aside. These  errors,  taken  cumulatively,  constitute  a  failure  to
    provide the appellant with a fair hearing of his appeal.  I  identified
    the errors as follows.

 4. It is clear from the papers on the Tribunal file that  the  appellant's
    solicitors had assembled a substantial volume of evidence regarding the
    levels of indiscriminate violence in Iraq; the appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal occurred at a time when there was  a  hiatus  in  country
    guidance available to the Tribunal. Whilst the First-tier Tribunal  may
    not have had the resources to embark upon  a  detailed  examination  of
    Article 15(c) issues, it should at least  have  made  some  attempt  to
    engage with the appeal on the basis upon which it was advanced  by  the
    appellant.  The Tribunal  purported  to  deal  with  the  Qualification
    Directive at [48] et seq.  At [49] the Tribunal  made  the  observation
    that the appellant's "overall account continues to  lack  credibility".
    The Tribunal did not clarify that remark nor did it seek to explain how
    the  matter  of  the  appellant's  credibility  might  be  relevant  to
    assessing levels of indiscriminate violence in Iraq capable of engaging
    Article 15(c).  At [50] the Tribunal  wrote,  "We  do  not  accept  any
    contention that what [the appellant] says amounts to  a  fresh  refugee
    claim." Again, the relevance of this  comment  to  the  issues  in  the
    appeal is not immediately apparent.  At [51] the Tribunal concluded its
    brief examination of the Qualification Directive by  saying  that,  "We
    [do not] accept that if returned [the appellant] will face serious harm
    entitling him to protection...." I consider  that  conclusion  and  the
    preceding analysis (if it can be so described)  as  wholly  inadequate.
    The Tribunal's postscript at [52] ("even had  the  appellant  qualified
    for humanitarian protection we would  still  have  withheld  it,  as  a
    result of his committing serious offences of  violence  in  the  United
    Kingdom") only served to make matters worse;  the  respondent  had  not
    submitted either in the refusal letter  or  at  the  hearing  that  the
    appellant should be  excluded  from  humanitarian  protection  on  that
    basis.

 5. At [66], the Tribunal wrote that "It  is  clear  that  [the  appellant]
    originates from the KRA". Elsewhere (for example, at [63]) the Tribunal
    accurately recorded that the appellant came from Kirkuk and had  family
    members who still lived there.  Kirkuk is not in the KRA (or  KRG).   I
    find that this is another example  of  the  lack  of  care   which  the
    Tribunal has taken  in  determining  the  appellant's  appeal.   It  is
    arguable that these errors, taken singly, might not have undermined the
    determination as a whole but I find that their cumulative effect is  to
    distort the reasoning of the determination to the extent that I am  not
    persuaded that the arguments advanced by Miss Poynor on behalf  of  the
    appellant were adequately addressed.  To that extent, the appellant has
    not been  given a fair hearing of his appeal.

 6. There was some discussion at the Upper Tribunal regarding the  comments
    of the First-tier Tribunal  at  [79]  as  regards  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.   Prima  facie,  the
    findings of the Tribunal as regards the best  interests  of  the  child
    (with whom the appellant does not live) do  not  appear  to  have  been
    vitiated by the errors made elsewhere in the determination.    However,
    considering the importance of making a proper assessment at  any  given
    time of the best interests of any children involved in  an  appeal  and
    given also the lapse  of  time,  I  do  not  propose  to  preserve  the
    Tribunal's findings at [79] or elsewhere in this determination which  I
    direct should be set aside in its entirety.

DECISION

 7. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    28 August 2012  is  set  aside.  None  of  the  findings  of  fact  are
    preserved. This appeal will be remitted for the decision to  be  remade
    by the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor House on 31 March 2014  at
    10 a.m.





Signed                              Date 6 December 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

