
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02295/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |              Decision & Reasons         |
|                                         |Promulgated                              |
|On 23rd November 2015                    |              On 4th January 2016        |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR SIDNEI BECKER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless for the purposes of  this  determination  I  will
    refer to the appellants as they were described  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that is the Secretary of State as the respondent and Mr Sidnei
    Becker as the appellant.

The Appellant

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Brazil born on  23rd  November  1971  and
    married to Maria Longhinotti Felippe who is an  Italian  national.   On
    4th October 2014 he made an application for confirmation of a right  of
    residence as the spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights  in
    the UK.  That application was refused on  29th  December  2014  on  the
    basis of Regulation 4  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.

         "4.  (1)      In these Regulations

                  (a)  "worker" means a worker within the meaning of Article
                      39  of   the   Treaty   establishing   the   European
                      Community(1);

                  (b)  "self-employed person" means a person who establishes
                      himself in  order  to  pursue  activity  as  a  self-
                      employed person in accordance with Article 43 of  the
                      Treaty establishing the European Community;

                  (c)  "self-sufficient person" means a person who has-

                      (i)  sufficient resources not to become a  burden  on
                           the  social  assistance  system  of  the   United
                           Kingdom during his period of residence; and

                      (ii) comprehensive sickness insurance  cover  in  the
                           United Kingdom;

                      (d)"student" means a person who-

                      (i)    is   enrolled   at   a   private   or   public
                           establishment, included  on  the  Department  for
                           Education and Skills' Register of  Education  and
                           Training Providers(2)  or  financed  from  public
                           funds, for the principal purpose of  following  a
                           course of study, including vocational training;

                      (ii) has comprehensive sickness  insurance  cover  in
                           the United Kingdom; and

                      (iii)    assures the Secretary of State, by means  of
                           a declaration, or by such equivalent means as the
                           person  may  choose,  that  he   has   sufficient
                           resources not to become a burden  on  the  social
                           assistance system of the  United  Kingdom  during
                           his period of residence.

             (2)  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  (1)(c),  where  family
                  members of the  person  concerned  reside  in  the  United
                  Kingdom and their right to reside is dependent upon  their
                  being family members of that person-

                  (a)  the requirement for that person  to  have  sufficient
                      resources not  to  become  a  burden  on  the  social
                      assistance system of the United  Kingdom  during  his
                      period of residence shall only be  satisfied  if  his
                      resources  and  those  of  the  family  members   are
                      sufficient  to  avoid  him  and  the  family  members
                      becoming such a burden;

                  (b)  the requirement for that person to have comprehensive
                      sickness insurance cover in the United Kingdom  shall
                      only be satisfied if he and his family  members  have
                      such cover.

             (3)  For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  (1)(d),  where  family
                  members of the  person  concerned  reside  in  the  United
                  Kingdom and their right to reside is dependent upon  their
                  being family members of that person, the  requirement  for
                  that person to assure the Secretary of State that  he  has
                  sufficient resources not to become a burden on the  social
                  assistance system of the United Kingdom during his  period
                  of residence shall only be satisfied  if  he  assures  the
                  Secretary of State that his resources  and  those  of  the
                  family members are sufficient to avoid him and the  family
                  members becoming such a burden.

             (4)  For  the  purposes  of  paragraphs  (1)(c)  and  (d)  and
                  paragraphs (2)  and  (3),  the  resources  of  the  person
                  concerned and, where applicable, any family  members,  are
                  to be regarded as sufficient if they  exceed  the  maximum
                  level of resources which a United Kingdom national and his
                  family members may possess if he is to become eligible for
                  social  assistance  under  the  United   Kingdom   benefit
                  system."

 3. It was stated that the appellant had not provided evidence that he  and
    his EEA family had  comprehensive  sickness  insurance  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It was also stated that he had not provided evidence by means
    of a declaration or such equivalent means that his  EEA  family  member
    had  sufficient  resources  not  to  become  a  burden  on  the  social
    assistance of the United Kingdom during his period  of  residence.   He
    had not provided evidence that he would have sufficient  funds  as  his
    EEA national family  member  was  5,561.21  Euros  in  debit.   It  was
    concluded  that  he  had  failed  to  provide  sufficient  evidence  to
    demonstrate that the EEA family member was currently a qualified person
    in the United Kingdom as a student and  therefore  it  was  decided  to
    refuse  to  issue  confirmation  that  he  sought  with  reference   to
    Regulation 6 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.

 4. The appellant appealed  and  submitted  that  his  wife  was  currently
    studying for a PhD in London and that she had a student  bank  loan  of
    about 10,000 Euros.  Further in addition the appellant had a  temporary
    job for helping fund the stay in the United Kingdom.

 5. The appeal was  heard  on  the  papers  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Anthony.  He recorded at paragraph 4  of  his  determination  that  the
    appellant had provided evidence of a European health insurance card for
    the spouse  as  evidence  of  comprehensive  sickness  insurance.   The
    appellant also referred to the EHIC card for himself and his  son  Alex
    to the notice of appeal.

 6. The appellant also submitted that the respondent had misread  the  bank
    statement as the bank statement represents a student loan  to  the  EEA
    family as of September 2014 they still had 10,042.79 Euros to spend.

 7. Judge Anthony found at paragraph 8 of his determination that there  was
    ample evidence that the appellant had sufficient resources not to be  a
    burden on the  social  assistance  system  further  the  appellant  had
    employment which provided income.  The appellant's spouse satisfied the
    definition of student pursuant to Regulation 4(1)(d) and that she was a
    qualified  person  in  accordance  with  Regulation  6   of   the   EEA
    Regulations.  He therefore allowed the appeal.

 8. An application for permission to appeal was made on the basis that  the
    appellant was refused a residence card on the basis his sponsor was not
    in possession of  comprehensive  sickness  insurance  and  this  was  a
    requirement of Regulation 4.  The judge accepted that the  EEA  sponsor
    had possessed a  European  Health  Insurance  Card  but  this  was  not
    sufficient for the purposes of the EEA Regulations further to  Ahmed  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 988.

 9. The refusal letter gives a second reason to refuse that no  declaration
    had been provided in line with Regulation 4(1)(d)(iii).  At the hearing
    the judge took into account a bank statement dated 28th September  2014
    showing a balance  of  approximately  10,000  Euros.   In  Boodhoo  and
    Another (EEA Regulations: relevant evidence) [2013]  UKUT  00346  (IAC)
    the Upper Tribunal found the relevant date for an in-county  appeal  in
    respect of the 2006 Regulations was the date of the hearing.

10. It was submitted that there was an error of law.

11. Submissions by the Appellant were made in opposition to the  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  He pointed out that the  application  form  itself
    confirmed  that  a  European  Health  Insurance  Card   fulfilled   the
    requirements for comprehensive sickness insurance.

12. Indeed at the hearing Ms Brocklesby-Weller conceded that  the  guidance
    for the Home Office indicated that the European Health  Insurance  Card
    was acceptable as evidence of sickness insurance  for  the  appellant's
    sponsor.  She made the point however that further to Regulation 4(2)(b)
    the European Health Insurance Card did not extend to a non-EEA national
    and only covered the sponsor herself.  The appellant could not rely  on
    the  EHIC  card  as  a  family  member  and  he  had  no  evidence   of
    comprehensive sickness insurance.

13. I can see force in this argument and note that at the hearing before me
    the appellant did not provide any evidence  of  comprehensive  sickness
    insurance but evidence of an EHIC card personal to himself.

14. However in relation to the family funds I accept the  explanation  that
    the family had sufficient funds and also had provided a declaration.  I
    accept that the Home Office had misread  and  misinterpreted  the  bank
    statement and this indeed was recorded by the judge at paragraph  8  of
    his determination

15. I note that the appellant stated he produced a  second  bank  statement
    dated 6th January 2015.  The bank statement dated 28th  September  2014
    showed that that the appellant had sufficiency of funds in order not to
    become a burden on the United Kingdom during his period  of  residence.
    The total loan was Euros 15620  and  the  family  had  spent  Euros  5,
    561.21. .  The income of the appellant can also be taken  into  account
    if he is in the UK in accordance with  the  EEA  Regulations  and  this
    income the judge took into account at the time of his decision [8].

16. That said however the question of comprehensive sickness  insurance  in
    respect of the appellant was raised.   Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  submitted
    that he could not rely on the European Health Card of his wife  but  it
    is quite clear from Regulation 4(d) that although  a  student,  meaning
    the EEA national, should have comprehensive sickness insurance cover in
    the United  Kingdom  further  to  4(1)(d)(ii)  that  an  EHIC  card  is
    sufficient on a temporary  basis.   Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  acknowledged
    that that family were only in the United Kingdom on a  temporary  basis
    and the EHIC card was sufficient for the wife.

17. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that further to paragraph 4(2)

         "4.  (2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(c), where family members
                  of the person concerned reside in the United  Kingdom  and
                  their right to reside is dependent upon their being family
                  members of that person

                  (a)  the requirement for that person  to  have  sufficient
                      resources not  to  become  a  burden  on  the  social
                      assistance system of the United  Kingdom  during  his
                      period of residence shall only be  satisfied  if  his
                      resources  and  those  of  the  family  members   are
                      sufficient  to  avoid  him  and  the  family  members
                      becoming such a burden;

                  (b)  the requirement for that person to have comprehensive
                      sickness insurance cover in the United Kingdom  shall
                      only be satisfied if he and his family  members  have
                      such cover"

    The appellant, however, did produce an EHIC card from Italy for himself
    and I see no reason why if his wife can  rely  on  the  EHIC  card,  he
    cannot rely  on  his  own  EHIC  card  for  the  purposes  of  sickness
    insurance.  Ahmed refers to  comprehensive  sickness  insurance  rather
    than insurance on a temporary basis.

18. I also note from updated guidance on Comprehensive  sickness  insurance
    for family members of EEA students the following

     'Prior to amendments to the EEA Regulations which came  into  force  on
    6th April 2015, EEA nationals who were residing in the UK  as  students
    were required to hold CSI for themselves, but the Regulations  did  not
    require such persons to also hold CSI for any family  members  who  are
    residing in the UK with them. This is in contrast to  the  requirements
    for self-sufficient persons, who are explicitly required  to  hold  CSI
    for themselves and any family members'.

19. There was no suggestion that the wife was in the United Kingdom without
    health insurance in accordance with the EEA  Regulations  and  as  this
    decision was promulgated on 26th March 2015 I am not persuaded that  it
    would have been caught by the amendment.

20. The application  form  used  by  the  appellant  for  the  Registration
    Certificate and Residence Card EEA2 stated

    'You must provide either a  private  comprehensive  sickness  insurance
    policy document that covers for medical treatment in  the  majority  of
    circumstances, or a European Health Insurance Card (EHIC).  The EHIC is
    only valid when your stay in the UK is on a temporary basis'.

21. The appellant had not indicated that  his  stay  in  the  UK  with  his
    student wife was anything  other  than  temporary  and  Ms  Brocklesby-
    Weller, as I noted, indicated that it was accepted that  the  stay  was
    temporary and I thus find that there  was  no  error  of  law  and  the
    decision should stand.






Signed                                  Date 21st December 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington






















