
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02797/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 October 2013                            |On 9 December 2013           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                 THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                               KHURSHID AHMAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

Appellant:    Mr Z Malik (of Counsel)  instructed  by  Malik  Law  Chambers,
             Solicitors
Respondent:   Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

[1]  At the outset of the hearing conducted before  this  Tribunal  on  31st
    October 2013, the parties were invited to address argument  on  whether
    the impugned decision of the Secretary of State for the Home Department
    (hereinafter "the Respondent"), communicated  to  the  Appellant  in  a
    letter dated 8th January 2013, was compliant  with  the  order  of  the
    Court  of  Appeal  made  at  an  earlier  stage  of  these   protracted
    proceedings.  This arose in the following way.

THE EARLIER COURT OF APPEAL ORDER

[2]   On 15th November 2011, the Court of Appeal  promulgated  its  decision
    in Sapkota and KA (Pakistan) - v - Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1320. The second Appellant therein, 'KA', is
    the Appellant in the present case.  The central issue in the appeals in
    question was one of legality, relating to the Respondent's  refusal  of
    applications by foreign nationals to vary their leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom and the absence of a simultaneous, or prompt,  direction
    to remove such persons.  Having failed in their appeals to  the  First-
    tier and Upper Tribunals, the Appellants succeeded before the Court  of
    Appeal. In the  concluding  paragraphs  of  his  judgment,  Aikens  LJ,
    delivering the unanimous judgment of the Court, stated:

         "[124]   In the case of RS I would allow the appeal.  In  his  case
                  the direction that I would give pursuant to section 87  of
                  the 2002 Act is that the matter be remitted to the SSHD to
                  reconsider RS's application for leave to  remain  and,  in
                  doing so, the SSHD should consider  all  relevant  factors
                  under paragraph 395C of the Immigration Rules .....


         [125]    In the case of KA .....  there should, broadly, be similar
                  directions and a similar order ..."

         [Emphasis added.]

    At the hearing, this Tribunal questioned why the order of the Court  of
    Appeal which, presumably, eventuated, did not form part of the evidence
    before either the First-Tier Tribunal or  this  Tribunal.  No  adequate
    explanation was forthcoming. An appropriate direction was  made.   This
    resulted in a  certified  copy  of  the  order  being  provided.   This
    confirmed, importantly, that the order reflected paragraphs  [124]  and
    [125] of the Court of Appeal's  judgment.  It  contains  the  following
    provisions:


        "4.  The Appellant do have until 4pm on Tuesday 13 December 2011 to
             make any further  submissions to the Respondent on the issue of
             why he should  be granted leave to  remain  or  should  not  be
             removed;


          5.  The Respondent  to reconsider the Appellant's application  for
             leave to                   remain  dated  28  October  2008  in
             conjunction  with  any  submissions  made  in  accordance  with
             paragraph 3 hereof, and thereafter either grant leave to remain
             in the United Kingdom or proceed to issue  a  removal  decision
             under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act
             2006.


        6.    The  Respondent  to  consider  all  relevant  factors   under
             Paragraph 395C of the  Immigration  Rules  in  considering  the
             matters referred in paragraph 3                    hereof:

         7.   The Respondent do have until 4pm on Tuesday 7 February 2012 to
             determine the matters referred  in paragraphs 4 and 5 hereof; "


    THE IMPUGNED DECISION

[3]  The effect of the order of the Court  of  Appeal  was  to  require  the
    Respondent to reconsider  the  Appellant's  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom  and  to  undertake  this  exercise  in  a
    specified manner.  Specifically, the Respondent was ordered to consider
    any representations  relating  to  any  of  the  factors  specified  in
    paragraph 395C of the Immigration Rules.  On behalf of  the  Appellant,
    it was argued that the ensuing decision of the Respondent  (supra)  had
    failed to comply with this  requirement  of  the  court  order.   As  a
    result,  it  was  contended,  the  Respondent's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law, giving rise to the conclusion that the  First-
    Tier Tribunal had erred in law.

[4]  The submission advanced on behalf of the Respondent was that  when  the
    reconsidered decision was made, paragraph 395C of the Immigration Rules
    had been deleted. It was argued  (in  terms)  that  this  absolved  the
    Secretary of State of  the  obligation  to  comply  with  the  relevant
    provision of the order of the Court of Appeal.  It was  further  argued
    (in terms), in the alternative, that a fair and broad evaluation of the
    Respondent's decision making yielded  the  analysis  that  all  of  the
    paragraph 395C factors had in fact been considered by the Respondent.

[5]  In  determining  this  appeal,  we  draw  attention  to,  firstly,  the
    unexceptional principle that orders of any court  are  binding  on  the
    parties.  One of the outworkings of  this  general  principle  is  that
    where  an  order  contains  provisions  of  a  mandatory  nature,  full
    compliance therewith  is  required  of  the  party  to  whom  they  are
    directed.  We observe that  there  was  no  appeal  by  the  Respondent
    against the order of the Court of Appeal and we note that there was  no
    legislative  intervention,  retrospective  or  at  all,  purporting  to
    extinguish or modify this order.  We would add,  in  parenthesis,  that
    the absence of any such  Parliamentary  intervention  is  unsurprising,
    given the doctrine of the separation  of  powers  which  underpins  the
    unwritten British Constitution.

[6]  Accordingly, the Respondent was obliged to  give  full  effect  to  the
    Court of  Appeal  order.   At  this  juncture,  it  is  appropriate  to
    interpose the terms  of  the  (now  repealed)  paragraph  395C  of  the
    Immigration Rules:

        "Before a decision to remove under section 10 is given, regard will
        be had to all the   relevant factors known to the Secretary of
        State, including:
            i) age ;
               ii) length of residence in the United Kingdom;
              iii) strength of connections with the United Kingdom;
               iv) personal history, including character, conduct and
                   employment record;
                v) domestic circumstances;
           vi) previous criminal record and the nature of any offence of
               which the person has been previously convicted;
              vii) compassionate circumstances;
             viii) any representation received on the person's behalf.
               in the case of family members, the factors listed in
               paragraphs 365-368 must also be taken into account."


         Paragraph 395C was  deleted  from  the  Immigration  Rules  by  the
         Statement of   Changes in Immigration Rules made by  Parliament  on
         19th January 2012.  This post dated  the  order  of  the  Court  of
         Appeal by some two months.

[7]   Applying elementary principles, we  reject  the  submission  that  the
    Respondent was absolved from complying with the relevant  provision  in
    the order of  the  Court  of  Appeal  by  the  subsequent  deletion  of
    paragraph 395C from the Immigration Rules.  This submission is  plainly
    unsustainable.  Accordingly, what was required of the Respondent by the
    court order was the twofold exercise  of  undertaking  a  detailed  and
    conscientious consideration of all of the paragraph  395C  factors  and
    doing so in relation to each  of  the  family  members  concerned.   We
    juxtapose this requirement with the ensuing letter of  decision,  dated
    8th January 2013.  Having  done  so,  we  find  that  the  Respondent's
    decision fails the test.  There are two clearly identifiable  defaults.
    The first is the failure to consider  all  of  the  factors  listed  in
    paragraph 395C.  The second is the failure to do so in relation to each
    of the family members concerned.  In making  this  assessment,  we  are
    mindful of the desirability of substance prevailing over  form  and  of
    the related principle that decision letters  of  this  kind  should  be
    considered fairly and in bonam  partem.   On  the  other  side  of  the
    scales, the dominant requirements of  the  operative  legal  rules  and
    principles must be given  full  effect.   Adopting  this  approach,  we
    conclude that the decision of the Respondent was non-compliant with the
    order of the Court of Appeal.  The failure to recognise this deficiency
    vitiates the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal.

[8]  To summarise, we conclude that the Secretary of  State's  decision  was
    not in accordance with the law by reason of its failure to comply  with
    the order of the Court of Appeal. The First-tier Tribunal,  in  failing
    to identify this illegality, erred in law.

PRACTICE: BUNDLES OF AUTHORITIES

[9]  We take this opportunity to deprecate the practice  of  presenting  the
    Upper Tribunal with a substantial bundle of authorities on the  day  of
    hearing.  In  the  present  case,  the  hearing  began  at  2pm.    The
    Appellant's bundle of authorities  was  presented  at  this  time.   To
    describe this as unacceptable is an understatement.  Following enquiry,
    the justification proffered for this egregious default appeared  to  be
    that (a) there had  been  no  failure  to  comply  with  specific  case
    management directions and  (b)  this  kind  of  practice  furthers  the
    overriding objective.  The unsustainability of  the  latter  submission
    requires no elaboration.  The infirmity blighting the  first  of  these
    submissions is readily exposed. It overlooks, sadly,  the  elephant  in
    the room: in the modern litigation era, practitioners are  expected  to
    comply with the highest of professional standards.  This entails (as we
    suggested at  the  hearing)  the  submission  of  relevant  bundles  of
    evidence,  bundles  of  authorities  and  skeleton  arguments  on   the
    initiative of the parties, irrespective of  directions,  a  minimum  of
    three  working  days  in  advance  of  the  scheduled   hearing   date.
    Efficiency and expedition are crucial elements of fairness and justice.
    The latter are jeopardised when the former are  neglected.  The  public
    interest is damaged in consequence  and  the  overriding  objective  is
    seriously  undermined.   Practitioners   will   doubtless   take   note
    forthwith, particularly - but not exclusively - having  regard  to  the
    recently extended judicial review jurisdiction of this Chamber  of  the
    Upper Tribunal.

DECISION

[10] It follows that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  must  be  set
    aside. The appeal is allowed. The failure which we have  identified  is
    not one which can be rectified by either the First-tier Tribunal  (upon
    remittal) or this Tribunal (in the context of  a  continuation/remaking
    hearing).  Accordingly, it will be incumbent on the Respondent to  make
    a fresh decision, giving full effect to this judgment.

         [pic]
Signed: ________________________________

     THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE McCLOSKEY
     PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
    (ASYLUM AND IMMIGRATION CHAMBER)


    27 November 2013

