


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/02964/2013
     IA/02968/2013
      IA/02967/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 29 July 2013                             |On : 30 July 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                            wajahat rehman babar
                               fahmida wajahat
                            hadiyah iraj wajahat
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Karim, instructed by Edward Alam & Associates
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellants are  citizens  of  Pakistan  and  are  husband,  wife  and
   daughter.  They  have  been  given  permission  to  appeal  against   the
   determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andonian  dismissing  their
   appeals against the respondent's decision to refuse the first appellant's
   application for leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant
   under the Points Based  System  and  the  second  and  third  appellants'
   applications for leave to remain as dependants of a  points-based  system
   migrant.

2. The first appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  22  June  2004  in
   possession of a visa that conferred leave to enter as a student  until  1
   September 2006 and was granted subsequent periods of leave to remain as a
   student until 31 December 2008, as a Tier 1 post-study  worker  until  18
   December 2010 and then as a Tier 4 student until 27 May 2012. The  second
   appellant, his wife, arrived in the United Kingdom on  20  June  2009  in
   possession of a visa conferring leave to enter until 18 December 2010 and
   was granted further leave to remain as a student dependant until  27  May
   2012. The third appellant, their child, was born on 30 March 2010 and was
   first granted leave to remain as a student dependant on 26  January  2011
   until 27 May 2012.

3. On 24 May 2012 the first appellant applied for leave to remain as a  Tier
   4 (General) Student Migrant under the Points Based System and the  second
   and third appellants applied for leave to remain as his  dependants.  The
   first appellant's application was refused under the immigration rules, on
   the basis that he was not able to  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
   245ZX(ha), as he had applied to study a Postgraduate Diploma in Strategic
   Management from 5 June 2012 to 5 December 2013 which would,  if  granted,
   mean that he would be studying at degree level or above  for  beyond  the
   maximum five year limit permitted under the rules. The second  and  third
   appellants' applications were refused accordingly.

4. The appellants' appeals were heard on 26  April  2013  before  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Andonian, who found that they  were  unable  to  meet  the
   requirements of the rules and accordingly dismissed the appeals.

5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  sought  on  the  grounds
   that the First-tier Tribunal Judge, in considering the five  year  period
   under the immigration rules, had wrongly taken into account periods spent
   on vacation and thus not studying; and that he  had  failed  to  consider
   Article 8 of the ECHR.

6. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  on  7  June  2013  on  all  grounds,
   although, in granting permission, Judge Chohan did not  see  any  obvious
   errors of law in the judge's findings under  the  immigration  rules  and
   granted permission primarily on the ground relating to Article 8.

Appeal hearing and submissions

7. At the hearing before me, Mr Karim noted  the  basis  for  the  grant  of
   permission and  accordingly  only  pursued  the  Article  8  grounds.  He
   submitted that the judge's failure to consider Article 8 was  a  material
   error, given the appellant's length of time living in the United  Kingdom
   with his family and the opportunities he would have had in Pakistan if he
   completed his studies in the United Kingdom.

8. Ms Martin submitted that the error was not material as there  was  little
   merit in the Article 8 claim. Article 8 could not be used  to  trump  the
   immigration rules. Ms Martin relied on the cases of Miah v  Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1719 and MM  (Tier  1  PSW;
   Art 8; private life) Zimbabwe [2009] UKAIT 00037 and submitted  that  the
   appellant did not need to have his certificate from the United Kingdom in
   order to set up his own business, as he  claimed  was  his  intention  on
   completing his studies.

9. I advised the parties that, in my view, the judge's error in omitting  to
   give any consideration to Article 8 of the ECHR when it had  been  raised
   before him, was a material one, particularly in a case such as this  when
   the appellant had lived in the United Kingdom for a number of  years.  Mr
   Karim requested that in such circumstances the appeal should be  remitted
   to the First-tier Tribunal to consider Article 8. Ms  Martin  asked  that
   the decision be re-made in the Upper Tribunal. I decided that it was  not
   appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier given that their findings
   under the immigration rules remained and the appeal had only  to  be  re-
   made in part. Mr Karim confirmed that there was to  be  no  further  oral
   evidence and I was directed to the appeal bundle which had been produced.
   I proceeded to hear submissions from both parties.

10. Ms Martin submitted that the appellant's assertion,  that  the  decision
   was unfair given the change in the rules since  he  came  to  the  United
   Kingdom, was of little merit given that the rules had  changed  prior  to
   his application in 2011 under  the  points-based  system.  The  five-year
   limit under the rules was clear and applied not only to tier  4  students
   but also to students prior  to  the  Tier  4  points  based  system.  The
   appellant had no expectation of being able to stay here as  he  had  only
   limited status. Article 8 could not be used to out-trump the rules.

11.  Mr  Karim  submitted  that  there  was  no  correlation   between   the
   immigration rules and Article 8. The appellant had established a  private
   life in the United Kingdom and the case of CDS (PBS: "available": Article
   8) Brazil [2010] UKUT 00315 (IAC) provided for circumstances such as his,
   where he had nearly completed his studies. He  had  already  achieved  60
   credits and only needed 60 more. He had invested time and effort  in  his
   studies here. He needed his MBA qualification in order to be able to  set
   up a business in Pakistan and in any event his plans had now changed  and
   he had  been  offered  a  job  in  Pakistan  provided  he  completed  his
   qualification in the United Kingdom.

12. Ms Martin raised a further point, namely that the  letter  now  produced
   offering the appellant employment in a company in Pakistan pre-dated  the
   hearing before the First-tier Tribunal but had not been produced then. At
   that time the appellant's evidence was that he wanted to  start  his  own
   business in Pakistan.

13. Mr Karim did not have any response.




Consideration and findings

14. Mr Karim did not pursue the grounds of appeal relating  to  the  judge's
   decision under the immigration rules and clearly he was right not  to  do
   so, since that decision was properly made and was one that the judge  was
   entitled to make. The error of law lies only in the  judge's  failure  to
   consider Article 8, when that had clearly  been  raised  before  him.  As
   such, I re-make the decision in that respect only.

15. The first appellant's Article 8 claim is pursued on grounds  of  private
   life, since his only family life here remains with his wife and  daughter
   whose applications have been refused in line with his. He has established
   a private life here as he has lived here for some nine years and has been
   studying for most of that period of time and working. His wife has  lived
   here with him for the past four years and his daughter since her birth in
   2010. There would be interference with the private lives of all three  if
   they  had  to  return  to  Pakistan.  However,  I  consider   that   such
   interference is clearly justified in  the  interests  of  maintaining  an
   effective immigration control, as part of the economic well-being of  the
   United Kingdom.  The only evidence produced by the appellants about their
   private lives in the United Kingdom, aside from a handwritten letter from
   a friend, is in relation to the first appellant's studies and his  desire
   to complete those studies to  assist  his  future  employment  prospects.
   However he cannot meet the requirements of  the  immigration  rules  with
   respect to his studies. The issue of unfairness raised in the grounds is,
   as Ms Martin submitted, of no merit, given that the rules had changed  at
   the time the appellant made his application and he would  therefore  have
   been aware at that time of the limit on the number of years for which  he
   could undertake such studies.

16. The appellant relies on CDS (PBS: "available": Article 8) Brazil  [2010]
   UKUT 00315 (IAC) in asserting that he should be granted leave  to  remain
   in order to complete his studies. However, in CDS the Upper Tribunal made
   it clear that Article 8 was not  to  be  used  as  a  substitute  to  the
   immigration rules:

    "Article 8 does not provide a general discretion in the IJ  to  dispense
   with requirements of the Immigration Rules merely because  the  way  that
   they impact in an individual case may appear to be unduly harsh."

17. Although the Upper Tribunal contemplated  circumstances  where  ties  to
   the United Kingdom, including a period of study as  well  as  social  and
   other ties, cumulatively amounted to private life deserving respect, I do
   not consider that to be the case with the appellant,  whose  evidence  of
   ties to the United Kingdom is limited.  He  claims  to  require  only  60
   points to complete his course of studies but there is  no  evidence  from
   the college to confirm that that is the case or to confirm how that is to
   be achieved. Furthermore, his evidence as to his future intentions is not
   consistent. His evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  he
   needed his  current  qualification  in  order  to  establish  himself  in
   business in Pakistan, which is what he intended to do  on  completion  of
   his studies. According to his evidence in his recent  statement  produced
   for this appeal, he had reconsidered  his  options  and  was  considering
   taking  up  employment  on  return  to  Pakistan  and  had  been  offered
   employment in a well-established company in Pakistan on condition that he
   completed his course of studies in the United  Kingdom.  However,  as  Ms
   Martin pointed out, the  letter  of  offer  of  employment  is  dated  21
   November 2012, and thus plainly pre-dated the appellant's  statement  and
   his evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and, as such, casts doubts on
   his claim to have simply changed his mind about the options available  to
   him. It seems to me  that  this  raises  significant  doubts  as  to  the
   appellant's true intentions and accordingly the relevance to him  of  his
   current course of studies.

18. There is no reason why the  appellant  cannot  return  to  Pakistan  and
   obtain employment with the qualifications and experience he  has  already
   gained. Likewise, there is no reason why his wife and child cannot return
   to Pakistan and resume  or  establish  their  private  lives  there.  His
   daughter is only three years of age and no evidence has been submitted to
   suggest that her best interests lie anywhere other than with her parents,
   whether that be in the United Kingdom or in Pakistan.

19. In all of the circumstances I  do  not  consider  that  the  appellants'
   removal from the United Kingdom as  a  consequence  of  the  respondent's
   decision to refuse to vary their leave amounts to a breach of Article  8.
   I would accordingly dismiss the appeals on those grounds.

DECISION

20. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set aside.  I
   re-make the decision in the appeals by dismissing them on all grounds.









Signed                                  Date 30th July 2013

 Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
