
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/02101/2016
     ia/02102/2016
     ia/02103/2016
     IA/02104/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 December 2017                            |On 24 January 2018            |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                    mr bs
                                   mrs bk
                                   miss gk
                                   miss bk
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr E Waheed, Counsel instructed by Linder Myers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

 1. The appellants in this case are Indian nationals  comprising  a  father
    and mother and their two minor children born in the UK on 13 April 2009
    and 22 October 2013 respectively.  The first appellant entered  the  UK
    on 27 May 2000 as a visitor on a valid visit visa which he  overstayed.
    The second appellant entered the UK on 15 July  2008  and  married  the
    first appellant four days later on 19 July 2008.  The  first  appellant
    applied for leave to remain in the UK on 12  February  2010  which  was
    refused on 22 April 2010 with no right of  appeal.   A  reconsideration
    request was received on 7 May 2010 but the  refusal  maintained  on  18
    August 2010.  On 26 September 2011 a human rights application was  made
    and this application  was  refused  on  22  April  2016  (with  further
    representations having been  made  on  8  July  2015).   Those  further
    submissions were refused  by  letter  dated  1  April  2016  which  was
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal in a decision  promulgated  on  30  March  2017
    dismissed the appellants' appeals.   The  appellants  appealed  to  the
    Upper Tribunal on the following grounds:

    Ground 1 - misdirection as to law

 3. It was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal failed to correctly apply
    MA (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705 and that the panel in this case had applied the incorrect  test
    when assessing best interests; as the date of application is not a  bar
    to the time when best interests are considered.  It was submitted  that
    MA (Pakistan) provided the starting point which was that "leave  should
    be granted unless there are powerful reasons to the contrary".

    Ground 2 - failure to account for material evidence

 4. It was submitted that the judge failed to  give  consideration  to  the
    statements of the  third  appellant,  a  typewritten  statement  and  a
    handwritten statement in the appellants' bundle as to her life  in  the
    UK and that the Tribunal declined to hear oral evidence from the  third
    appellant solely on account of  her  age  notwithstanding  Lady  Hale's
    opinion in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2001] UKSC 4 and it was  not  open  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to neglect to account for the evidence  of  the
    third appellant.  It was submitted that had they  done  so  they  would
    have found that the respondent's  reasons  were  not  of  the  required
    powerful nature to displace the starting point that the third appellant
    should be granted leave.

 5. For the reasons that are below I am not  satisfied  that  the  decision
    discloses any material error of law.

Ground 1

 6. The Tribunal reminded itself that the best interests  of  the  children
    are paramount [22].  The Tribunal rightly found that given the  age  of
    the third appellant at the date of application she  could  not  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules but I note that the  Tribunal  went  on  to
    find that even if that limitation were  disregarded  it  must  also  be
    shown it is not reasonable to expect the third appellant to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  The Tribunal, at [40] found that the  third  appellant
    was a qualifying child for the purposes of section 117B  (but  that  it
    was not accepted that it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
    leave).  There is nothing to indicate in my findings that the  Tribunal
    did not consider the best interests of the children at the date of  the
    hearing (when she was over  seven).   The  decision,  considered  as  a
    whole, sets out the evidence that was  before  the  Tribunal  including
    from the first and second appellant and from a Mr  Mediraj  who  was  a
    friend of the first and second appellants and his daughter was a friend
    and classmate of the third appellant.

 7. It is important to note that in considering the evidence  the  Tribunal
    found that the first and second appellants were "reluctant to admit the
    truth" and it was noted that both the first and second appellant had  a
    long history of abuse of UK  immigration  law.   However  the  Tribunal
    quite properly, when considering the best interests  of  the  children,
    reminded themselves, at [45], that these best interests were "obviously
    innocent of  their  parents'  wrongdoing";  the  primary  consideration
    required under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009 was  also  given.   At  paragraph  53  of  MA  (Pakistan),  in
    discussing the relevant case law, including ZH (Tanzania) and Zoumbas v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC  74,  it  was
    confirmed that the best interests of the child are to be determined  by
    reference to the child  alone  without  reference  to  the  immigration
    history or that as provided by their parent.  It is evident  that  that
    is what the Tribunal did in this case.

 8. The Tribunal reached the conclusion there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    removal of the children would cause them any significant difficulty and
    that it was plainly in their best interests that they remain with their
    parents whose devotion was not questioned.

 9. With respect to the approach  to  MA  (Pakistan)  both  representatives
    relied on MA (Pakistan) including that the fact that a child  has  been
    in the UK for seven years would need to be given significant weight  in
    the proportionality exercise for two reasons.  First,  because  of  its
    relevance to determining the nature and strength of  the  child's  best
    interests; and second because it established as a starting  point  that
    leave should be granted  unless  there  are  powerful  reasons  to  the
    contrary (paragraph  49  MA  (Pakistan)].   I  take  account  that  the
    Tribunal noted these submissions at [31] of the decision and reasons.

10. Although it was submitted that powerful reasons were not  provided  for
    outweighing the starting point that leave should be  granted,  that  is
    not the case.  The Tribunal noted, in addition to the difficulties with
    the credibility of the first  and  second  appellants,  that  they  had
    failed to leave the United Kingdom on each  occasion  that  an  adverse
    decision has been made against them and it is  not  disputed  that  the
    first appellant has been an overstayer since 2000.

11. At paragraph 53 of MA (Pakistan) in discussing the  relevant  case  law
    including ZH (Tanzania) and Zoumbas v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2013] UKSC 74 it was confirmed that the best  interests  of
    the child are to be determined by reference to the child alone  without
    reference to the immigration history  or  that  as  provided  by  their
    parent.  It is evident that that is what the Tribunal did in this case.



12. I have also taken into account that  the  appellant  in  MA  (Pakistan)
    included an appellant who was 8 years of age and whom,  it  was  found,
    could adapt to life elsewhere and that his social life was dominated by
    his life with his parents and the younger brother.  Although Mr  Waheed
    sought to distinguish the particular appellant from the third appellant
    in the case before me,  I  am  of  the  view  that  the  Tribunal  gave
    sufficient weight to the circumstances of the third appellant including
    that she had been resident in the UK since birth and the views  of  her
    parents, the issue of language, the issue of education and contact with
    friends and the issue of culture.  It may be that other Tribunals might
    have struck the balance differently, however the conclusion  that  this
    panel reached was open to them.  The  Tribunal  was  required  to  have
    regard  to  the  wider  public  interest   in   maintaining   effecting
    immigration control and I note that the first appellant  in  this  case
    has been in the UK without permission for longer than the parents in MA
    (Pakistan).

13. It cannot be said that  the  Tribunal  misdirected  itself  in  law  in
    relation to the proper approach.  No  error  of  law  is  disclosed  in
    ground 1.

Ground 2

14. Mr Waheed relied heavily on the grant of permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal from the First-tier Tribunal which identified  that  the
    panel decided not to hear from the third appellant because of  her  age
    and noted that  the  panel  did  not  refer  to  the  contents  of  the
    appellant's witness statement.

15. There may be circumstances where it is not proper to call evidence from
    a child but young age in itself is not a sufficient reason  to  exclude
    oral  evidence  particularly  when  it  is  necessary  to  assess  best
    interests and the Presidential Guidance indicates the  Tribunal  should
    be alerted to enabling any person including children to  give  evidence
    and to make suitable arrangements.

16. I note that at [8] of the decision and reasons, the Tribunal took  into
    consideration that it had a witness statement before it for  the  third
    appellant but in view of the fact that the third appellant was  only  7
    years old "the Tribunal did not consider it appropriate for her to give
    evidence  in  person".   Although  it  was  the  main  thrust  of   the
    submissions before me that this vitiated the panel's decision I do  not
    share that conclusion.

17. The Tribunal reminded  itself,  at  [22],  that  when  considering  the
    immigration decision the best interests will be a primary consideration
    but all other factors must be balanced including the public interest in
    maintaining effective immigration control.

18. It was not argued, and it cannot be properly said, that the evidence of
    the third appellant was  divergent  from  that  of  her  parents.   The
    evidence of the third appellant as set out in her  handwritten  witness
    statement, which was reproduced in typewritten statement, consisted  of
    a number of lines which  indicated  what  school  the  third  appellant
    attends, where she lived and the names of eight of  her  friends.   The
    third appellant also listed family friends and stated she liked the  UK
    because she was born there.  The statement went on to indicate that the
    third appellant had a bunk  bed  and  that  she  celebrates  Christmas,
    Diwali, Easter, birthdays, Halloween and also the New Year.

19. The Tribunal, in considering the evidence before  it,  noted  that  the
    first appellant accepted that his children could adapt to life in India
    but also expressed concern about the weather in India  and  noted  that
    his children whilst they speak English they understand Punjabi and that
    the first appellant encourages the children to speak Punjabi  but  they
    are resistant (and I note that the witness  statement  from  the  third
    appellant was in English).  The Tribunal summarised the  evidence  from
    the second appellant, including that she has never worked  because  her
    children are too young and her daughter is in school and "has a  circle
    of friends both in and out of school and that she speaks mostly English
    and a little Punjabi".  In addition the  third  witness  described  the
    third appellant as "similar to any child  brought  up  in  the  UK  and
    having no resemblance to an Indian born child".  He explained that  his
    daughter and the third appellant are  good  friends  and  like  to  eat
    pizza, chicken and chips as well as  Indian  food  and  that  they  are
    immersed in British culture".

20. The Tribunal  went  on  at  [36]  to  consider  the  third  appellant's
    situation and did not accept that  her  claimed  immersion  in  British
    culture was a sufficient reason to make it unreasonable for her  to  be
    removed from the UK alongside her parents.  The Tribunal considered her
    age and that she was adaptable.   The  Tribunal  also  considered  that
    there were school reports produced to the Tribunal showing that she  is
    polite and sociable and was learning and the Tribunal specifically took
    into account the class teacher's  comment  that  "the  third  appellant
    should be able to continue her schooling".

21. The Tribunal went on to reach a finding  open  to  it  that  the  third
    appellant would be able to adapt to any environment  and  would  thrive
    there equally.  The Tribunal also took into  consideration  that  there
    was some knowledge of the Punjabi language as it is used in the  family
    home and "which her parents say they have encouraged her" and therefore
    the Tribunal reached a conclusion open to it that the  third  appellant
    would be able to communicate and adapt without any  serious  difficulty
    and that there was no impediment to  her  continuing  education  in  an
    effective manner.  The Tribunal went on to consider and reach  findings
    in relation to the contact with friends and rejected the submissions in
    relation to the claimant and the child's preferred foods.

22. I have had regard to the relevant case law and Practice Guidance and in
    particular that:

         "The Tribunal may decline to issue  a  witness  summons  under  the
         Tribunal Procedure Rules or to permit a child, vulnerable adult  or
         sensitive witness to give evidence where it is satisfied  that  the
         evidence is not necessary to enable a fair hearing of the case  and
         it must decline to do so  where  the  witness's  welfare  would  be
         prejudiced by them giving evidence."

23. The age of the child was one of the deciding factors  in  the  Tribunal
    not hearing from the  third  appellant.   The  Tribunal  gave  detailed
    consideration to the substance of the evidence which was  contained  in
    her statement, although not specifically referring to that  but  rather
    to the evidence of the three witnesses.  I note that Mr Waheed did  not
    submit that her evidence was divergent in any significant way from that
    given by the witnesses  at  the  hearing.   A  proper  reading  of  the
    Tribunal's conclusions indicates that  they  were  satisfied  that  the
    evidence of the third appellant was not  necessary  to  enable  a  fair
    hearing of the case and/or that her  welfare  would  be  prejudiced  by
    giving of such evidence.   I  am  not  satisfied  that  there  was  any
    procedural unfairness in the Tribunal's approach.

24. It cannot not be said that the conclusions reached by the Tribunal were
    irrational and, as identified, they gave  adequate  reasons  for  those
    conclusions.

Notice of Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

As the appeal includes minor appellants,  I  make  an  anonymity  direction.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Dated: 12 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is dismissed no fee award is made.

Signed                                  Dated:  12 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
