
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/02626/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 28 October 2014                         |On 30 October 2014             |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK



                                   Between

                              Mr RAMESH GAUTAM
                          (No anonymity order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Allen (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is an error  of  law  in  the  determination  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

2.    The appellant, whose date of birth is 22 December 1981, is  a  citizen
    of Nepal.  He made an application as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  which
    was refused on the grounds that he failed to provide  evidence  showing
    that he held the required funds for a period of 28 consecutive days.

3.    In  a  determination  before  First-tier  Tribunal   (Judge   Wilsher)
    promulgated on 30 July 2014, the appeal was  dismissed  on  immigration
    grounds and removal  directions  made  under  Section  47  Immigration,
    Asylum & Nationality Act 2006 were upheld.  The Tribunal found that the
    appellant failed to provide adequate evidence of  funds  held  for  the
    required period of 28 days.  The evidence  produced  by  the  appellant
    was a letter from his bank confirming his account held funds as at 13th
    November 2013.

4.   The grounds of appeal for permission argue that the Tribunal  erred  in
    law by failing to follow  Rodriguez [2014] EWCA CIV 2  with  regard  to
    evidential flexibility.

Permission

5.   Permission was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Simpson,   who
    considered it arguable that the Tribunal [4] misunderstood Rodriguez in
    that the facts were different.  In this instance there was  nothing  to
    suggest  that this appellant  would not have been able to show, by  way
    of bank statements for the  relevant  period,  that  he  did  have  the
    necessary funds available to him for  the full 28 day period.

Error of law hearing

6.   There was no appearance by or  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   I  had
    before me a letter (somewhat oddly dated 17 March 2014)  but  referring
    to the hearing date, 28 October 2014 at 2.00 pm  from  the  appellant's
    solicitors Maalik & Co.  The letter was, however, faxed on  27  October
    2014 and so it would appear that the date was an error.  In any  event,
    that letter stated that the firm were without  instructions  and  would
    not be attending the hearing.  I  was  satisfied  that  the  notice  of
    hearing issued on 26 September 2014 was sent to the  appellant  at  his
    last known address in Hampshire and to his solicitors.   There  was  no
    further evidence before me showing any reason  why  the  appellant  was
    unable to attend the hearing and/or any  request  for  an  adjournment.
    Accordingly I decided to proceed  to  deal  with  this  matter  in  the
    absence of the appellant and his representative, in accordance with the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as amended at Rule 38.

7.    I heard brief submissions  from  Mr  Allen  who  maintained  that  the
    determination was entirely sound.  There was no evidence to  show  that
    either  the  appellant  could  succeed  under  the  Rules  or  for  the
    evidential flexibility policy to be applied.  I was invited to  dismiss
    the appeal.

Discussion and Decision

8.   I am satisfied that  the  determination  is  entirely  sustainable  and
    sound.   The Tribunal considered the evidence of the letter dated  13th
    November  2013  from  the  appellant's  bank  and  found  that  it  was
    inadequate and did not meet  the  Rules  for  maintenance.  It  further
    considered whether the evidential flexibility policy was applicable and
    whether the circumstances met the relevant  criteria,  and  found  that
    none of the  factors  were  applicable.   In  particular  the  Tribunal
    rejected the argument that the documents  were  in  the  wrong  format.
    There was no evidence either then or now to show that  the  funds  were
    held for the  period of 28 days .  There was no evidence  to  show  the
    appellant could meet the Tier 4 Rules and/or  that he could rectify any
    claimed omissions  or missing documents under paragraph  245AA  of  the
    Rules.

9.    The finding made  that  the  evidential  flexibility  policy  was  not
    applicable was and remains sound. At the hearing before me  no  further
    evidence was adduced or relied on by the  appellant  to  show  that  he
    meets the requirements for maintenance under the Rules.

Decision

10.      There is no error of  law  disclosed  in  the  determination  which
    shall stand.
     The appellant's appeal is dismissed.





Signed                                  Date 29.10.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



No fee award
No anonymity order made

Signed                                  Date 29.10.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
