
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/03930/2015
                                                               IA/03940/2015
                                                               IA/03946/2015
                                                               IA/03947/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2015                    |On 9 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             ROOVIKA KARUNAGARAN
                           KANESHAMANY KARUNAGARAN
                            KAMSHANA KARUNAGARAN
                             SAJANA KARUNAGARAN
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms Short, Counsel instructed by M&S Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I was not asked, and saw no reason, to make an anonymity order.

 2. The first respondent is a citizen of Germany born on 2 May  1983.   The
    second respondent is her husband, who is a citizen of  Sri  Lanka.  The
    other respondents are their children, who are citizens of  Germany.  In
    this decision I will refer to the respondents as "the claimants".

 3.  The  first  claimant  applied  for  a  document  certifying  permanent
    residence as confirmation of a right to reside in  the  United  Kingdom
    pursuant to Regulation 15(1)(a) of the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006 ("the 2006 Regulations") on the basis of having been employed  for
    a continuous period of five years. On 9 January  2015  the  application
    was refused by the appellant (hereinafter "the Secretary of State")  on
    the ground that the first claimant had  failed  to  provide  sufficient
    evidence showing how she had been exercising Treaty rights in  the  UK.
    At the same time, and for the same  reasons,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused to issue a permanent  registration  certificate  to  the  first
    claimant's children (the third and fourth claimants).

 4. In addition, pursuant to  Regulation  20(2),  the  Secretary  of  State
    revoked the Registration Certificate that had been issued to the  first
    claimant on 6 November 2009 as confirmation of a right to reside in the
    UK.  The letter setting out the  reasons  for  revocation  stated  that
    there was no evidence of the first claimant exercising Treaty rights in
    the UK at present and she had stated she had been in employment from 18
    November 2008 until 30 March 2012. The letter also stated  that  as  an
    EEA national she was not required to leave the UK as a  result  of  the
    decision.

 5. The second claimant applied for a Permanent Residence Card on the basis
    of being a  family  member  of  the  first  claimant  under  Regulation
    15(1)(b). On 9 January 2015, his application was refused on  the  basis
    that it could not be established  that  the  first  claimant  had  been
    exercising Treaty rights for the requisite five year period.

First tier Tribunal Decision

 6. The claimants  appealed  and  their  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Andrew ("the judge"). The judge  found  that  the  first
    claimant had worked in the UK from 18 November 2008 until 30 March 2012
    but not thereafter and although  she  had  been  unwell  there  was  no
    evidence showing that she was temporarily unable  to  work  because  of
    illness  or  accident  such  that  she  satisfied  the  requirement  of
    Regulation 6(2) of the 2006 Regulations. Having made this  finding  the
    judge concluded:

         "I dismiss the appeal in respect of the  Permanent  Residence  Card
         but  allow  the  appeal  against  the  revocation  of   the   First
         Appellant's Residence Card. The appeals of the other Appellants are
         dismissed/allowed in line".

 7. The grounds of appeal submit that the judge has failed to explain  why,
    if  the  first  claimant  was  no  longer  a  "qualified  person",  the
    revocation of her registration certificate was unlawful  or  the  basis
    under which the other claimants qualify for residence cards.

Relevant law

 8. The 2006 Regulations provide as follows:

         6 -  (1) In these Regulations, "qualified person"  means  a  person
         who is an EEA national and in the United Kingdom as-

                (a) a jobseeker;

                (b) a worker;

                (c) a self-employed person;

                (d) a self-sufficient person; or

                (e) a student.

            (2) A person who is no longer working shall  not  cease  to  be
            treated as a worker for the purpose of paragraph (1)(b) if-

                (a) he is temporarily unable to work as  the  result  of  an
                illness or accident;

         14 - (1) A qualified person is entitled to  reside  in  the  United
         Kingdom for so long as he remains a qualified person.

         15 - (1) The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in
         the United Kingdom permanently-

                (a) an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom in
                accordance with these Regulations for a continuous period of
                five years;

                (b) a family member of an EEA national who is not himself an
                EEA national but who has resided in the United Kingdom  with
                the EEA national in accordance with these Regulations for  a
                continuous period of five years;

         20  -  (2)  The  Secretary  of  State  may  revoke  a  registration
         certificate or a residence card or refuse to renew a residence card
         if the holder of the certificate or card has ceased to have a right
         to reside under these Regulations.

Submissions

 9. Mr Tufan submitted that it was perplexing  that  the  judge  found  the
    first claimant to not be exercising Treaty rights and  that  Regulation
    15 was not satisfied but still allowed the appeal  in  respect  of  the
    revocation of the registration certificate. Regulation 20(2) allows for
    the  revocation  of  a  registration  certificate  or  card  in   these
    circumstances and therefore there was a clear error of law.

10. Ms Short acknowledged that the  judge's  decision  was  not  adequately
    reasoned and did not  dispute  Mr  Tufan's  comments  about  Regulation
    20(2). She proceeded to argue that the judge had failed to take  proper
    account of the ECJ's judgment in Chen,  which  concerns  the  right  of
    residence for a parent of an EEA child, and argued that the  judge  had
    failed to address issues such as  the  second  claimant's  income,  the
    position of the children and their schooling. She was of the view  that
    the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier to be heard afresh.

11. Mr Tufan responded  by  noting  that  Chen  was  never  raised  by  the
    claimants before the First Tier Tribunal and that there was  no  reason
    to prevent the decision being remade.

Consideration

12. For the reasons identified by Mr Tufan and recognised by  Ms  Short,  I
    find there to be an error of law.  The  judge  has  allowed  the  first
    claimant's appeal  against  revocation  of  her  residence  certificate
    without providing any reasons. Moreover, the decision  is  inconsistent
    with his factual findings. Having found that the first  claimant  could
    not be considered a qualified person and  having  not  made  any  other
    findings that would be consistent with  the  first  claimant  having  a
    right to reside under the 2006 Regulations, it  was  not  open  to  the
    judge to allow  the  appeal  against  revocation  of  the  registration
    certificate given that Regulation 20(2) entitles the Secretary of State
    to make such a revocation where a person has ceased to have a right  to
    reside under the 2006 Regulations.

13. I have considered the argument by Ms Short  that  the  case  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal because of inadequate fact  finding
    by the judge but consider  that  the  factual  evidence  before  me  is
    sufficient for the decision to be remade.  My substituted  decision  is
    to dismiss the appeal on the basis that as the first claimant is not  a
    qualified person under Regulation 6 she is not entitled  to  reside  in
    the UK under Regulation 14(1) and the Secretary of State is entitled to
    revoke her registration certificate under Regulation 20(2).

Decision

14. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and is set aside.

15. I remake the decision and dismiss the appeal.

16. No anonymity order is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 9 October 2015                |

