
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03011/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 July 2014                               |23 October 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Premnath Ganeshpillai
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Lorna Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    In Person
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant", against a decision of the Secretary of  State  refusing
    to extend his leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a student.   The
    claimant has appeared before me in person and  I  record  that  he  has
    conducted himself courteously and helpfully and has  used  the  English
    language competently. I am satisfied he has understood  what  is  being
    said and was able to explain his case.

 2. The papers show that he was in the United Kingdom with  permission  and
    his leave expired on 18 November 2013.  On the  same  day  he  made  an
    application for further leave to remain as a  student  but  it  was  an
    application that could not possibly  succeed.   It  could  not  succeed
    because it was not supported by a form CAS (Confirmation of  Acceptance
    for Studies) and he could not obtain the form CAS because  he  had  not
    passed the necessary English language tests.  I know this  because  the
    claimant explained it to me in a commendably forthright way.

 3. He thought that he could make a  sort  of  deferred  application  which
    would be acceptable provided he  made  it  in  time  and  produced  the
    necessary evidence later, which he appears to have done, but if that is
    what he thought he was wrong.  The Rules are extremely clear  and  they
    require the documents identified to be produced with  the  application.
    There  are  some  circumstances  which  only  occur  rarely  where  the
    evidential  flexibility  policy  has  to  be  considered  but  this  is
    manifestly not such a case. Rather, this is a case of an applicant  who
    just did not satisfy the requirements of the Rules.

 4. The appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I have to say
    with respect for the First-tier Tribunal Judge it is very  hard  indeed
    to understand the reasons behind  allowing  the  decision.   The  judge
    directed himself correctly but he had to look at what the appellant had
    proved at the date of application and noted that  the  form  CAS  post-
    dated the application. The application was made  in  November  and  the
    form was dated in January 2014.  The position seemed hopeless.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge decided  that  there  was  some  sort  of
    discretion that could have been exercised.  That appears to be entirely
    wrong. The judge  then  compounded  the  error  by  then  presuming  to
    exercise the discretion himself, which is simply not open  to  a  judge
    except in the very rare circumstances where there is only one  possible
    outcome, and that is something which in  the  nature  of  a  discretion
    hardly ever occurs.

 6. It follows therefore that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision  to
    allow the  appeal  was  completely  wrong.   I  have  listened  to  the
    respondent today and although I understand that from his point of  view
    the situation  is  vexing  and  hard  to  understand  his  position  is
    completely hopeless.  The fact is he did not meet the  requirements  of
    the Rules when he made his application.   The  decision  to  allow  his
    appeal was completely wrong and I must  set  aside  that  decision  and
    replace it with a decision dismissing the claimant's appeal against the
    Secretary of State's decision.

 7. I do record that there is nothing that I have seen  in  the  claimant's
    conduct which is to his discredit beyond making  a  mistake  about  the
    operation of the Immigration Rules, and that is something which  should
    be borne in mind in the event of his returning to Sri Lanka and  making
    a further application of some kind on a future  occasion  but  that  is
    entirely a matter for him.

 8. It follows therefore that I allow the Secretary of State's  appeal  and
    substitute the decision dismissing the claimant's appeal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 22 October 2014                |

