
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03389/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30th October 2014                            |On 4th November 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            Mrs Angela Anima Odei


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Shaw, Counsel instructed by Nasim & Company
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT


 1. The Respondent is the Appellant in these proceedings but  for  ease  of
    reference I shall refer to the parties as they were known at the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The Respondent appeals the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Judge Elliman, promulgated on 11th August 2014 in  which  the
    judge allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  the
    Respondent to issue her with a residence card as the family  member  of
    an EEA  national  under  Regulation  7  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.   The  judge   concluded,   without
    reference to case law which is binding upon her, namely that of  Kareem
    (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 and TA  &  Others  (Kareem
    explained) UKUT 00316, also promulgated in 2014 so the  point  that  in
    order for a proxy marriage to be valid it must be recognised in the EEA
    Sponsor's  country  of  nationality.   Judge  Elliman  considered   the
    question of validity in the context of foreign law, in  this  case  the
    country of locus in terms of the proxy marriage  which  was  Ghana  and
    failed to address the EEA national's legal framework of  marriage.   In
    that context the judge plainly fell into error.  It was accepted by the
    Appellant's representative before me that the decision  in  respect  of
    Regulation 7 could not stand as the evidence  did  not  establish  that
    there was in fact a valid marriage.

 2. The judge's decision reveals  a  further  error  of  law  in  that  the
    Appellant raised a Ground of Appeal in the alternative which  was  that
    the Respondent's decision that she was not in  a  durable  relationship
    with her EEA Sponsor ran contrary to the evidence.  That ground was not
    determined by the judge, perhaps not surprisingly given  the  cognitive
    finding in respect of marriage.  However, it remains an area of dispute
    which has not been litigated and the Appellant has not had the  benefit
    of a hearing with regard to that factual dispute.  The parties were  in
    agreement before me that the matter should be remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for resolution of that dispute.   That  is  a  course  of
    action which is appropriate as there are insufficient factual  findings
    in the decision of the judge to allow me to re-make the decision and it
    is appropriate, given the extent and  nature  of  the  evidence  to  be
    tested that the Appellant should have her opportunity at the First-tier
    Tribunal.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge          30th October 2014

