
                                                                  [pic]
Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number:  IA  03848 2014
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                              |                             |
|                                              |Notice sent                  |
|                                              |On 12 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                            Bernard Oppong Donkor
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the appellant: Mr Afzhal from International Immigration Advisory
Service  For the Respondent: Mr McVeety Senior Presenting Officer
      NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT

 1. The appellant has left the United Kingdom voluntarily and prior to doing
    so signed a form indicating that he  wished  to  withdraw  any  and  all
    outstanding claims or applications he had made to stay in  the  UK.  His
    representative, Mr Afzhal,  appeared at the hearing of his appeal  today
    and although unaware that his client had left the country accepted  that
    the appellant no longer wished to pursue his appeal. He understood  that
    s. 104(4A) did not apply to the appeal of the kind before me.

 2. The consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a  party  to  withdraw
    its case. Mr McVeety had no objection to the appellant  withdrawing  his
    case.

 3. Accordingly with my consent, and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  this  appeal  is  recorded  as
    "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal".  This  is  a  Notice
    pursuant to rule 17(5) to inform the parties that the  appellant's  case
    is withdrawn.









 4. The effect of the  appellant's  case  being  withdrawn  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper  Tribunal  are  at  an
    end. There is no appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision shall stand.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
       Dated 7 August 2014

















