
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Birmingham                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1 August 2013                                |On 2 August 2013           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                          upper tribunal judge pitt

                                   Between

                                raghvir chand
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Franco instructed by Tramboo & Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This appeal is against the decision dated 20 June  2013  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chohan which  refused  the  appellant's  appeal  brought
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India and was born on 24 August 1968. The
    background to this matter is that the appellant came to  the  UK  on  1
    October 1999 as a visitor. His leave as a visitor expired  on  1  April
    2000. He has  been  an  overstayer  ever  since.  In  2004  he  met  Ms
    Balwinderjit Kaur and formed a relationship with  her.  They  began  to
    cohabit in 2010.

 3. Judge Chohan accepted at [10] that the appellant  and  Ms  Kaur  had  a
    family life and that the appellant had established a  private  life  in
    the 13 years that he had been in the UK. He correctly indicated at  the
    end of that paragraph that  the  appeal  therefore  came  down  to  the
    proportionality assessment.

 4. Judge  Chohan  found  against  the  appellant  in  the  proportionality
    assessment. At [13] he set out an  accurate  summary  of  the  case  of
    Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40. At  [14]  he  concluded  that  it  was
    proportionate to expect this appellant to return to India to seek entry
    clearance. In  reaching  that  conclusion  he  again  acknowledged  the
    appellant's relationship with Ms Kaur had endured  for  "a  significant
    period of time" and that the appellant had been in the UK for  over  13
    years. He found that the  fact  of  the  appellant  entering  into  the
    relationship with Ms Kaur at a time when he was an overstayer and  when
    "he and his partner were fully aware that  his  status  in  the  United
    Kingdom as somewhat precarious" made it proportionate for the appellant
    to return to India, however. He accepted  that  there  would  be  "some
    disruption and interference in his family life but it  would  be  of  a
    temporary nature pending his entry clearance application".  There  were
    no minors involved and Ms Kaur could decide whether she wanted to go to
    India with the appellant while he made his entry clearance application.
    At [15], Judge Chohan acknowledged that the appellant had a substantial
    private life but also noted that he had established that  private  life
    whilst knowing that he was an overstayer, that his private life in  the
    UK was to a certain extent within the Indian community here and that he
    had still spent the majority of his life in India. It was proportionate
    to expect him to be able to enjoy a private life of similar  nature  in
    India, therefore.

 5. I did not find an error in the reasoning or conclusion of Judge Chohan.
    As clarified by SSHD  v  Hayat  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1054,  the  case  of
    Chikwamba is not authority for  it  always  being  disproportionate  to
    expect an individual to return home to regularise his status  where  he
    otherwise meets the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.  Following
    [30] of Hayat, "there has to be a sensible reason for doing so"  not  a
    blanket application of the principle. Deciding if there is a  "sensible
    reason" will be "fact sensitive".

 6. Judge Chohan conducted a fact  sensitive  assessment  of  whether  this
    appellant could be expected to return to seek entry clearance. At  [14]
    he assessed the period  of  separation  and  absence  from  the  UK  as
    "temporary" and "not of a serious nature" and there was nothing in  the
    evidence before him to suggest  otherwise.  Mr  Franco  submitted  that
    Judge Chohan erred in not considering whether the appellant could  meet
    the entry clearance requirements if he returned to India and, thus, his
    absence  from  the  UK  be  rather  longer  than  suggested  (or   even
    permanent). I found that  argument  rather  odd.  The  appellant  being
    unable to meet immigration law is the starting point in the  Article  8
    assessment. It is the factor that attracts weight on  the  respondent's
    side of the balance as it is in the public interest for there to be  an
    effective immigration system. I found  it  difficult  to  see  how  the
    appellant being unable to meet the law as set out in the relevant entry
    clearance requirements could be something  that  would  strengthen  his
    case under Article 8. In any event, Mr Franco was not in a position  to
    specify which entry clearance requirements in force as at the  date  of
    the hearing before Judge Chohan  could  not  be  met,  his  submissions
    focusing on previous versions of the Immigration Rules.

 7. Where Judge Chohan's decision that the appellant could be  expected  to
    return to India  without  Ms  Kaur  is  sound,  any  challenge  to  the
    alternative situation assessed, that of  Ms  Kaur  returning  with  the
    appellant either temporarily or permanently cannot be material.

 8. As for the other grounds, there is no dispute that the appellant  lived
    with Ms Kaur only for the last 3 years, that is, from 2010 onwards. Her
    two children became adults in 2003 and 2005 respectively. Even if  they
    do regard the appellant as a father figure, something that  would  seem
    not entirely straightforward given their ages when their mother met the
    appellant, this does not automatically mean that their relationship, as
    adults, with the appellant is one of such dependency or closeness  that
    it amounts to a family life for the purposes of Article 8. There was no
    evidence before Judge Chohan of such emotional ties or dependency  that
    might have led him to find family life between  the  appellant  and  Ms
    Kaur's children.

 9. It was also argued that insufficient evidence relating to the  children
    of Ms Kaur and other family members was taken as the  appeal  had  been
    adjourned by a week at short notice and a number of witnesses could not
    attend. There was nothing to indicate that Judge Chohan  was  asked  to
    take this into account or adjourn the hearing again in order for others
    to attend, however. I was not taken to  anything  that  suggested  that
    evidence  of  any  materiality  would  have  been  adduced  by  further
    witnesses given  that  Judge  Chohan  took  into  account  the  witness
    statements that were before him and did hear  from  one  of  Ms  Kaur's
    children.

10. I found it difficult to see any relevance in the evidence  relating  to
    the appellant's ex-wife in India being abused by a  later  partner  and
    did not find that it could amount to something showing a material error
    of law in the determination of Judge Chohan. In so far as it might lead
    to the appellant being unable  to  meet  entry  clearance  requirements
    (something I was entirely unwilling to accept had been  established)  I
    have set out my view above.

11. The appellant's application was never put on the basis  that  he  could
    meet the substantive requirements of paragraph 295D of the  Immigration
    Rules. His application was outside the Immigration Rules and made under
    Article 8 of the ECHR. This was conceded before Judge Chohan,  recorded
    at [3].  Mr Franco seemed to submit  that  paragraph  6  (vii)  of  the
    grounds should be read as meaning that the  Tribunal  had  jurisdiction
    over the respondent's residual discretion  to  allow  any  application,
    whether or not it met the  Immigration  Rules.  If  that  is  what  was
    intended by paragraph 6 (vii), it is misconceived as the Tribunal  does
    not have such a jurisdiction.

12. The appellant sought to have weight placed on his side of  the  balance
    because the respondent did not take steps  to  locate  and  remove  him
    earlier and because he voluntarily brought himself to the attention  of
    the respondent without waiting for 14 years of residence. That position
    is also misconceived. The appellant was responsible for the  illegality
    of his presence in the UK and that fell to be weighed against him.  The
    respondent's inability to  locate  and  remove  him  earlier  does  not
    detract from the extent of his illegal actions  and  is  not  something
    that can weight in his favour. It was the appellant's decision to apply
    to the respondent when he did. He cannot now seek to benefit  from  the
    fact that he might have chosen to remain here  illegally  even  longer,
    waiting until 14 years had passed. It would have been a vain  wait,  in
    any event, as, in any event, the law in this area  changed  on  9  July
    2013 before he could have established 14 years residence.

13. Mr Franco conceded at the hearing that paragraphs 6 (v) and 6 (vi) were
    no longer relied on.

14. For all of these reasons, I did not find that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal disclosed a material error on a point of law.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed                              Date: 1 August 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
