
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03092/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4th November 2014                          |On 20th November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                      Mr Dhavalkumar Laljibhai Kumbhani
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against decisions to refuse to  vary  his  leave
    and to remove him from the United Kingdom by way  of  directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Woolley  ("the  judge")  in  a
    determination promulgated on 13th August 2014.  The  appellant  entered
    the United Kingdom in September 2009 as a Tier 4  Student  and  further
    leave was granted as a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant,  valid  until  15th
    September 2013.  Two days before expiry of  his  leave,  the  appellant
    applied for leave to remain outside of the rules.

2.   In his notice of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant
    requested an oral hearing but subsequently asked for the matter  to  be
    dealt with "on the papers".  The judge determined  the  appeal  on  the
    basis of the documentary evidence before her.  She  took  into  account
    bundles produced by the parties.  The Secretary of State found that the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    rules.  The judge concluded that  the  evidence  before  her  contained
    nothing  of  any  substantial  detail  regarding  private   life   ties
    established by the appellant since his arrival here.  She found that he
    had not lost ties with his country of nationality, India and  that  his
    passport showed that he returned to that  country  in  2011,  2012  and
    2013.  She found that the case advanced on his behalf  under  paragraph
    276ADE(ii), that he had no ties in India, was not made out.  The  judge
    took into account a statement from the appellant in  which  mention  is
    made of a child, apparently  his,  who  was  one  month  old  when  the
    statement was made in February 2014.  The appellant  mentioned  friends
    and family in this country in his statement but the  judge  found  that
    there was no supporting evidence in this  context.   According  to  the
    application form completed when he sought further  leave,  his  parents
    and siblings remain in India.

3.   The judge concluded that the requirements of the  rules  were  not  met
    and that the appellant's case disclosed no exceptional or compassionate
    circumstances.

4.   The appellant applied for permission to appeal, which  was  granted  on
    29th September 2014.  The judge granting permission noted dicta  in  MM
    [2014] EWCA Civ 985 and found that it was arguable that the judge ought
    to have given full consideration to the  appellant's  Article  8  case,
    outside the rules.  The same judge observed that it  was  not  easy  to
    envisage any Tribunal concluding that the respondent's  decisions  were
    disproportionate, even if a full Article 8 assessment were made.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   The appeal was listed for hearing at 2pm.  By 2.30pm  on  4th  November
    2014, it had become apparent that the  appellant  was  not  present  at
    Field House and neither were his solicitors.  I made enquiries  through
    my clerk, who telephoned  the  appellant's  solicitors  on  the  number
    provided by them.  Attempts  to  make  contact  were  unsuccessful,  an
    automated message being the only response to calls.   No  messages  had
    been left for the Upper Tribunal and no adjournment sought.   The  case
    management file revealed that notice of the hearing had  been  properly
    sent to both the appellant and his solicitors.

6.   Mr Bramble said that the judge had not erred in law  and  even  if  she
    had, any error was plainly not material.  The determination showed that
    she had regard to the appellant's bundle of documents and she  referred
    to items contained within it.  On the evidence before  her,  there  was
    simply no substantial Article 8 case advanced at  all.   The  appellant
    mentioned a child in his second statement, as recorded by the judge  in
    paragraph 8 of the  determination.   The  evidence  did  not,  however,
    include a birth certificate or anything of substance about  a  partner.
    Even if, in the light of MM, the judge ought to have expressly assessed
    the case outside the rules, there was no  material  error.   The  judge
    plainly considered all the factors the appellant relied  upon  and  she
    was entitled to conclude that there was no reason to look  outside  the
    rules.

Conclusion on Error of Law

7.   I accept in full Mr Bramble's submissions.  The determination has  been
    prepared by a very experienced judge and shows that she made a  careful
    assessment of the documentary evidence before her, in the light of  the
    appellant's indication through his solicitors that he did not require a
    hearing.  It is readily apparent that the judge was fully aware of  all
    the salient features of the appellant's case.   Notable  was  the  very
    brief mention of a child, in his second witness statement.  There was a
    paucity of supporting evidence regarding this aspect of the  case  and,
    more generally, regarding the  substance  of  the  ties  the  appellant
    claimed to have established in this country.  As the  judge  found,  he
    has had only limited leave throughout and any ties will have been  made
    in the absence of any reasonable expectation that he would be  able  to
    remain here in the absence of qualification under the rules.  The judge
    was entitled to find that the  appellant  has  not  lost  ties  to  the
    country of his nationality, as the presence there of  his  parents  and
    siblings and his several returns to India reveal.

8.   Overall, I conclude that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  an
    assessment of the appellant's position under the  rules  fully  engaged
    with all the relevant aspects of his case in  the  Article  8  context.
    She did not err in concluding that there was no reason to look  outside
    the rules.  Even if she did err, however, in this respect, and even  if
    express consideration was required of the appellant's  Article  8  case
    outside the rules, her error was plainly not  material.   The  evidence
    before the judge showed that the appellant  had  very  little  of  real
    substance to put in the balance against the Secretary of  State's  case
    that his application for leave fell to be refused and that he should be
    removed to India.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of  law
and shall stand.



Signed        Date 19th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

