
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03751/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision made without a hearing at Field House|Determination Promulgated    |
|on 5 September 2013                           |on 23 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                        VENERANDUS AMAUZOCHUKWU ELOKE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Permission to appeal has been granted to the appellant  a  national  of
    Nigeria born 26 April 1978 against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Snape who for reasons given in her determination dated 7 May 2013
    dismissed the appellant's appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  and  on
    human rights grounds.

 2. The decision by the Secretary of  State  was  a  combined  decision  to
    refuse to vary leave to enter or remain and a decision to remove  dated
    16 January 2013.

 3. The grant of permission  to  appeal  is  limited  to  extent  that  the
    Secretary of State's decision to make removal directions under  section
    47 of the 2006 Act was not in accordance  with  the  law.   By  way  of
    response dated 14 June 2013 to that grant (which had  been  on  31  May
    2013) the Secretary of State indicated that the appellant's application
    was not opposed on the section 47 ground only and invited the  tribunal
    to determine the appeal on the papers.

 4. In a memorandum and directions dated 19 June 2013 Upper Tribunal  Judge
    O'Connor  expressed  his  provisional  view   that   subject   to   any
    representations to  the  contrary  to  be  received  by  26  June,  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal should be set  aside  and  the
    appellant's appeal should thereafter be allowed to the  limited  extent
    that the Secretary of State's decision to remove him is found  to  have
    been otherwise in accordance with the law.  For the avoidance of  doubt
    it was explained in that memorandum that the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal made in relation  to  the  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to refuse a variation of leave would stand.

 5. In a fax dated 21 June 2013 the  appellant's  advisors  indicated  that
    they had no representations to make to the  contrary  and  invited  the
    Tribunal to set aside the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  in
    accordance with the view expressed in the memorandum and directions.

 6. I therefore do so.  I set aside the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal insofar as the Tribunal failed to  reach  a  decision  on  the
    Secretary of State's decision to remove the appellant.   I  remake  the
    decision and allow the appeal by the appellant against that decision.






Signed                                  Date 23 September 2013





Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


