
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03871/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23 June 2014                                 |On 30 June 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                              mr nashit rehman
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     none
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal from the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Camp sitting at Birmingham on 17 March 2014)
    dismissing his appeal  on  the  papers  against  the  decision  by  the
    respondent to refuse to vary his leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    as a Tier 4 Student Migrant.

 2. Judge Camp dismissed the appeal on the ground that  (a)  the  appellant
    had no right of appeal, as he had no extant  leave  when  he  made  his
    application; and (b) he had not brought forward evidence to  show  that
    his Article 8 claim should be considered outside the rules.

 3. Permission to appeal on error of  law  grounds  was  granted  by  Judge
    Plumptre on 13 May 2014 on the ground that it  was  arguable  that  the
    judge had failed to consider common law fairness.

 4. The appellant admits that he made his application  after  his  existing
    leave had expired. On the available evidence there was a gap  of  about
    three months between the date when his leave  to  enter  expired  (June
    2013) and the date when he applied to vary his leave (September  2013).
    The ground of refusal was that he did not have a valid CAS at the  date
    of decision (January 2014) as his sponsor's licence had  been  revoked.
    As  the  appellant  did  not  have  extant  leave  when  he  made   his
    application, the respondent was not under a common law duty of fairness
    to notify the appellant of the  revocation  of  the  licence,  and  the
    consequential invalidation of his CAS, before making a decision on  his
    application so as to enable him to obtain a new CAS  and  to  vary  his
    application. So the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not
    disclose an error of law.

 5. Section 104(4) of the 2002 act provides that an  appeal  under  Section
    82(1) brought by a person while he is in the United  Kingdom  shall  be
    treated as abandoned if the appellant leaves the UK.

 6. After the appellant was granted permission to appeal he left the UK and
    returned to his home country of Pakistan. At the hearing before  me  Mr
    Tarlow produced evidence of the appellant having left the country,  and
    submitted that his appeal must therefore be  treated  as  abandoned.  I
    agree.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and in any event the appellant has abandoned his appeal against the  refusal
of further leave to remain by leaving the country.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity order.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
