
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03743/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 January 2015                            |On 6 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                               FACINET CAMARA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson, instructed by One Immigration Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a  citizen  of  Guinea,  born  25  January  1981,
    appeals with permission  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gurung-Thapa.  For reasons given in her determination dated  26  August
    2014, the judge dismissed the appeal against the decision to remove the
    appellant, the respondent having contended that such a course would not
    breach his human rights.   The  appellant's  claim  was  based  on  the
    private life he had established here since entry as  a  student  on  12
    September 2003 and the family life  that  he  had  established  with  a
    British Citizen, Bijou Traouri and her son MT.

 2. The judge accepted that there was family life between the appellant and
    Ms Traouri and MT in particular the parental relationship with  MT  who
    was not expected to leave the United Kingdom, noting that it was in his
    best interests to remain with his mother in the United Kingdom.

 3. The grounds on  which  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  were  with
    reference to the assertion that the judge has failed to explain why the
    appellant should be removed in the light of the findings of  fact  made
    with reference to s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  This particular provision is in these terms:

         "(6)     In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
              the public interest does not  require  the  person's  removal
              where -

             (a)  That  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  It would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

 4. Section 117D(1) defines a "qualifying child" as meaning  someone  under
    the age of 18 who, inter alia.,  is a British citizen.

 5. Mr Harrison accepted that the Secretary of  State  had  not  considered
    s.55 in the reasons  letter  dated  8  November  2013  with  particular
    reference to the principles established in JO and  Others  (Section  55
    duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC).  He invited me to find error  of
    law on  this  basis  and  allow  the  appeal  on  the  grounds  of  the
    unlawfulness of the Secretary of State's decision and for the matter to
    be reconsidered by her.  After reflection, Mr  Nicholson  consented  to
    this course.

 6. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside
    for error of law.  I remake the decision by allowing the appeal against
    the decision dated 14 November 2013.  The application by the  appellant
    will remain pending  before  the  Secretary  of  State.   She  will  be
    required to take into account any new matters that the appellant wishes
    to draw to her attention.  In addition she  must  remake  her  decision
    based  upon  the  unchallenged  findings  of  fact  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 7. The decision of the FtT is set aside. I remake the decision  and  allow
    the appeal against the decision to remove the appellant.  No  anonymity
    direction is made.



Signed        Date 4 February 2015
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

