
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/03277/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 October 2016                   |On 26 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                     V O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Braganza, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Anonymity order
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant or his wife.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to
contempt of court proceedings.



 1. The appellant is a Nigerian citizen born on 19 June 1966.

Permission to appeal and error of law

 2. The appellant had applied for leave to remain on  the  grounds  of  his
    family life. This was refused under paragraph 322(1), Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and a decision was  taken  to
    remove the appellant pursuant to s47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006. The appellant appealed against that decision  and
    his appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  MacDonald  ("the
    FTTJ") in a decision and reasons promulgated on 2 October 2015.  He was
    refused permission to appeal by the First-tier Tribunal  but  this  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Hanson on 4 August 2016.

 3. On 13 September 2016 I found there was an error of law in the  findings
    of the FTTJ  because  he  had  departed  from  the  concession  of  the
    respondent that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship
    with one of his children.  Although he was not  bound  to  accept  that
    concession, his departure from a position established as true  by  both
    parties required explanation and there was none in his findings.  As  a
    result, the reasonable inference was that the FTTJ had misunderstood or
    failed to consider the evidence. This was an error of law  (SS  v  SSHD
    [2010] CSIH 72).

 4. In view of the appellant's evidence that his elder daughter had not, at
    the date of the hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal,  known  about  his
    precarious immigration status but that, by the time of the error of law
    hearing before me, she had been told about, I adjourned the hearing  to
    enable her to give evidence at a resumed  hearing  on  the  substantive
    issues.  I directed, since there was no challenge  to  them,  that  the
    FTTJ's record of the evidence of the appellant himself and  his  former
    partner, should be preserved (ie [20-41] of the FTTJ's decision).

 5. The FTTJ's findings on  Article  3  were  also  preserved  at  [92-103]
    because there was no challenge to those findings in this Tribunal.

 6. I now remake the decision of the  FTTJ  insofar  as  it  addressed  the
    appellant's Article 8 claim.

The Evidence

 7. Prior to the start of the  hearing,  Ms  Braganza  for  the  appellant,
    sought to adduce  further  documents  which  had  not  been  served  in
    accordance with the directions made at the error of  law  hearing.   Mr
    Avery did not object to those documents being adduced and  I  therefore
    take them into account. They are a King's  College  Hospital  discharge
    notification relating to the appellant, a letter relating  to  proposed
    physiotherapy for the  appellant  and  an  invoice  receipt  issued  by
    Southwark Mediation Centre.

 8. Mr Avery, for the respondent, sought to rely on a screenprint from  the
    respondent's computer records to the effect that the police  had  asked
    for a status check on the appellant following his arrest  on  suspicion
    of possession of an offensive weapon on  24  June  2016.   Ms  Braganza
    initially objected to this being admitted in evidence.  She  then  took
    instructions  and  withdrew  that  objection  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant was permitted to adduce  evidence  rebutting  the  suggestion
    that the appellant had been charged with an offence on  that  occasion:
    she produced a  Bail  Cancellation  Notice  issued  because  there  was
    insufficient evidence to proceed.

 9. I also have before me the evidence which was adduced in support of  the
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal in the form  of  the  appellant's
    and respondent's bundles. I also have the appellant's elder  daughter's
    witness statement which was prepared for the hearing before me.

10. The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal is set out at [20  -41]  of
    the FTTJ's decision. I also heard from  the  appellant  who  gave  oral
    evidence at the hearing before me.

11. The appellant is an educated man: he has an HND in finance.

12. The appellant is a wheelchair user and has been since May 2012 when  he
    had an operation which was not wholly successful.  He  has  carers  who
    assist  him  with  personal  hygiene,  his  purchases  and  his   needs
    generally. These  services  are  provided  by  the  London  Borough  of
    Southwark.  He lives in  local  authority  accommodation  and  receives
    Disability Living Allowance and Employment Support Allowance. He has  a
    car and is able to drive.

13. The appellant has three brothers and one sister in Nigeria. He does not
    know much about them; the youngest has finished school and  his  sister
    is employed.  He visited Nigeria in 2014  and  had  previously  visited
    that country twice in 2012 for a week at a  time;  he  had  visited  on
    three occasions in 2013. He was able to travel to  Nigeria  unescorted,
    arranging transport and accommodation at a hotel.  He paid his own  air
    fares.  He was able to travel by car in Nigeria to  see  his  uncle  in
    another city.  This was a two hour car journey. He visited his uncle in
    hospital and stayed in the hospital. He  contributes  when  he  can  to
    hospital costs.

14. The appellant has two children in the UK.  One aged 17 (who will be  18
    on 31 October 2016; the second daughter is aged 2, she will be 3 on  24
    October 2016.

15. The appellant sees his elder daughter regularly and has done  so  since
    her birth (when the appellant and the  child's  mother  separated).  He
    gives her money sometimes. The appellant, his elder  daughter  and  her
    mother meet at restaurants as a family occasionally.  The  elder  child
    comes to the appellant's home two or three times a week; she  sometimes
    stays overnight.  She travels alone for these visits which  started  in
    about August 2016, following  the  appellant's  latest  hip  operation.
    Prior to that date, the daughter's mother  did  not  let  her  daughter
    travel alone to Peckham because she considered the  area  unsafe.   The
    child is now considered sufficiently mature to travel  alone  to  visit
    her father in Peckham. The appellant provides his elder  daughter  with
    emotional support, particularly when she has a  row  with  her  mother,
    with whom she lives. He also encourages her in her studies although  he
    does not provide direct guidance with regard  to  the  content  of  her
    studies.  The appellant's elder daughter has not been to  Nigeria.  She
    intends to study criminology at university once she  has  finished  her
    BTech in Business and Criminology at College.  The appellant is  unable
    to visit his elder daughter at her home because  the  building  is  not
    suitable for a wheelchair.

16. The appellant's younger daughter lives  with  her  maternal  aunt.  The
    appellant has not seen her since January 2016. He is in the process  of
    undergoing mediation with the child's mother in order to gain access to
    the child; if that is not successful he will pursue the matter  through
    the court.

Submissions

17. Mr Avery, for the respondent, relied on the reasons for refusal letter.
    The appellant did not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules,
    Appendix FM because he did not  fulfil  the  suitability  requirements.
    Nor, for that reason, could EX.1  apply.   The  appellant  had  various
    convictions as set out in the Police National Computer  record  in  the
    appellant's bundle. He was a persistent offender.   Compelling  reasons
    were required for consideration outside the Immigration  Rules.   There
    were none in this case.  Were the appeal to be considered  outside  the
    Rules, s117A-D considerations should be taken into  account,  including
    the appellant's background, in the reasonableness test as  regards  his
    relationship with the elder daughter.  Prior to  August  2016,  contact
    had been limited.

18. For the appellant, Ms Braganza relied on the  skeleton  argument  which
    was before the First-tier Tribunal. She supplemented that argument with
    oral submissions to  the  effect  that,  whilst  it  was  accepted  the
    appellant had a series of criminal conviction,  these  were  no  longer
    relevant  to  an  assessment  under  the  suitability  requirements  in
    Appendix FM (1.5 and 1.6) because of the passage of time since the last
    conviction in 2009 (driving while disqualified and  a  vehicle  without
    insurance). Seven years had passed since those offences.  Whilst  there
    was no case law to support this proposition, this was an issue of fact.
     This was the only issue of concern for the  respondent  therefore,  by
    implication, the appellant met the Rules.

19. Ms Braganza submitted that, if the appellant were unable  to  meet  the
    criteria in the Rules, there were compelling  circumstances  warranting
    consideration of the appeal outside the  Rules.  She  referred  to  the
    nature of the appellant's relationship with  his  elder  daughter,  her
    vulnerability in terms of her age, she was a teenager who  had  lost  a
    step-father; the appellant had a direct  and  positive  impact  on  her
    studies and education; he had  a  calming  influence  on  her  and  her
    mother. The appellant and his elder daughter's mother were bringing her
    up together.  The appellant's daughter leaned on her father  more  than
    her mother as her mother  was  working  unusual  hours.   The  mother's
    assessment of her daughter's  vulnerability  was  relevant,  given  her
    particular  experience  and  expertise   working   with   disadvantaged
    children. The elder daughter's  voice  deserved  to  be  heard.   These
    factors were compelling in combination.  There was  clear  interference
    with the Article 8 rights of the appellant, his former partner and  his
    elder daughter.  Removal was not required where there was a genuine and
    subsisting relationship with a child [sic].  It was accepted  that,  in
    the case of the appellant's youngest child, whilst  the  appellant  was
    taking all the steps he could, there  was  no  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship between them.

The Law

20. Paragraph 322 of the Immigration Rules sets out the  grounds  on  which
    leave to remain and variation of leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    are to be refused. The grounds in sub-paragraph (1) are "the fact  that
    variation of leave to enter or remain is being sought for a purpose not
    covered by these Rules".

21. The requirements of Appendix FM, R-LTRPT.1.1(c) for  limited  leave  to
    remain as a parent are that inter alia the applicant must not fall  for
    refusal under S-LTR: Suitability leave to remain.

22. Section R-LTRPT (requirements for limited leave to remain as a  parent)
    require that the applicant must not fall Section S-LTR:  Suitability  -
    leave to remain provides as follows:

           "S-LTR.1.1. The applicant  will  be  refused  limited  leave  to
           remain on grounds of suitability in any  of  the  paragraphs  S-
           LTR.1.2 to 1.7 apply.


           S-LTR.1.2 ....


           S-LTR.1.5. The presence of  the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
           conducive to the  public  good  because,  in  the  view  of  the
           Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious  harm  or
           they are a persistent offender who shows a particular  disregard
           for the law.


           S-LTR.1.6. The presence of  the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
           conducive to the public good because  their  conduct  (including
           convictions which do not fall  within  paragraphs  S-LTR.1.3  to
           1.5.),  character,  associations,  or  other  reasons,  make  it
           undesirable to allow them to remain in the UK.


           S-LTR.1.7. The applicant has failed without reasonable excuse to
           comply with a requirement to -


                 ...


                 (b) provide information;


                 ...


                 (d) undergo a medical  examination  or  provide  a  medical
           report.


           S-LTR.2.1 The applicant will normally be refused on  grounds  of
           suitability if any of paragraphs S-LTR.2.2 to 2.4 apply.


           S-LTR.2.2. Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge -


                 (a) ...


                 (b) there has been a failure to disclose material facts  in
                 relation to the application."


23. Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the  Immigration  Rules  sets  out  one  the
    requirements for leave to  remain  in  the  UK  on  the  basis  of  the
    applicant's private life in the UK:

           "(vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged  18  or  above,  has
           lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting
           any period of imprisonment) but there would be very  significant
           obstacles to the applicant's integration  into  the  country  to
           which he would have to go if required to leave the UK."


Discussion

24. These findings are limited to the appellant's Article 8 claim  pursuant
    to my earlier error of law decision.

25. I bear in mind the  age  of  the  appellant's  elder  daughter  and  in
    considering her evidence and circumstances take account  of  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010: Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and
    Sensitive Appellant Guidance.

26. The respondent refused the application on various suitability  grounds.
    The principal issue  is  that  the  appellant  was  the  subject  of  a
    deportation order signed on 30 July 2008.  He  appealed  unsuccessfully
    against the decision to deport him.  The deportation order was  revoked
    in 2010 on discretionary grounds due to his health: the  appellant  was
    due to  undergo  imminent  essential  surgery.    By  letter  from  the
    respondent to the appellant dated 31 August  2010,  the  appellant  was
    warned that if he committed further offences,  consideration  would  be
    given to deporting him, including automatic deportation  under  the  UK
    Borders Act 2007. The appellant nonetheless committed further  offences
    in 2013 and 2014: he was  convicted  of  using  a  mobile  phone  while
    driving and failing to stop, respectively.   The  appellant  failed  to
    declare all his criminal convictions in his application form, referring
    only to the two traffic offences in 2013 and 2014.  I cannot accept the
    submission of his counsel that the passage of time, his  health  issues
    and the lesser nature of the offences in 2013 and 2014 do  not  warrant
    the application of S-LTR.1.6.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant's
    presence in the UK is not conducive to  the  public  good  because  his
    conduct, namely the convictions which  were  sufficient  to  warrant  a
    deportation order in 2008, together with  his  further  convictions  in
    2013 and 2014 and his failure to declare all  his  convictions  in  his
    application form, make it undesirable to allow him to remain in the UK:
    his conduct, spanning as it does several years up to and including  the
    date of application, demonstrates a blatant disregard for the  laws  of
    this country and the immigration rules.

27. The failure by the appellant to disclose all his  criminal  convictions
    in the UK when applying for further leave to remain is, in any event, a
    discrete ground  for  refusal  under  S-LTR.2.2.(b).   The  appellant's
    application form refers only to the two traffic convictions in 2013 and
    2014; he makes no reference to any of those convictions  which  led  to
    the respondent's earlier decision to deport  him.   Nor  is  there  any
    reference to the earlier convictions in the covering  letter  of  those
    representing him at the time he made his application for further  leave
    to remain.  Thus I am satisfied that the appellant failed to  refer  to
    material facts in his application form (S-LTR.2.2(b)).

28. The respondent refused the application on the ground that the appellant
    did not provide a medical report, as requested by  the  respondent  (S-
    LTR.1.7.(d)).  Whilst this was not specifically addressed  in  evidence
    or submissions by either party before me, I note there is a letter from
    the appellant's representatives to the respondent dated 4 December 2014
    enclosing a GP's letter concerning the appellant's anticipated  surgery
    on his hip. This suggests that the appellant did provide  some  medical
    evidence, as requested.

29. Unlike paragraph S-LTR.2.1 which applies to  S-LTR.2.2(b),  S-LTR.1.1.,
    insofar as it relates to S-LTR.1.6, is a  mandatory  provision  to  the
    effect that "the applicant will be refused limited leave to  remain  on
    grounds of suitability in any of the paragraphs S-LTR.1.2 to 1.7 apply"
    (my emphasis).  In the circumstances, I am satisfied  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse the appellant leave to remain under  this  provision
    was not in breach of the Rules.  It follows that the  appellant  cannot
    benefit from EX.1 which is not free-standing.

30. Taking into account the periods of the appellant's imprisonment, he had
    lived in the UK for less than twenty years at the date of  application.
    However, he does not fulfil the  criteria  in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
    because there are not very significant  obstacles  to  his  integration
    into life in Nigeria: he has lived the majority of his life in  Nigeria
    and is familiar with life in that country.  He has  visited  family  in
    Nigeria several times in recent  years.   There  is  no  evidence  that
    hospital and other medical treatment, including physiotherapy would not
    be available  to  him.   He  is  an  educated  man:  he  has  a  higher
    qualification in finance  which  was  awarded  in  Nigeria.   He  is  a
    wheelchair user but is capable of at least  part-time  employment,  for
    example in an office environment. He is able to drive.   Albeit  he  is
    not working in the UK, he has skills and experience which  are  capable
    of being utilised and would be valued in Nigeria. He would be  able  to
    support himself, although perhaps not to the standard he enjoys in  the
    UK. His earnings would enable him to pay for assistance  with  personal
    hygiene and other needs.

31. The appellant has not demonstrated he fulfils the criteria in the Rules
    insofar as his right to a  family  and  private  life  in  the  UK  are
    concerned. I therefore turn to the issue of whether or not this  appeal
    should be considered outside the Rules in accordance with the Article 8
    jurisprudence. There  is  no  'exceptionality  test'  but  there  is  a
    requirement to carry out  a  balancing  exercise  where  an  individual
    cannot meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  public
    interest will generally only be outweighed if  an  applicant  can  show
    that 'compelling circumstances' exist - see paragraphs 40 to 42  of  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

32. In the case of Sunassee, R (on the application  of)  v  Upper  Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2015] EWHC 1604  (Admin),  the
    court held:

         "33.     The decision of Sales J in Nagre therefore, as  explained,
         received the endorsement of the Court of Appeal and represents  the
         law. It has not been "overruled". It had  received  an  endorsement
         already in MM (Lebanon). The law is that there is always  a  second
         stage, but where all  relevant  considerations  have  been  weighed
         under the Rules and  there  are  no  compelling  circumstances  not
         sufficiently recognised under the Rules it will be enough  for  the
         decision maker simply to say that."

33. I bear in mind the oral submissions of Ms Braganza  who  asserted  that
    the appellant's circumstances and those  of  his  elder  daughter  were
    sufficiently compelling to warrant  consideration  outside  the  Rules.
    Those submissions are set out at [19] above.  Ms Braganza did not  seek
    to suggest that the appellant's health and/or disability were  such  as
    to merit such consideration.

34. I bear in mind the best interests of the two children and make  them  a
    primary consideration.  However, it is conceded the appellant does  not
    have a genuine and subsisting relationship with his  younger  daughter.
    There is no submission that he should be permitted to  remain  in  this
    country to take part in  any  family  court  proceedings  or  mediation
    relating to access to that child.   The  appellant  has  not  seen  his
    youngest daughter since January 2016; she is aged two and is likely  to
    have little memory of her father.  The impact on  her  of  his  removal
    would be minimal.  Nor is there  evidence  to  suggest  that  her  best
    interests would be undermined by his removal. Nonetheless it is in  her
    interests to have contact with her father  and  this  would  be  almost
    impossible, save for visits by the appellant to the UK to see her, were
    he to be removed.  Thus removal would entail the loss of opportunity to
    build a relationship of personal contact with the younger daughter.

35.  The  appellant  has  had  the  surgery  for  which  he   was   granted
    discretionary leave to remain outside the Rules.  There is no  evidence
    to suggest that the appellant would  not  receive  appropriate  medical
    treatment in Nigeria.  His uncle, for example,  has  received  hospital
    treatment there.

36. I turn  to  the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his  elder
    daughter, aged 17.  She will be 18 at the end of this month.  I  accept
    their relationship  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting  one.   Whilst  the
    appellant and his former partner told me the current level  of  contact
    between the appellant and his elder daughter  had  contributed  to  her
    recent educational achievements,  I  am  unable  to  accept  that.  The
    evidence is that the appellant was in contact with  his  daughter  when
    she took earlier examinations, her GCSEs, yet her mother's evidence  is
    that their daughter's GCSE results were a "shock" in that she  did  not
    do as well as  predicted.   Given  that  contact  has  been  maintained
    between the appellant and his daughter throughout, I am unable to  find
    that the appellant has been wholly or even partly responsible  for  his
    daughter's recent  examination  successes:  the  appellant's  input  is
    limited to encouragement and emotional support,  rather  than  specific
    guidance on her studies.  Whilst such support is not to be undervalued,
    it is likely the appellant gave similar support when his  daughter  was
    taking her GCSEs.

37. The appellant's  former  partner  described  their  daughter  as  "more
    independent now".  This is consistent with her  reaching  adulthood  at
    the end of  this  month.  She  is  not  financially  dependent  on  the
    appellant. He gives her presents and occasional financial contributions
    but that is the extent of his financial commitment to her.

38. The appellant and his elder daughter keep in contact  by  telephone.  I
    was told that when she had an argument with her  mother  recently,  the
    mother telephoned the appellant who spoke to her and to their daughter.
    The appellant and his daughter speak  on  the  telephone  "every  other
    evening" when they are not in contact personally.

39. Whilst I make the best interests and welfare of the  appellant's  elder
    daughter a  primary  consideration,  I  am  unable  to  find  that  the
    appellant's circumstances, including his relationship  with  his  elder
    daughter, are such as to merit consideration outside  the  Rules.   The
    appellant's elder daughter is an independent young  woman  living  with
    her mother. She is a well-adjusted teenager with an appropriate  degree
    of independence and maturity for her  age;  she  is  on  the  verge  of
    adulthood.  The evidence does not suggest she is  any  more  vulnerable
    than any other young person of her age.   She is in full-time education
    and has a part-time job.  She lives with her very supportive mother who
    has particular professional experience and skill in dealing with  young
    people with behavioural and social difficulties. I  am  satisfied  that
    her mother would make every attempt to  support  her  daughter  in  the
    event of her father's removal from  the  UK  and  would  encourage  her
    daughter to maintain contact with her father in Nigeria.

40. The appellant's daughter is not financially dependent on her father and
    he has had limited involvement with her day-to-day upbringing since she
    was born, albeit they have remained in contact and that involvement has
    increased since August this year. This increased contact  has  resulted
    largely from the fact the appellant's daughter has become  increasingly
    independent and  her  mother  now  has  confidence  in  their  daughter
    travelling alone to see her father  in  his  home.   This  indicates  a
    measure of confidence in the maturity of the appellant's  daughter.   A
    measure of emotional  support  can  continue  to  be  provided  by  the
    appellant from Nigeria by  telephone  and  the  internet.   It  is  the
    appellant's former partner, his daughter's mother, who has had  greater
    responsibility for the daughter's immediate upbringing  throughout  her
    life, with contact being maintained, intermittently on  occasion,  with
    the appellant. That would continue if the appellant were  removed.  The
    appellant's elder daughter's studies would not be  interrupted  if  the
    appellant were not in the UK; she  would  continue  to  live  with  her
    mother and to attend the same college; she could go  to  university  in
    the UK, as planned. Whilst she would lose regular personal contact with
    her father, telephone and internet contact could continue. In addition,
    the appellant's daughter is now of an age and level of maturity  to  be
    able to travel to Nigeria  on  her  own  to  visit  her  father.   Thus
    personal contact would be maintained, albeit in a  different  form  and
    less regularly.

41. The appellant was the subject of a deportation order which was  revoked
    on medical grounds.  He has  failed  to  provide  details  of  all  his
    convictions in his application for further leave to  remain.   He  does
    not fulfil  the  criteria  in  the  Immigration  Rules  on  suitability
    grounds.  The Rules have been drafted to address the public interest in
    immigration  control,  including  the  factors  in  s117A-117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The appellant's own  and
    his children's protected rights under Article 8 are  capable  of  being
    addressed under the Rules. Their circumstances are not compelling  such
    as to require consideration outside the Rules and  in  accordance  with
    the Article 8 jurisdiction.

Notice of Decision

42. This appeal is dismissed.

A M Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal                 Date: 21 October 2016



Fee Award
The appeal has been dismissed and there can be no fee award.

A M Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal                 Date: 21 October 2016

