
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc/sc-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03987/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st October 2015                 |On 25th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                     H.A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Khan, solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 3rd September 1963.   On
    19th February 2014 the Appellant was granted limited leave to enter the
    United Kingdom until 5th August 2014 as a visitor.  On 31st  July  2014
    he applied to vary his leave to enter or remain.  That application  was
    refused by a Notice of Refusal dated 15th January 2015.  In making that
    refusal the Secretary of State noted that the Appellant had not in  his
    application mentioned that he had children in the UK and noted that the
    Appellant had submitted an application for a contact  order  whilst  in
    the UK on 24th March 2014.  Removal directions pursuant to  Section  47
    of the 2006 Act were also provided on 15th January 2015.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Nicholson sitting at Manchester on 28th April 2015.  In a
    decision and reasons promulgated  on  13th  May  2015  the  Appellant's
    appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

 3. On 19th May 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal contending that the judge's consideration of  Article  8
    was fundamentally flawed.  It is appropriate herein to set out verbatim
    the Secretary of State's Grounds of Appeal.

         "In para 74 the judge essentially concludes  that  Section  117B(6)
         has precedence over the other public  interest  considerations  set
         out in Section 117.  The judge's justification for  this  primarily
         seems to be because  this  is  what  Parliament  had  unambiguously
         stated.  However this is equally true of the other parts of Section
         117.  The Secretary of State considers that the approach he set out
         in para 73 is in fact the correct one and that  117B(6)  is  simply
         one of the Section 117 factors to be taken into account.  This  has
         completely skewed his consideration of Article 8 as he has  applied
         it as being definitive of the  position  of  the  public  interest.
         This is a material error because as the judge points out in para 75
         if he had interpreted para 117B(6) differently he might  have  been
         able to reach a different conclusion."

 4. On 14th July 2014 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Molloy  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Molloy contends that the Grounds of Appeal
    raise an interesting question of how First-tier Judges should interpret
    the various parliamentary provisions set out in Section 117 of the 2002
    Act.  In particular there may have been an error  of  law  because  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge appeared to have given more weight to one  of
    the subparagraphs than others.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  For the purpose  of  continuity  throughout
    the appeal process Mr HA is referred to herein as the Appellant and the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent.  Mr Kahn advises  me  that  there
    has been no Rule 24 reply served on behalf of the Appellant.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Mr Harrison advises that the judge's consideration of Article 8 outside
    the Immigration Rules is considered within paragraphs 59 to 79  of  his
    determination.  He submits that from paragraph 74 onwards the judge has
    failed to adequately explain the basis by  which  he  has  allowed  the
    appeal by virtue of his failing to give  adequate  reasons  as  to  his
    consideration of Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  He points out that  the
    judge makes reference to a tension between sub-Sections  1-3  and  sub-
    Section 6 of Section 117B and has  made  an  unambiguous  finding  that
    Section 117B(6) takes precedence over any  other  factor.   He  submits
    that the judge's reasoning as to why  he  reached  that  conclusion  is
    inadequate and further submits that there is a possibility  that  there
    is less ambiguity than is stressed in the  determination  and  that  in
    fact there is no tension at all.  He submits that there is  a  material
    error of law and that the matter should be reconsidered?

 7. Mr Khan submits that the judge has looked at all the  factors  of  117B
    starting at paragraph 66 and that it  is  not  as  if  he  jumps  to  a
    conclusion without giving reasons.   He  submits  that  the  judge  has
    analysed the matter in depth, given careful considered reasons and  has
    made findings that he was entitled to.  He contends that  there  is  no
    material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    asked me to dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

The Statutory Authority

10. Section 117B.  Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in
    all cases

    (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
         interest.

    (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
         English, because persons who can speak English-

         (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

    (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
         independent, because such persons-

         (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

    (4)  Little weight should be given to-

         (a)  a private life, or

         (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

    (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established  by  a
         person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration   status   is
         precarious.

    (6)  In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom.

Findings

11. No reference is made to me within this appeal to the judge's conclusion
    that the Appellant cannot meet  the  Immigration  Rules  therefore  the
    refusal to allow him entry pursuant to the Rules is correct.  There  is
    no cross-application by Mr Khan.  The issue therefore turns  solely  on
    whether or not the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in his consideration
    of Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  My conclusion is  that  he
    did not but it is important I give my reasons.  The judge made findings
    which are not disputed that the Appellant has  Article  8  family  life
    with his children and that  in  the  light  of  the  court  orders  the
    Secretary of State acknowledged that the Appellant had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his children.   At  paragraph  64
    the judge quite properly takes as his starting point  full  account  of
    all the considerations weighing in favour of  refusal,  then  considers
    prejudice to family life and goes on to decide whether the  refusal  of
    leave prejudices that family life in a manner sufficiently  serious  as
    to amount to  a  breach  of  the  fundamental  rights  protected.   His
    starting point is Section 117B  of  the  2002  Act.   Judge  Molloy  in
    granting  permission  commented  that  the  appeal  raised  interesting
    questions as to how First-tier Tier Judges should interpret the various
    parliamentary provisions set out in Section 117.   I  actually  do  not
    think that that is a basis for granting permission to  appeal.   It  is
    necessary to consider that there  is  an  arguable  error  of  law  for
    granting permission but to a  certain  extent  the  judge  has  rescued
    himself by contending that there may have been  an  error  due  to  the
    weight given to the various subparagraphs.   It  is  consequently  with
    that  argument  in  mind  that   I   consider   the   submissions   and
    representations made to me.

12. Judge Nicolson  has  noted  that  paragraph  117B(1)  states  that  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public  interest
    and that because the Appellant needed an interpreter and did not appear
    to speak fluent English and there was no evidence to show that  he  was
    financially independent in this country.  He found that  those  factors
    pursuant to paragraphs 117B(2) and (3) were factors that would make  it
    in the public interest to refuse the Appellant further leave and remove
    him.  The judge has consequently given due and  full  consideration  to
    paragraphs 117B - (1) to (3).

13. Thereafter the  judge  has  gone  on  to  consider  paragraph  117B(6).
    Analysis of that subparagraph is critical.  It starts  off  by  stating
    that it applies to a person who is not liable to deportation.  That  is
    a fact noted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.   Thereafter  it  states
    that the public interest does not require the person's removal where-

    (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
         a qualifying child, and

    (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

    The judge has set out this subparagraph  and  considered  it.   He  has
    considered it at paragraphs 68 through to 70.  It is neither  necessary
    nor appropriate for me to set out those considerations save to say that
    he has looked at the issue in considerable  detail  and  made  findings
    that he was perfectly entitled to.  It cannot  remotely  be  said  that
    those findings constitute a material error of law and indeed it is  not
    those findings that are challenged by the Secretary of State.

14. The judge's conclusion at paragraph 71 that it would therefore  not  be
    reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK is one  that  he  was
    perfectly entitled to make.  The challenge is to whether or not he  has
    properly applied Section 117B(6) or whether he has given  undue  weight
    to it.  Mr Harrison criticises the use of the word tension  as  between
    sub-Sections  117B(1)  to  (3)  and  117B(6).   I  disagree  with  that
    analysis.  Had the judge merely stated that then there  would  be  some
    merit in the submission but the judge carefully goes on to explain  why
    he considers there to be a tension in his conclusions at paragraph  72,
    then at paragraphs 73 to 78 goes on to try and resolve  them.   I  find
    his analysis particularly at paragraphs 74 and  75  to  be  impeccable.
    The difficulty on behalf of the Secretary of State appears to be found,
    if there is any, in the actual wording of the statute.  All  the  judge
    has done is interpret the statute.  It is important to  note  that  the
    head note for the Section states:

         Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

         (The underlining is my own emphasis).

    It is therefore appropriate to give due and full consideration  to  the
    paragraphs in all cases.  The analysis carried  out  by  the  judge  at
    paragraphs 74 and 75 is exactly on that point.   Paragraph  117B(6)  is
    specific to the individual.  It  is  confined  to  removal  and  it  is
    unequivocal.  These are all findings that the  judge  was  entitled  to
    make as matters of law and I  believe  quite  properly  made.   If  the
    Secretary of State has any challenges here then it should not be to the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge but with the drafting of  the
    statute.

15. For all the above reasons this is  an  extremely  well-constructed  and
    well-reasoned decision from an extremely experienced Immigration  Judge
    who has given full and thoughtful consideration to the  application  of
    the relevant statutory provisions.  The determination does not disclose
    any material errors of law and the appeal therefore of the Secretary of
    State is dismissed and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material error  of  law,
the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

