
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/03031/2013
     IA/03165/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 September 2013                          |On 27 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                navdeep kaur
                               amandeep singh
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Hamid, Solicitor, instructed by Freemans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants are sister and brother and  nationals  of  India,  their
    dates of birth being 14 April 1993 and 12 August 1994 respectively.

2.   They came to the United Kingdom on 22 July  2010,  with  their  mother,
    who it is claimed subsequently disappeared on 15 August  2010  and  has
    remained absent since then.

3.   Both sought to claim asylum on the basis that  if  they  were  returned
    they would be ill-treated by their uncle who had  ill-treated  them  in
    the past.

4.   That application was refused by the  respondent  in  a  refusal  letter
    dated 6 October 2010.  So far as the  second  appellant  is  concerned,
    given his age, it was found by the respondent  that  he  qualified  for
    limited leave to remain in accordance with the  published  Home  Office
    Asylum Policy Instruction on Discretionary Leave.

5.   He was granted discretionary leave  until  12  February  2012  when  he
    became 17� years of age.

6.   His sister, the first appellant, was granted discretionary  leave  also
    for the same period on the  basis  that  she  was  the  carer  for  her
    brother.

7.   The hearing of the asylum claim came before  Immigration  Judge  Bryant
    on 31 January 2011.

8.   The accounts of both appellants were considered in that hearing and  it
    was the finding of the Immigration Judge that they  lacked  credibility
    as to their experiences in India. He  found  their  evidence  to  be  a
    fabrication.

9.   Thereafter, an application was made for further leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom outside the Immigration Rules, it being  contended  that
    to remove either  of  the  appellants  would  be  in  breach  of  their
    fundamental human rights.  The respondent refused those applications on
    12 August 2012.  There were no grounds to claim asylum or  humanitarian
    protection and the decision of Immigration Judge Bryant was relied upon
    in that regard.  The period of discretionary leave, having expired, the
    respondent did not consider that removal was contrary to Article  8  of
    the ECHR.

10.  The appellants sought to appeal against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Gordon  on  25  June  2013.   The
    Judge applied the case of Devaseelan to the findings of Judge Bryant so
    far as asylum and humanitarian protection are concerned.  The Judge did
    not accept that the  appellant's  mother  was  missing  in  the  United
    Kingdom or indeed that their brother had been missing  in  India.   The
    Judge concluded  that  there  were  relatives  in  India  to  whom  the
    appellants  could  return.   In  those  circumstances  the  appeal  was
    dismissed.

11.  Grounds of appeal were submitted against that decision  and  permission
    to appeal was granted.  Thus, the matter comes before me  in  pursuance
    of that grant of permission.

12.  Mr Hamid, who represents the appellants, invited my  attention  to  his
    skeleton argument and to the bundle  of  documents  as  were  presented
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

13.  His first and substantial ground of appeal was to the effect  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to  consider  the  impact  of  the
    recent case of SM & TM & JD & Others v SSHD [2013] EWHC 1144 (Admin) as
    part of her decision making.  The burden of the submission made  is  to
    the effect that the Secretary of State was  wrong  to  have  given  the
    second appellant only discretionary leave for one year and four  months
    but should have given leave to him for much longer.

14.  The children who were  the  subject  matter  of  the  decision  by  the
    Administrative Court had ages ranging from 10  to  6.   They  were  all
    related to one another, either as siblings or as cousins.

15.  Certain aspects  of  guidance  were  quoted  in  paragraph  21  of  the
    judgment highlighting that, when making decisions  affecting  children,
    such applications should be dealt  with  in  a  timely  way  so  as  to
    minimise the uncertainty that they may experience.

16.  The  concern  of  the  Administrative  Court  was  in  the  process  of
    successive applications for grants of  time  limited  to  discretionary
    leave as  to  whether  that  was  a  timely  resolution  of  any  given
    application.  An overarching submission at the heart of that particular
    case was that when it was  so  obvious  that  the  future  of  all  the
    children was going to be in the United Kingdom,  where  they  were  all
    born and where they have all continuously lived and from which they and
    their mothers cannot be removed, the decisions to  grant  time  limited
    discretionary  leave  which  would  obviously  be  renewed  was  merely
    prolonging uncertainly for the children  for  no  practical  or  useful
    purpose and certainly for no purpose with regard  to  safeguarding  and
    promoting their welfare.

17.  It was the finding of the Administrative Court that the  relevant  2009
    Discretionary Leave Policy and the instruction document was unlawful as
    it effectively precluded case specific consideration of the welfare  of
    the child in making the discretionary decision whether to grant limited
    discretionary leave or indefinite leave to remain.

18.  It seems  to  me  that  the  situation  and  circumstances  facing  the
    appellants, in particular the second appellant, was  far  removed  from
    the factual basis as considered in SM.  It was by no means  established
    that they would have the right to remain in the United Kingdom;  indeed
    the express findings of the Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    in relation to both applicants was that they had  no  proper  basis  to
    remain over and above the policy in relation to minors.  They were  not
    born in the United Kingdom and had family elsewhere.

19.  The second appellant was granted leave to remain  as  an  unaccompanied
    minor following the determination of  Judge  Bryant.   The  sister  was
    granted leave in line with that to be his carer.  For my part I can see
    no unfairness or illegality in the process that was undertaken  so  far
    as both appellants were concerned.

20.  Seemingly they had come with their mother upon a visitor's visa  for  a
    family visit which in fact did not take place.   There  was  no  lawful
    basis for either appellant to be in the United Kingdom.   Thus  it  was
    that  discretionary  leave  was  granted   for   the   minimum   period
    commensurate with the exercise of the policy. I do not understand  what
    uncertainty was caused thereby, as the  respondent  had  made  it  very
    clear in the respective refusal letters that she  did  not  accept  the
    basis of the claim as advanced.  Indeed Judge  Bryant  in  the  hearing
    upheld those concerns,  particularly  as  to  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection.  The Judge did not  accept  that  there  had  been  a  land
    dispute or that there was any danger to either appellant upon return or
    violence at the hands of their uncle.

21.  The appellants were granted leave in order  for  them  to  put  forward
    their case for consideration by the First-tier Tribunal.  I  detect  no
    unfairness in the position adopted by the respondent or in the grant of
    discretionary leave which was made.

22.  Criticism is also made as to the approach taken by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Gordon to her assessment of the evidence and particularly by  her
    lack of acknowledgment that the evidence presented  by  the  appellants
    was evidence given by  young people.

23.  Both had been under the care of the local  authority  to  some  extent.
    There was a letter from the Education Children's Services Team  of  the
    Slough  Borough  Council  dated  6  June  2013  confirming  that   both
    appellants were accommodated under Section 20 of the  Children  Act  as
    they were unaccompanied  children,  seeking  asylum.   Until  her  18th
    birthday Slough Borough Council funded the accommodation of Navdeep and
    subsistence costs.  There is now a support role with a personal advisor
    under the 2000 Care Leaving Act which  will  continue  to  support  her
    until her 21st birthday and up to the age of 25, if she remains in full-
    time education.

24.  The Borough Council provides the second  appellant  with  accommodation
    and subsistence and the author of the letter, Sunita Mohindru,  is  his
    personal advisor.  The Borough will continue to support him  until  his
    21st birthday and up to the age  of  25  if  he  remains  in  full-time
    education.

25.  It is said that both appellants were studying for  ESOL  qualifications
    at the East Berkshire College.

26.  Criticism is made in particular as to the approach taken by  the  Judge
    to the documentation that had been produced  and  to  the  observations
    made as to behaviour.  It is submitted that it was inadequate  for  the
    Judge to have dealt with the documents in the way which she had done.

27.  The appellant's mother disappeared on 15 August  2010  and  essentially
    three documents were produced in support of that fact.  The first was a
    letter from the Gurdwara dated 24 June 2013 in these terms:-

         "I am writing to confirm that the  enclosed  poster  of  a  missing
         woman named Baljinder Kaur, aged 40 of  Carlton  Road,  Slough  was
         displayed at the notice board of Gurdwara  Sri  Guru  Singh  Sabha,
         Slough, on 25 August 2010.  It was left on the notice board for few
         weeks but the Management Committee of the Gurdwara did not  receive
         any information about this missing person."


    The next document purports to be an  enclosed  poster  of  the  missing
    woman, being her description and photograph,  asking  persons  to  make
    contact with the police on a particular number quoting URN 481 of  20/8
    or to contact the local Gurdwara.  The third  document  is  an  extract
    from the Slough Express, seemingly obtained from  the  internet,  dated
    Wednesday 25 August 2010, speaking as to the missing woman  giving  her
    description and urging people to make contact with the police.


28.  The Judge considered these documents, particularly at paragraph  19  of
    the determination.  The first appellant was unable to explain where the
    photograph of her mother came from and why the letter from the Gurdwara
    had not been before Immigration Judge Bryan when the asylum appeal  was
    heard in January 2011.  It refers to the fact that  their  mother  went
    missing on 20 August 2010 whereas the evidence from the appellants  had
    been that she went missing on 15 August 2010.  She noted there  was  no
    independent documentary evidence of the involvement of the police.

29.  So far as the document from the web is  concerned  that  had  not  been
    produced before  Immigration  Judge  Bryant.   It  was  dealt  with  at
    paragraph 15 of  the  determination.   Seemingly  that  had  only  been
    received by the first appellant in the United Kingdom a week before the
    hearing before Judge Gordon.  It was sent by fax from a friend  in  the
    US.  Little explanation was given as to why that had not been  produced
    at the previous hearing.  The  first  appellant  was  asked  where  the
    photograph of her mother had come from and she  had  said  "the  police
    could get a photograph from the airport".

30.  The Judge did not feel able, in the light of those  comments  ,to  give
    much weight to those documents.  It seems to me, and I  so  find,  that
    she was entitled to take that view of the documents.

31.  It is of course  important  to  place  documentation  within  a  proper
    context and it is clear that the Judge has done so.  When pressed  upon
    the photograph of her mother, the first appellant said that she  had  a
    copy of a letter from her solicitor.  She did not know when the  poster
    was taken down or how many  posters  were  put  up.  She  had  made  no
    enquiries of India as to whether her mother had re-appeared there.

32.  The second appellant said that he took the  letter  from  the  Gurdwara
    and reported it to the police.  He too had made  no  further  enquiries
    about the whereabouts of his mother.

33.  The Judge noted that there were few  outside  agencies  that  had  been
    involved in the search for the mother and little evidence  that  social
    workers had  been  asked  for  help.   The  police,  according  to  the
    appellant, had been contacted but appeared to have done little,  saying
    they could do little about a photograph.  However, it is clear  that  a
    photograph was available for certain matters but little had  been  done
    thereafter to follow up the search for their mother.

34.  Criticism is made of the Judge relying upon demeanour as  part  of  her
    reasoning.  In paragraph 18 of the determination she expressed concern,
    saying that neither appellant appeared particularly concerned  to  find
    their mother.  It is noted at paragraph 15  that  the  first  appellant
    appeared "very relaxed" about the disappearance of her mother.   It  is
    said not to be a fair reflection of the  situation  because  the  first
    appellant became very upset and emotional  during  examination.  It  is
    said that caution should be exercised by the  Judge  as  to  how  young
    people convey their feelings of sadness and abandonment.

35.  There may be considerable merit to that comment.  It is  important  for
    the Judge to recognise that she is dealing with two young people.  That
    being  the  case,  however,  apart  from   the   documentation   issued
    immediately following the disappearance in 2010, there  would  seem  to
    have been no further investigations or enquiries made or followed up in
    the intervening years, particularly  so  even  with  obvious  enquiries
    which could  have been made in India.

36.  Overall I find that it was properly open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge to make the findings which she did upon the presence or otherwise
    of the mother.  It is to be noted  that  the  case  of  Devaseelan  was
    applied to other aspects of the case including the lack of  credibility
    generally or as found to the original claim of difficulties in India.

37.  It is contended by Mr Hamid that the Judge erred  in  failing  to  make
    clear findings as to Article 8.   If  the  Judge  had  found  that  the
    evidence was credible, that the mother had  gone  missing,  that  would
    have significantly affected the findings made in respect of  Article  8
    of the ECHR.  Mr Hamid submits that the appellant's father is dead, his
    brother missing  as  also  their  mother.   All  close  relatives  have
    therefore become missing or dead and that there is  a  lack  of  family
    support in India.

38.  He invites me to find that there is family  life  as  between  the  two
    appellants in the United Kingdom  and  both  are  undertaking  positive
    courses such as to improve their education and their private life.   It
    is said  in  those  circumstances  the  Judge's  findings  are  largely
    unreasoned.

39.  It is clear from the determination that  the  Judge  has  in  mind  the
    private life of the appellants in the United Kingdom.  That is set  out
    in paragraph 27.  Whilst recognising  that  there  is  family  life  as
    between the two appellants, the  question  arises  as  to  whether  the
    removal to India for the appellants to  enjoy  their  life  there  with
    their relatives is an interference with their private and  family  life
    in  the  United  Kingdom  as  to  be  disproportionate   in   all   the
    circumstances.

40.  The Judge made clear findings in  paragraph  25  of  the  determination
    that there are relatives in India to whom the appellants can  turn  for
    assistance.  Although it was accepted that the father  had  died  there
    were a number of uncles and cousins living in the same village.  It had
    not been accepted by the Immigration Judge that there was animosity  of
    the nature as claimed.  Judge Gordon noted the findings by Judge Bryant
    that there was no land dispute in the village affecting the  appellants
    and/or causing their mother to have sold their property.

41.   Mr  Hamid  submits  that  the  disappearance  of  her  mother  is   an
    extraordinary circumstance that would make a  difference,  if  properly
    considered, to an Article 8 claim.  For my part I cannot see  how  that
    fact, even were it to be accepted,  creates  any  Article  8  right  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  There may be cases where it is desirable
    for the children to remain in the United Kingdom in  order  to  conduct
    their search for their mother.  As  has  been  observed  by  the  Judge
    however the appellants would seem to have done  absolutely  nothing  to
    further such enquiries since 2010, despite having lived in  the  United
    Kingdom for nearly three years.

42.  Although they arrived on a visa, the purpose for  which  the  visa  was
    issued was not fulfilled and the appellants have been allowed to remain
    in the United Kingdom essentially because of the respondent's policy in
    relation to unaccompanied minors.

43.  They have family to return to and no doubt would  put  their  education
    to good use in India.

44.  It seems to me, and I so find,  that  the  Immigration  Judge  properly
    considered matters for  and  against  the  appellants  and  came  to  a
    reasoned finding as to Article 8 of the ECHR.  There was no document or
    report  from  the  Slough  Borough  Council  to  indicate  that  either
    appellant has particular emotional or physical needs such as to require
    their continuing presence in the United Kingdom.

45.  The Judge is entitled to consider  the  appellant's  claim  within  the
    overall immigration history, particularly the lack of credibility as to
    their claim as found by Judge Bryant.  As young  people  they  obtained
    the appropriate protection from the authorities but may now be returned
    to family.

46.  Mr Tarlow, who represents the respondent, invited me to find  that  the
    case of SM was not relevant to this particular case and that  full  and
    proper consideration had been given  by  the  Judge  to  the  claim  as
    advanced by both appellants.  Although he expressed some sympathy  with
    their plight,  particularly  if  it  be  true  that  their  mother  had
    disappeared, he contends that their best interests  lie  in  any  event
    with their family in India where they can be fully supported.

47.  I find that there is no material error of  law  in  the  determination.
    The findings were reasoned and properly arrived at.   The  private  and
    family life of the appellants was considered  in  the  light  of  their
    family in India. This appeal by the appellants is dismissed.

48.  In those circumstances  the  decision  of  Judge  Gordon  shall  remain
    standing, namely that the appeals in respect of asylum and human rights
    are dismissed.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
