

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/03655/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                        |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 23 July 2015                            |On 29 July 2015                |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                YUDVHIR SINGH
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Smart a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr David of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This appeal is against the decision  promulgated  on  16  September
        2014  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Phull  which   allowed   the
        respondent's appeal under the provisions  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
        Immigration Rules and a second stage Article 8 ECHR assessment.
     2. The applicant at this hearing is the Secretary of  State.  For  the
        sake of consistency with the decision in the First-tier Tribunal we
        shall refer to her as  the  respondent  and  to  Mr  Singh  as  the
        appellant.

Background


     3. The appellant, a citizen of India, came to  the  UK  in  2006  with
        leave until 6 March 2007. He became an overstayer thereafter and so
        has been in the UK almost entirely unlawfully.

     4. On 16 March 2013 he was arrested by police for traffic offences and
        when arrested gave a false name. On 26 March 2013  he  applied  for
        leave to remain on the basis  of  a  relationship  with  a  British
        citizen, Salochana Devi, whom he had met in 2011. Subsequent to the
        application he married Ms Devi on 14 June 2013.

     5. The respondent refused the appellant's  application  for  leave  to
        remain and notified him on 6 November 2013 that he had to leave the
        United Kingdom.


     6. The appeal before Judge Phull was allowed under the  provisions  of
        Appendix FM, specifically  paragraph  EX.1.,  and  a  second  stage
        Article 8 ECHR  assessment.  In  summary  it  was  found  that  the
        appellant's wife had a prolapsed disc which  restricted  her  daily
        movement. She found it difficult to bend, push, pull or  lift.  She
        was having medication, physiotherapy and spinal rehabilitation. She
        needed to  remain  in  the  UK  to  continue  with  her  treatment,
        particularly as she had become pregnant against medical advice. The
        appellant  provided  daily  support  which  she  could  not  manage
        without. Adjustments had been made for her on her return  to  work.
        Those matters made it unreasonable for her to go to India with  the
        appellant.

     7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert granted permission to  appeal  on
        the basis that it was arguable that the Judge had;

          1) Incorrectly applied EX.1. of the Immigration Rules,
          2) Failed to  identify  circumstances  justifying  a  freestanding
             consideration pursuant to Article 8, and
          3) Failed to consider s117A of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 act").

Error of law

       Ground 1


     8. Mr Smart accepted that the circumstances of the appellant  and  his
        wife fell to be considered under paragraph EX.1. where  the  First-
        tier Tribunal had found them to be  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
        relationship.


     9. It was the respondent's position, however, that  an  error  of  law
        remained as the First-tier Tribunal did not apply the correct  test
        set out in EX.1..

    10. EX.1. states;


           "This paragraph applies if...(b) the applicant has a genuine and
           subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the UK and is a
           British Citizen...and  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
           family life with that partner continuing outside the UK."

    11. We were in agreement with Mr Smart as nowhere in the decision  does
        the Judge apply the test of "insurmountable  obstacles".  She  uses
        only a test of "reasonable" or "reasonableness" in  paragraphs  12,
        20, and 21. The test of "insurmountable obstacles"  sets  a  higher
        threshold than mere "reasonableness" as explained  in  EX.2.  which
        states that;


           "For  the  purposes  of   paragraph   EX.1.(b)   "insurmountable
           obstacles" means the very significant difficulties  which  would
           be faced by the applicant or their partner in  continuing  their
           family life together outside the  UK  and  which  could  not  be
           overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the applicant
           or their partner."

    12. We were therefore satisfied that the Judge did  materially  err  in
        law in failing to apply the test of "insurmountable obstacles" from
        paragraph EX.1. of the Immigration Rules.


       Ground 2


    13. The respondent also maintained that the  First-tier  Tribunal   had
        not shown how there  were  exceptional  circumstances  outside  the
        matters that fell to be decided under the  Immigration  Rules  such
        that the second stage Article 8 assessment was required. As  in  MM
        and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA
        Civ 985, if the relevant rule does not  provide  a  complete  code,
        then the Article 8 proportionality exercise should  be  undertaken.
        There will generally be no or only a relatively small  gap  between
        the new rules and the  requirements  of  Article  8  in  individual
        cases, including those involving sponsors who are British  citizens
        located in the United Kingdom.


    14. The position was further clarified in Secretary of  State  for  the
        Home Department v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387. We also noted the
        comments of the Court of Appeal in that case at paragraph 31 that a
        "strict test of  exceptionality  will  apply"  in  a  second  stage
        proportionality  assessment  if  the   appellant's   situation   is
        "precarious", as here.


    15. Where the First-tier Tribunal did not apply the correct formulation
        of the Immigration Rules, it appeared to us that  the  decision  to
        proceed to a second stage assessment also had to be  unsustainable.
        In essence, there was no reliable decision  under  the  Immigration
        Rules to take into account when considering the need for  a  second
        stage. We found that to be material where the matters  relied  upon
        when finding in favour of  the  appellant  in  the  proportionality
        assessment did not appear to us to go beyond those provided for  in
        an assessment of "insurmountable obstacles" under paragraph EX.1..

    16. We were satisfied that this matter  also  amounted  to  a  material
        error of law such that the second stage Article 8 assessment  could
        not stand.

       Ground 3

    17. The respondent also argued that the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to
        apply  in  substance  the  provisions  of  section  117B   of   the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


    18. The Judge here stated at paragraph 25 that she did have  regard  to
        s117A which incorporates s117B. She recognised that  the  appellant
        had been in the UK as an overstayer, stating at paragraph  29  that
        "the appellant overstayed and only sought to regularise his  status
        on arrest."


    19. Nowhere in the second stage Article 8 assessment, however, is there
        any consideration of s117B (4) which states;


           "Little weight should be given to ... (b) a relationship  formed
           with a qualifying partner that is established by a person  at  a
           time when the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully."


    20. To our minds, this was clearly a material consideration  which  was
        omitted  from  the  Article  8  assessment  which  centred  on  the
        appellant's family life with his wife and it could not be said that
        the  outcome  would  have  been  the  same  had  it  been   weighed
        appropriately. We were satisfied that this failure  amounted  to  a
        material error of in law.


    21. We announced our decision that we were satisfied that the Judge had
        made the material errors of law  identified  above  each  of  which
        required us to set the decision  aside.  We  decided  that  it  was
        appropriate for us to remake the decision.

    Remaking the decision


    22. It was submitted by Mr Smart that on the facts as found there  were
        no insurmountable obstacles to the appellant leaving the UK and his
        wife accompanying him, either whilst he applied for entry clearance
        or establishing a family life together there on  a  more  permanent
        basis.


    23. Mr Smart maintained that it had not been shown that entry clearance
        would take an unreasonable amount of time.  If the appellant's wife
        wanted to join him in India either permanently or whilst he  sought
        entry clearance, there  was  no  evidence  she  could  not  receive
        appropriate medical treatment there. There  would  be  difficulties
        for her in adapting to India and being away from her family in  the
        UK but these could not be  said  to  be  insurmountable  obstacles.
        Where that was  so  and  the  appellant  had  to  show  exceptional
        circumstances to succeed, the second stage Article 8  consideration
        had to fail.


    24. We were told by Mr David that,  unfortunately,  since  the  hearing
        before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,   the   appellant's   wife   had
        miscarried.  He  submitted  that  she  required   the   appellant's
        emotional support at  this  difficult  time.  Her  ongoing  medical
        condition was such that she required his support.  She  had  little
        family in India. His  recollection  was  that  she  had  aunts  and
        cousins there but her work and immediate family were in the  UK.  A
        10 hour flight to India would not be good for her back.  She  could
        obtain free health care in the UK but would have to pay  in  India.
        She did not know if her job would be  kept  open  if  she  went  to
        India. She would lose her job and house. That would not be  just  a
        case of hardship. Whilst it was acknowledged that the appellant had
        a precarious immigration status, this case was exceptional.


    25. In light of  Mr  David's  recollection  we  checked  the  notes  of
        evidence  from  the  previous  hearing.  These  disclose  that  the
        appellant said that his parents, two  brothers,  and  five  sisters
        live in India. He is in contact with his parents by  phone  once  a
        month or after 2 or 3 months depending on when he gets  chance.  He
        does not have contact with his siblings. His  wife  said  that  her
        mother's sisters lived in India. Her  mother,  brother  and  sister
        live here. Her father has passed away.


    26. In our judgement there would be no insurmountable obstacles to  the
        appellant and his wife exercising their family life in India  while
        he applies for entry clearance or on a more extended  basis.  There
        is no cogent evidence she would lose her job or be unable to take a
        leave of absence from work if she accompanied  him  to  seek  entry
        clearance. There is no medical evidence to  support  the  assertion
        that  she  would  be  unable  to  fly  or  that  with   appropriate
        precautions the discomfort of flying could not be ameliorated.  She
        has family there namely her aunts and all of the appellant's family
        to assist her  and  has  visited  the  country  in  the  past.  The
        appellant's family  could  assist  with  housing,  maintenance  and
        financially. The appellant could  be  expected  to  look  for  work
        albeit we accepted it would be harder for Ms Devi to find  work  in
        India and that she would have to give up her career in the UK  were
        she to go to India permanently.

    27. It was not suggested that Ms  Devi  could  not  access  appropriate
        medical treatment in India and we did not find that fact  that  she
        would very likely have to pay was a  matter  amounting  to  a  very
        significant difficulty given the family support available.  In  our
        view, given the degree of the  wife's  health  and  family  support
        available both from the UK and in India, we did not find  that  the
        couple had shown that there would be "very  serious  hardship".  We
        did not find that the  provisions  of  paragraph  EX.1.  were  met,
        therefore.


    28. We also did not find that there were compelling reasons that  could
        lead to a decision in the appellant's favour outside the provisions
        of Appendix FM. The factors to  be  considered  in  any  Article  8
        proportionality assessment are essentially those already  addressed
        under paragraph EX.1.. In addition,  the  appellant's  family  life
        with his wife could only attract little weight in  that  assessment
        following s117B (4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
        2002. The appellant's private life also cannot assist  him  greatly
        where it was established whilst he was here unlawfully. It was  our
        view that even were such an assessment to be required,  it  had  to
        fail.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of a material error on a point of law.

      We set aside the decision.

         We dismiss the appeal on all grounds.




Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
28 July 2015





