
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03772/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th December 2015                |On 26th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                              MS REBECCA EFFAH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bajwa - Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms G Savage - Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge N M K  Lawrence  issued  on  15th  July  2014
    allowing under the Immigration Rules the Appellant's appeal against the
    decision of the Respondent made on 20th December  2013  to  refuse  to
    grant a residence card under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 as the spouse of Paul Mensah, a  citizen  of  Germany.
    The application was refused  under  Regulation  7  of  the  Regulations
    because the Secretary of State considered that the  Appellant  had  not
    provided a valid marriage certificate in support of her application and
    she was not satisfied that the parties are in  a  durable  relationship
    akin to marriage.

 2. In the grounds seeking permission to appeal it is stated:

         "1.  There is an error of law in this determination  such  that  it
             should be set aside.  The Respondent Secretary  of  State  for
             the Home Department invites the  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration
             and Asylum Chamber) to set it aside and remit  the  matter  to
             the First-tier Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber).

         2.   Recent case law (Kareem, TA) make it clear beyond peradventure
             that it is a requirement of Judges to consider the validity of
             the marriage  in  light  of  the  marriage  laws  of  the  EEA
             national's country of EEA nationality, in cases such as  this.



         3.   This assessment is absent in Judge Lawrence's determination.

         4.    Thus,  it  is  inadequately  reasoned   and/or   contains   a
             misdirection in law.

         5.   For the avoidance of doubt if the matter  is  reheard  by  the
             Immigration and Asylum Chamber  the  Respondent  Secretary  of
             State for the Home  Department  continues  to  rely  upon  the
             refusal letter of 20th December 2013.   She  further  observes
             that this letter does not  demonstrate  the  exercise  of  the
             discretion to issue a residence permit to an  extended  family
             member under Regulation 17(4) of the EEA Regulations 2006.  It
             is submitted that if the Tribunal later find this Appellant is
             in a durable relationship with an EEA national then the matter
             should be remitted by the Respondent for consideration of  the
             exercise of the discretion to issue a residence permit  to  an
             extended family member  under  Regulation  17(4)  of  the  EEA
             Regulations 2006."

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Davies.
    The grant of permission is undated.  He said:

         "The grounds in the determination do disclose an arguable error  of
         law.   The  Judge  should  have  considered  the  validity  of  the
         Appellant's marriage on the basis as to whether  the  marriage  was
         valid in Germany, the country of which the Appellant's Sponsor  was
         a national."

 4. The Judge in his determination relied  on  CB  (validity  of  marriage:
    proxy marriage) Brazil [2008] UKAIT 00080 and on NA Ghana [2009]  UKAIT
    00009.  He found that the Appellant and  her  spouse  had  demonstrated
    that they are validly married in accordance  with  the  proxy  marriage
    laws of Ghana.  He therefore found the marriage was valid  and  allowed
    the appeal.  He failed to consider either Kareem (Proxy marriages -  EU
    law)  Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT  00024  (IAC)  or  TA  and  Others  (Kareem
    explained) [2014] UKUT 316.

 5. It was agreed by the parties that this appeal should be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo as the Judge  clearly  failed
    to deal properly with the issues before him.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  de  novo
by a Judge other than Judge N M K Lawrence.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 22nd January 2016

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


