
[pic]
IAC-TH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/03195/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2016                           |On 25 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                Faheem Hayat
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He was born on 12 March 1985.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's decision to refuse  him  leave  to
    enter dated 17 March 2015.

 3. The appeal was heard by Judge Lingam (the  judge)  who  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 28 August 2015, allowed the appeal under the Immigration
    Rules.  That was because she found the respondent had  failed  to  show
    that the appellant had relied upon a false document to procure his last
    leave to enter and that even if so, there was no  causal  link  between
    the  alleged  false  document  and  the  leave  issued  following   the
    appellant's 2014 leave application.

 4. The grounds claimed a material  misdirection  of  law  and  failure  to
    provide inadequate or any reasons on a material point :

Material Misdirection in Law

 5. At [20] the judge, relying upon an unreported  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal concluded that the application of paragraph 321A  was  limited
    to instances where deception was deployed in the  application  granting
    the current leave.  It was said that since the appellant did  not  rely
    upon the ETS  qualification  for  his  current  period  of  leave,  the
    respondent erred in cancelling leave under paragraph 321A.

 6. In her assessment  at  [20]  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
    respondent's assertion that the appellant  did  not  disclose  material
    facts (that is, his historic deception) in the application the  subject
    of the appeal, the  Immigration  Officer  having  sought  clarification
    regarding the validity of the appellant's ETS qualification.

 7. On that basis, the previous use of deception and the subsequent failure
    to disclose material was  relevant  to  the  application  granting  the
    appellant's current period of leave.  It was relevant because  if  such
    matters had been disclosed to the respondent, she would have considered
    the appellant's conduct.  In any event the assertion by the  respondent
    that deception had been exercised was put to the appellant at his  port
    interview and investigations were undertaken.  As such it was incumbent
    on the judge to consider the evidence advanced by the  respondent  that
    the appellant had used a  proxy  in  his  English  language  test,  the
    witness statements of Mona Shah, Rebecca Collings and Peter  Millington
    as well as the specific evidence relating to the appellant.

Failure to Provide Inadequate or any Reasons on a Material Point

 8. At [17] and [18] the judge failed to consider in any way the statements
    of Peter Millington and Rebecca Collings which were highly material  to
    the issue of deception and related directly to the  production  of  the
    database printout identifying the appellant as an individual whose test
    had been invalidated as a result of a proxy  being  detected.   It  was
    incumbent on the judge to consider that evidence and, if was the  case,
    provide cogent reasons for rejecting the evidence.

 9. In addition, the only criticism  taken  of  the  respondent's  evidence
    related to the statement of Mona Shah at [18].  It  would  appear  that
    the statement mistakenly  referred  to  a  different  individual.   The
    grounds claimed that was  clearly  an  administrative  error.   In  any
    event, the judge had before her the ETS  source  database  entry  which
    identified the appellant.  That evidence was pertinent to the issue  of
    deception and the administrative omission  did  not  detract  from  the
    materiality of that evidence.  The data entry coupled with the evidence
    in the other witnesses' statements demonstrated how the  appellant  was
    identified as an individual who had used deception.

10. Judge Saffer considered the application for permission  to  appeal  and
    granted permission in a decision dated 19 January 2016.   He  took  the
    view that the judge had arguably erred as she did not  appear  to  have
    considered the alleged current deception in  terms  of  not  disclosing
    material facts  of  historic  deception.   Further,  he  found  it  was
    arguable that the judge had  erred  in  terms  of  failing  to  provide
    inadequate or any reasons on material points as the judge  appeared  to
    have ignored the statements of Peter Millington and Rebecca Collings.

11. There was no Rule 24 response.

12. Neither the appellant  nor  his  representatives  appeared.   I  caused
    enquiries to be made of Milestone Chambers.  It was reported to me that
    Mr Nasim of Milestone  Chambers  had  been  contacted  via  his  mobile
    telephone.  He said he had informed the appellant that because he would
    be in Birmingham  on  26  February,  that  the  appellant  should  seek
    alternative representation; that aside, there was  no  explanation  for
    the appellant's absence.

Submissions on Error of Law

13. Mr Whitwell relied upon the grounds.  He handed up a witness  statement
    of Mona Shah dated 25 February 2016, which I will refer to  further  at
    [16] below.

Conclusion on Error of Law

14. I find the judge materially erred in her  assessment  of  the  evidence
    because the historic deception was relevant.   There  was  evidence  in
    that regard at  E1  of  the  respondent's  bundle  under  record  21670
    certificate number 0044201649018068 in the appellant's name.  The  test
    date was recorded as 27 June 2012.  The test was recorded as "Invalid".



15. I find the judge failed to take into account the respondent's claim  in
    the reasons for refusal that the appellant did  not  disclose  material
    facts with regard to his historic  deception  in  the  application  the
    subject of the appeal.  That is apparent from the interview record,  in
    particular, at Q45, 47, 48, 49, 53, 54, 55 and 56.  It was put  to  the
    appellant at Q62 that the evidence provided by ETS declared his test as
    "invalid" and that as a result, his current leave would  be  cancelled.
    The appellant's response was  that  he  would  discuss  that  with  his
    solicitor.  Those were issues which  the  judge  failed  to  adequately
    address in her analysis of the evidence.

16. I do accept that it was put to the judge at the First-tier  hearing  by
    Mr Nasim that she should be cautious of the attachment to  Mona  Shah's
    statement because there was an error as to the name on the  attachment.
    The statement of 25 February 2016 apologised for the  error.   Ms  Shah
    goes on to say inter alia:

         "5.  This witness statement is intended to  assist  the  First-tier
             Tribunal in understanding the process by which  the  appellant
             was identified as a person who had sought to obtain  leave  by
             deception through the use of a fraudulently  obtained  English
             language test  certificate  provided  by  Educational  Testing
             Services (ETS).

         6.   The appellant is one of many individuals in  respect  of  whom
             leave to enter  was  refused  by  the  Home  Office  following
             invalidation of an English language test certificate by ETS.

         7.   The decision to refuse leave to enter in this case  was  taken
             in light of the  cancellation  of  an  English  language  test
             result by  the  test  provider.   The  test  result  had  been
             cancelled by ETS on the basis of its  own  analyses  indicated
             that the test result had been obtained via the use of a  proxy
             tester.  The Home Office was notified by way of an entry on  a
             spreadsheet an excerpt from which in respect of the  appellant
             is at Annex A."

17. Annex A of the statement of 25 February 2016 is a duplicate of the  ETS
    SELT source data I have referred to above at [9] contained  within  the
    respondent's bundle at E1.

18. I find the judge erred because she failed  to  take  into  account  the
    historic deception, by failing to give reasons or any adequate  reasons
    on material points as identified by the respondent and to have  ignored
    the statements in support of the respondent's position.

19. In the  circumstances,  none  of  the  judge's  findings  shall  stand.
    Directions are attached to this short decision.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law, is  set
    aside and will be remade following a de novo hearing.

Anonymity direction not made.




Signed                              Date 10 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
