
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA037122014
     IA007802014
     IA008242014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1st April 2016                        |On 13th June 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

     MR SUKHDEV (1)
                            MRS KAVITA KAVITA (2)
                                  [K B] (3)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Hussain (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge N B Hussain, promulgated on 13th August 2015, following a hearing
    at Richmond  on  3rd  July  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Mr Sukhdev, Mrs Kavita Kavita, and  [KB].   The
    Appellants subsequently applied for, and were  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are nationals of India.  The First Appellant, who is the
    principal Appellant, was born on 15th December 1981,  and  is  a  male.
    The Second Appellant, who is  his  dependent  wife,  was  born  on  2nd
    October 1988.  The Third Appellant, who is their dependent  child,  was
    born on [ ] 2010.  The Appellants made their application for  leave  to
    remain in the UK on 20th September 2013, and  these  applications  were
    refused on 29th November 2013 on the basis  that  the  bank  statements
    submitted with the application were not genuine and  valid.   This  was
    important because the principal Appellant had made an  application  for
    leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student, and had to show that he could meet
    the maintenance requirements in  paragraph  245ZX  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge held that this was a case where the Respondent  Secretary  of
    State had alleged that the bank account of the principal Appellant  was
    false, but the burden of so proving rested on the Secretary  of  State,
    and in this case the Respondent Secretary  of  State  "has  provided  a
    detailed verification report which includes evidence emanating from the
    bank that issue the documents relied on by the Appellant."   The  judge
    went on to say that, "despite being given an adjournment  to  obtain  a
    response to  this,  other  than  assertions  made  in  the  Appellant's
    representative's letter referred to above, no documentary evidence  has
    been produced in rebuttal" (see paragraph 10).

 4. The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.
     The judge did, then however, have also  to  consider  any  obligations
    arising upon the Secretary of State under human rights  law  and  under
    international law.  He observed that, although the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    asserted rights under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention,  and
    that "it is asserted that the Appellant's wife is pregnant and  due  to
    give birth in December," because the Appellant and his  dependent  wife
    and children had not attended  court,  "it  is  not  possible  for  the
    Tribunal to carry out any  meaningful  assessment  of  the  Appellants'
    rights under Article 8" (see paragraph 13).  That being so,  the  judge
    held that these related issues could be considered  at  the  time  when
    enforcement action was taken against the Appellants.

Grounds of Application

 5.  The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  erred  in  not
    considering Article 8 of the ECHR.

 6. On 17th February 2016, permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis
    that the judge had recognised that the Second Appellant  was  pregnant,
    and yet went on to  dismiss  the  entire  appeal,  without  considering
    Article 8 and that, "irrespective  of  what  evidence  was  before  the
    judge, it  is  open  to  argument  that  Article  8  should  have  been
    considered bearing in mind that it had been pleaded in the  Grounds  of
    Appeal."

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on 1st April 2016, Mr  Hussain,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellants repeated the Grounds of Appeal and stated that
    there had been a failure to consider Article 8 and the judge was  wrong
    to have said that there  could  be  no  meaningful  assessment  in  the
    absence of the Appellants' presence before the Tribunal.

 8. For his part,  Mr  Walker  submitted  that  there  was  no  Appellants'
    representative in attendance, and the  Appellants  themselves  did  not
    come to court, and the judge was entitled to take into account the fact
    that the Appellant had only been in the UK for a short period of  time,
    and even that on a temporary basis, so that even if Article 8  was  not
    in terms considered, there would be  no  material  error,  because  the
    appeal was bound to have been rejected.

 9. In reply, Mr Hussain submitted that it  was  not  just  the  fact  that
    Article 8 had not been considered under the ECHR, but  the  Section  55
    obligation under the BCIA 2009 had  not  been  considered  either,  and
    there was an international obligation to consider the  "best  interests
    of the child" whenever an administrative decision was taken against  an
    Appellant child.  It  is  noteworthy,  as  Mr  Hussain  accepted,  that
    Section 55  had  not  even  been  pleaded  by  those  representing  the
    Appellant.

Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge involved an
    error on a point of law, but this is not such as  one  to  justify  the
    setting aside of the decision.  This is because the Upper Tribunal  may
    (but need not) set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (see
    Section  12(2)(a))  where  this  is  unwarranted.   I  find  it  to  be
    unwarranted for the following reasons.  First, whereas it is  the  case
    that if Article 8 had been raised in the grounds, it ought at least  in
    principle to have been determined by the judge,  determining  it  would
    not have led to a result any different from that which the judge did in
    the event come to.  The Appellant cannot succeed under the  Immigration
    Rules.   The  only  other  possibility  is  a  freestanding  Article  8
    jurisprudence.

11. In the case of Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74, it has been made clear that MM
    (Lebanon) does not undermine the judgment of Sales J in  Nagre  and  in
    any event Sales J's approach in Nagre has been endorsed in the Court of
    Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, namely  that  a  two-stage
    process is necessary, whether it takes place within  the  consideration
    of the case under the Immigration Rules or outside the Rules, and  that
    what the decision maker must do is apply  the  principles  that  emerge
    from the strata of jurisprudence in that event.

12. Applying these principles, it is clear that  the  Appellant  could  not
    have succeeded because he has only been in this country on a  temporary
    basis as a student, and the case of EA makes it clear  that  this  does
    not imply with it a right to remain in this country.  As far as Section
    55 BCIA was concerned, although this was a basis of the decision letter
    itself, being carefully addressed in that refusal  decision,  it  never
    formed part of the Grounds of Appeal before the Tribunal.

13.  The  Appellant  chose  not  to  attend  and  chose  not  to   send   a
    representative on his behalf.  Although Mr Hussain submitted  that  the
    Third Appellant was born  in  2010  and  is  almost  6  years  old,  he
    neglected to add that the child only came to the UK in June  2011,  and
    has only been here five years, so that he is young enough to  accompany
    both parents back to India with no adverse impact being  on  his  "best
    interests."  In fact, as is clear from established case law  his  "best
    interests" are kept intact by keeping the family together: see  Zoumbas
    [2013] UKSC 74.

14. Further, I should just add that both with respect to Article 8 ECHR and
    Section 55 BCIA 2009 the evidence submitted on behalf of the  Appellant
    before Judge N B Hussain was jejeune and parsimonious.  In fact, a look
    at the witness statement of the First Appellant, dated 7th  March  2014
    makes no reference whatsoever to either.

15. On the other hand, the Grounds of Appeal (see pages 14  to  21  of  the
    Appellants' bundle) only referred to the fact that  the  Appellant  has
    expended "substantial amount of money for his tuition fee with  a  view
    to obtain a prestigious UK degree" (see paragraph 23 on page  20),  and
    it is well-established that this in itself would  not  have  aided  his
    Article 8 ECHR application to remain in this country.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law  in  the  original  judge's  determination
such that it should be set aside.  The determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th June 2016
