
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/03540/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 October 2015                   |On 26 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               JEVIN NOOKANAH
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:     Ms Brankovic, Counsel


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

      1. The respondent is a citizen of Mauritius.   He  originally  entered
         the United Kingdom ('UK') on 21 July 2003  as  a  student  and  has
         remained here continuously since then.

      2. The respondent applied for leave to remain  pursuant  to  Paragraph
         276B of the Immigration Rules on the basis of his ten years  lawful
         residence.  In a decision dated 10 January 2015  the  SSHD  refused
         the application.  All relevant requirements of paragraph 276B  were
         considered to have been met save for the fact  that  the  residence
         was not continuous lawful residence because there was said to be  a
         gap of 119 days.

      3. The respondent appealed against this  decision  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal relying upon two grounds: (1) the respondent met 276B, and
         in the alternative (2) Article 8 of the ECHR.

      4. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Somal  first  of  all  considered  the
         relevant chronology having heard the respondent give evidence.  The
         relevant chronology can be summarised as follows:

         21/7/13  R enters the UK with entry clearance as a student

         15/9/03  R makes an in-time application to extend leave  to  remain
                    as a student

         21/9/13  Entry clearance expires

         10/3/04  SSHD refuses the application on the basis that it did  not
                    include an application form but indicates that R has  28
                    days to make a further application (in order for  it  to
                    be treated as in-time)

         8/7/04   R resubmits the application (after  the  relevant  28  day
                    period)

         10/3/09  SSHD grants leave as a student.  This leave  continues  to
                    be extended to 2/9/14

         1/9/14   R makes in-time application for ILR on the basis of 276B

      5. The judge found that the respondent  did  not  reapply  within  the
         requisite 28 days but some three months later in  July  2004.   The
         judge therefore found  there  was  a  break  in  continuous  lawful
         residence as the respondent applied after the expiry of his initial
         period of leave, and as such the appeal under the Immigration Rules
         had to be dismissed. Ms  Brankovic  clarified  that  this  was  not
         disputed and there has been no cross-appeal against this finding.

      6. The judge however  found  that  the  SSHD  had  acted  unfairly  in
         delaying between 8 July 2004 and 10 March 2009 and  concluded  that
         the decision was not in accordance with the law.   The  appeal  was
         allowed on this basis only.

      7. The  SSHD  has  appealed  against  the  decision  with  permission.
         Permission was granted on the basis that "the reasoning as  to  why
         the delay would itself lead to a grant  of  leave  was  sparse  and
         unclear."

      8. At the beginning of the hearing I indicated my preliminary view  to
         the parties: the judge erred in law in allowing the appeal  on  the
         basis that  the  SSHD  had  breached  its  requirement  to  act  in
         accordance with the common law  principle  of  procedural  fairness
         without conducting any assessment or making any findings  regarding
         Article 8 of the ECHR.  Ms Brankovic conceded that the judge failed
         to address Article 8 and was not entitled to allow the  appeal  for
         the reasons provided.  Ms Brankovic was correct to do so.

      9. The judge was obliged to determine the appeal against the  decision
         not to grant ILR dated 1 September 2014.  The judge has provided no
         reasoning as to why that decision was unfair because  of  delay  on
         the part of the SSHD many years earlier.  That period of delay  did
         not  cause  the  gap  in  lawful  residence,  which  led   to   the
         respondent's inability to meet 276B.  The gap in  lawful  residence
         was caused by the respondent's own delay in 2004.

     10. It follows that the decision allowing the appeal on the basis  that
         the decision is not in accordance with the law must be  set  aside.
         That leaves the Article 8 appeal outstanding as the judge  did  not
         address this.  Both representatives agreed that as  the  judge  had
         completely  failed  to  engage  with  and  address  Article  8  the
         appropriate course was  to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.  I have had regard to para 7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior
         President's Practice Statement and the absence  of  any  Article  8
         assessment on the part of the First-tier Tribunal.   I  agree  with
         the representatives that this is an appropriate case to be remitted
         to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

     11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
         material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

     12. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

      1) The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  in
         Nottingham / Stoke (preferably Nottingham) on the  first  available
         date. (TE: 1.5hrs).

      2) 28 days before the hearing date the respondent shall file and serve
         an indexed and paginated comprehensive bundle of  documents.   This
         shall contain a chronology and a statement from the respondent.

      3) 14 days before the hearing the SSHD shall file and serve a  written
         summary of her position in response to the respondent's evidence.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
22 October 2015
