











Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/04211/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |                 Decision and Reasons    |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On: 24 February 2016              |                 On: 17 March 2016       |


                                   Before


                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between



                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr samuel Euclio Nyanor
                        (no anonymity order is made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Akohene, Legal Representative, Afrifa and
Partners Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. We shall refer to the appellant as "the secretary of state" and to the
      respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The secretary of state appeals with permission from  the  decision  of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge who, in a decision promulgated on  6  August
      2015, allowed the claimant's appeal against the secretary  of  state's
      decision  to  refuse  to  issue  him  a  residence  card  pursuant  to
      Regulation 7 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006  -  'the  2006
      Regulations'.  Although the appeal of the  claimant's  wife  was  also
      allowed by the First-tier Tribunal, Mr Duffy informed us  that  it  is
      only the First-tier Tribunal's decision allowing the claimant's appeal
      that is challenged.


   3. It is contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in
      allowing the claimant's appeal outright.  The  Judge  found  that  the
      claimant's relationship with his sponsor, a Polish  national,  was  "a
      genuine, subsisting and  durable  relationship."  Moreover,  "this  is
      neither a marriage nor  a  relationship  of  convenience"  [27].   The
      claimant was thus found to be an extended/other  family  member  under
      Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations").


   4. Mr Duffy contends that in the circumstances the case should have  been
      remitted to the secretary of state for consideration under  Regulation
      17(4) instead of his appeal being allowed 'outright'.


   5. The Judge's finding that the claimant is in a durable relationship and
      is therefore an extended family member under the 2006  Regulations  is
      not disputed; nor the finding at [20] that the claimant's  sponsor  is
      an EEA national who has been exercising Treaty rights.


   6. Mr Duffy submitted however that the Judge did not have any  regard  to
      the requirements under Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.  This
      provides that the secretary of state "may" issue a residence  card  to
      an extended family member not falling within Regulation  7(3)  who  is
      not an EEA national on application, if the EEA national in relation to
      the extended family member is a  qualified  person,  and  in  all  the
      circumstances it appears to the  secretary  of  state  appropriate  to
      issue a residence card.


   7. The secretary of state has noted in her grounds that the claimant  was
      found to be an extended family member under  Regulation  8(5)  of  the
      2006 Regulations. Accordingly, Regulation 17(4) provides a  discretion
      to the secretary of state relating to the issue of a residence card.


   8. The secretary of state has accordingly not yet considered the exercise
      of such discretion, having made a decision dismissing  the  claimant's
      application.


   9. The secretary of state is in the first instance required  to  consider
      the exercise of discretion before the Tribunal is itself  entitled  to
      consider such exercise: FD (EEA Discretion - Basis of Appeal)  Algeria
      [2007] UKAIT 49 and Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340
      (IAC).


  10. Mr Akohene conceded  that  the  secretary  of  state's  appeal  should
      accordingly be allowed to the limited extent referred to. We find that
      this concession was properly made. We find that the  decision  of  the
      first-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point of law.


      Notice of Decision


      We allow the appeal of the secretary of state to the  extent  that  we
      set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  substitute  a
      decision allowing the appeal of the claimant against the  decision  of
      the secretary of state under Regulation 8(5) of the 2006  Regulations,
      to the extent that his application for an EEA residence  card  remains
      outstanding before the secretary of state.


      No anonymity direction is made.










      Signed                             Date 4 March 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer





