
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/04711/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 18th July 2016                         |  On 27th July 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                 Wasim Arif
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTIOn Not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield, instructed by Hartley Bain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant with permission appeals against  the  decision  of  Judge
    Suffield-Thompson  in  which  he  dismissed  the  appeal  against   the
    respondent's decision to refuse his application for leave to remain  as
    a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.

 2. The appellant  made  an  application  on  28th  August  2014  and  that
    application was dismissed by the Secretary of  State  on  19th  January
    2015 further to paragraph 245DD(h) and (i) of the Immigration Rules.

 3. In the refusal letter the Secretary of State set out:

         "Non-Points Scoring Reasons for Refusal

         You have applied for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
         Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant but the Secretary  of  State  is  not
         satisfied on the balance of probabilities that:

         .    you genuinely intend or are able to establish,  take  over  or
             become a director of one or more businesses  within  the  next
             six months; or

         .    you genuinely intend to invest the money referred to in  Table
             4 of Appendix A in the Immigration Rules in your  business  or
             businesses; and

         .    the money referred  to  in  Table  4  of  Appendix  A  of  the
             Immigration Rules is  genuinely  available  to  you  and  will
             remain available to you until such time as it is spent by your
             business or businesses ('available to  you'  means  the  funds
             are:

             1)   in your own possession or

             2)   in the financial accounts of a UK  incorporated  business
                  of which you are the Director or

             3)   are available from a third party or parties named in  the
                  application under the terms of the declaration(s) referred
                  to in paragraph 41-SD(b) of Appendix A); and

         .    you do not intend to take employment  in  the  UK  other  than
             under the terms of paragraph 245DE.

         In making the assessment under  the  following  factors  have  been
         considered, as per paragraph 245DD(i) of the Immigration Rules:

         Paragraph  245DD(i) of the Immigration Rules states that, in making
         the assessment in (h) above, UK Visas and Immigration  will  assess
         the balance  of  probabilities,  and  may  take  into  account  the
         following factors:

         (i)  the evidence the applicant has submitted;

         (ii) the viability and credibility  of  the  source  of  the  money
             referred to in Table 4 of Appendix A;




         (iii)    the viability and credibility of the applicant's  business
             plans and market research into their chosen business sector;

         (iv) the applicant's previous educational and  business  experience
             (or lack thereof);

         (v)  the applicant's immigration history and previous  activity  in
             the UK;

         (vi) where the applicant has already registered in the UK as  self-
             employed or as the director of a business, and the  nature  of
             the business requires  mandatory  accreditation,  registration
             and/or  insurance,  where  that  accreditation,   registration
             and/or insurance has been obtained: and

         (vii)    any other relevant information."

 4. One of the aspects that the  Secretary  of  State  considered  was  the
    viability and credibility of the applicant's business plans and  market
    research into their chosen sector.  This has an effect on  the  overall
    success of the application.

 5. The Secretary of State proceeded to reject the applicant's evidence  on
    the basis of the  assessment of the appellant's business  plan,  market
    research, contract, insurance and the appellant's website.

 6. The application for permission to appeal submitted that in reaching her
    findings:

      1) The judge had no regard to the appellant's oral evidence  regarding
         the contract which included details of the contracts the  appellant
         had generated for QHC with local taxi firms.

 7. As per Ahmed and Another (PBS: admissible evidence) [2014]  UKUT  00365
    (IAC), I find that  this  is  an  impermissible  ground  Section  85(a)
    precludes the reliance on oral evidence and this ground of  appeal  and
    challenge is misconceived.

 8. The second ground of challenge was  that  the  judge  misconstrued  the
    contract with QHC at 34 to 36 of the decision, considering it  unlikely
    that a  client  would  sign  such  an  agreement.   But  the  appellant
    asserted, the  "late  payment"  clause  to  which  the  respondent  had
    referred in the refusal letter was one that disadvantaged the appellant
    himself and not the client.  In signing that document  the  client  did
    not deprive themselves  of  an  opportunity  to  ensure  the  appellant
    provided the services as the judge thought.

 9. It is clear that the judge did appear to misunderstand the  point  that
    was being made about the contract, which states that "no  late  penalty
    will be charged if the customer does not comply with the rates, amounts
    or payment dates provided in this agreement".  The point  made  by  the
    respondent is that it  was  of  concern  that  the  appellant  had  not
    included a clause within the agreement to assure that he would  receive
    payments for services on time.  It is clear from the point made in  the
    reasons for refusal letter that the appellant  would  not  insert  this
    into his own clause to ensure that his services were  fully  paid  for.
    The judge did not appear to grapple with the essential  point  made  on
    either side.

10. Ground  three  seems  to  assert  that  the  appellant  had  taken  out
    employers' liability and the judge had no regard  for  the  explanation
    given by the appellant in his witness statement having taken out such a
    policy.  Once again it is impermissible to take  into  account  further
    evidence.  It is that which has been put before the Secretary of  State
    in support of the application which the judge had  to  concentrate  on.
    The judge clearly stated at paragraph 38 that she could not  understand
    why the appellant would take out employers' liability when "he has  not
    staff and his business is nowhere near the  stage  when  he  will  need
    staff". That was a legitimate reason and finding made by the  judge  in
    the circumstances.

11. With respect to ground (iv), at paragraph 39 it would appear  that  the
    judge has employed some of her own opinion in relation to  whether  the
    appellant with a degree in IT would be able to create a website or  not
    on the basis that "it is not a particularly difficult piece of IT for a
    layperson to learn let alone an IT graduate" and this would  appear  to
    be speculation and an error on the part of the judge.

12. In relation to ground (v) and the criticism that the  judge  took  into
    account  evidence  which  could  not  have  been  supplied   with   the
    application the judge notes that the appellant had  failed  to  produce
    various documents before the  Tribunal  and  yet  in  holding  such  an
    absence of evidence against  the  appellant  the  judge  did  misdirect
    herself in law because she was, in any event, unable to take that  into
    account.

13. It is also the case that in relation to ground (vi) the judge took into
    account further information such that there was "nothing before  me  to
    show that the appellant  has  used  his  post-study  migrant  leave  to
    legitimately develop Beam Marketing".

Notice of Decision

14. I can accept that the grounds of challenge would appear on the one hand
    to criticise the  judge  for  failing  to  take  into  account  further
    evidence  or  expecting  further  evidence  whilst  at  the  same  time
    criticising the judge for indeed taking into account  further  evidence
    which does seem curious.  On balance, however, the judge  did,  despite
    her self direction, with consider further evidence not  submitted  with
    the application or consider the fact that further evidence was  not  in
    existence.   I consider that the judge has cumulatively made rather too
    many errors either in fact or law for this decision to  stand  and  the
    matter should be  referred  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  further
    consideration.

15. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Signed                                  Date 27th July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

