
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04610/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 6 January 2015                            |On 15 January 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                           emmanuel oladapo banjo
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Al-Rashid, Counsel instructed by David A Grand
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wiseman promulgated on 18  July  2014  dismissing  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant,  Mr  Emmanuel  Oladapo  Banjo  against  a  decision  of  the
    Respondent, the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department,  dated  9
    January 2014 to remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom.


Background

2.   The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born  on  22  June  1937.   His
    immigration history is set out in the body of the determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal - see in particular at paragraphs  3-10,  and  note
    the findings of fact at paragraphs 45-47.  I do not propose  to  repeat
    the history in detail now, however I note in particular  the  following
    salient features.

3.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom first in June  1962  with  his
    wife.  He remained here until  3  January  1973  when  he  returned  to
    Nigeria, at which point he would have been aged 35 years.  Although the
    Respondent had not been satisfied as to the  date  of  the  Appellant's
    first arrival in the United Kingdom, it was accepted by  the  Secretary
    of State that by the time the Appellant left the United Kingdom in 1973
    he had acquired settled status.  This was because he was present in the
    United Kingdom on 1 January 1973 when the current immigration laws came
    into force (commencement of the Immigration Act 1971) and he would have
    been considered to be a person freely landed and settled in the  United
    Kingdom at that date.

4.   The Appellant next arrived in the United Kingdom in 2004 as  a  visitor
    returning to Nigeria after his visit.   He  again  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 12 June 2005 by which time he  would  in  effect  have  been
    resident in Nigeria for a period of 32 years since his  departure  from
    the UK in 1973.

5.   On 12 June 2005 the Appellant entered as a visitor with leave  until  9
    December 2005.  A subsequent application for indefinite leave to remain
    was refused and an appeal was dismissed, the Appellant becoming 'appeal
    rights exhausted' on 11 June 2007.  A further application for leave  to
    remain was refused with no right of appeal.

6.   The current application was made on 22  April  2013,  relying  on  long
    residence and Article 8 of the ECHR.  The application was refused on  9
    January 2014 for reasons set out in  a  'Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter'
    ('RFRL') of that date and a decision to remove the Appellant  was  made
    on 10 January 2014 and served on 14 January 2014.

7.   The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.   His  appeal  was  dismissed  for
    reasons given in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wiseman
    promulgated on 18 July 2014.

8.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson on  25  November
    2014.

9.   A Rule 24 reply has been filed  by  the  respondent  dated  3  December
    2014.

Consideration

10.  The Appellant's grounds of challenge to the Upper Tribunal rely on  two
    bases.  A challenge is mounted in respect of the Immigration Rules, and
    a challenge is also mounted in respect of Article 8 of the ECHR.

11.  So far as the challenge in respect of the Rules is concerned,  that  is
    no longer pursued before me.  I  pause  to  note  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge dealt briefly with paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration
    Rules at paragraph 49 of his decision - briefly, but adequately  in  my
    judgment - stating:

         "The fact of the matter is that  the  application  under  paragraph
         276B is only being made now and sub-paragraph (v) clearly says: the
         applicant must not be in the  UK  in  breach  of  immigration  laws
         except any period of overstaying for a period of twenty eight  days
         or  less  will  be  disregarded.   The  appellant  has  of   course
         overstayed for many years so I do not believe any application based
         on even a historical period of lawful residence can succeed."


12.  The grounds of appeal sought to challenge the  approach  taken  by  the
    Judge to paragraph 276B: see grounds at paragraphs 4, 5  and  6.   Such
    grounds did not find favour in  the  decision  of  Judge  Simpson  when
    granting permission to appeal and Mr Al-Rashid, in  my  judgment  quite
    properly and realistically, does not seek to  resurrect  those  grounds
    before me.

13.  For completeness I should also add that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    had regard to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and found  that
    the appellant  did  not  satisfy  the  requirements  thereunder  -  see
    determination at paragraph 49.  No challenge has been made  in  respect
    of that assessment.

14.  The second basis of the Appellant's challenge,  and  the  one  that  is
    pursued before me, is in respect of the Judge's evaluation  of  Article
    8.

15.  In granting permission to appeal Judge Simpson  identified  the  effect
    of MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA  Civ  985  on  the  previous  jurisprudence
    including in particular the case of Gulshan.  Mr Al-Rashid acknowledges
    before me that the unnecessary 'intermediate  step'  identified  in  MM
    (Lebanon) was not one that had operated to the Appellant's prejudice in
    the circumstances of this particular case.  As such he does not seek to
    suggest that the Judge was in error - or more particularly in  material
    error - in considering the intermediate step at  paragraph  50  of  the
    determination.   It  is  accepted  that  the  Judge  went  on  to  give
    consideration to Article 8.  However, Mr  Al-Rashid  submits  that  the
    judge erred in his approach to Article 8  and  failed  to  undertake  a
    proper or adequate Razgar assessment.

16.  In my judgment the challenge in respect of Article 8 is  in  reality  a
    disagreement  with   the   factual   assessment   and   evaluation   of
    proportionality undertaken by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and  does
    not disclose an error of law.

17.  It is clear that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  influenced  by
    adverse features of the Appellant's  more  recent  immigration  history
    notwithstanding  the  favourable  findings  made  in  respect  of   the
    substantial period of time that the Appellant had spent lawfully in the
    United Kingdom  between  1962  and  1973  and  the  acceptance  by  the
    Secretary of State that the Appellant had acquired  settled  status  by
    the time of his departure in 1973.  The Judge was clearly alert to  the
    historical circumstances.  Similarly the Judge was clearly alert to the
    missed opportunity of seeking to make an application under 276B  in  or
    about 2005 at a time both when the currently worded  sub-paragraph  (v)
    was not in force and would therefore not have operated to  defeat  such
    an application, and the Appellant was in any event lawfully present  in
    the UK.

18.  A number of matters were advanced on behalf  of  the  Appellant  before
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  respect  of  the  circumstances  and
    quality of his private and family life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Judge rehearses all such matters at paragraph 55 of the  determination.
    Mr Al-Rashid, who appeared before the First-tier Tribunal, acknowledges
    that paragraph 55 represents an accurate and complete  summary  of  the
    matters advanced on the Appellant's behalf.  In  the  circumstances  it
    seems to me impossible to contend that the Judge was not fully alert to
    all  matters  that  the  Appellant  wished  to   rely   upon   in   the
    proportionality balance.

19.  What is clear on the face  of  the  determination  is  that  the  Judge
    considered certain aspects of the recent immigration history to be such
    that the imperative of maintaining effective immigration control as  an
    aspect of public interest  outweighed  the  positive  features  of  the
    Appellant's private and family life.  This was an  evaluation  open  to
    him on the findings of fact that he made, findings which in  themselves
    are not the subject of any dispute in the proceedings before me.

20.  I note in particular that the Judge expressed criticisms in respect  of
    aspects of the Appellant's recent applications at paragraphs 47 and  48
    of the determination.  Those paragraphs are in the following terms:

         "47. He then of course lived in Nigeria for more than thirty  years
             before returning with his wife I think on one short visit  and
             then in 2005 returning for good.  He  had  of  course  arrived
             with a visit visa which imported an obligation to return  home
             to Nigeria but the couple did not do that but instead made  an
             application to remain as dependants of their daughter  and  at
             the time would have had to meet the requirements of  paragraph
             317 of HC 395.  Both the  (part  available)  determination  of
             Immigration Judge Davda promulgated on 20 March 2006 and  that
             of Senior Immigration Judge Gill promulgated on 12 April  2007
             made interesting reading; a number of different  matters  were
             raised during the course of those hearings and explained quite
             a bit about the situation in the period between 2005 and 2007.
              The Tribunal did I think have some  difficulty  in  accepting
             that the final arrival in the United Kingdom was not with  the
             intention of staying, but  in  fairness  the  appellants  were
             entitled to make the application that  they  did  and  it  was
             considered on its merits; it failed specifically on the  issue
             of previous financial support for the couple  in  Nigeria  and
             that really should have  been  the  end  of  the  matter;  the
             appellants should simply have returned home.


         48.  They did not do so and  there  was  some  rather  unconvincing
             evidence before me about what happened.   The  suggestion  was
             that for a further period of years the family did not  realise
             that the couple should have gone home  even  though  they  all
             knew the appeals had failed.  I formed the impression that the
             children were intelligent and holding down good employment and
             I have to say that I rather felt the result of the appeal  was
             simply not the one the family wanted and that even  if  simply
             passively, the decision was  eventually  made  to  do  nothing
             until the respondent took any steps to remove them.  Of course
             as in so many cases this never happened and so the family went
             on living happily together with grandchildren growing  up  and
             no doubt with the grandparents becoming  ever  more  dependent
             both financially and in practical terms until of course  sadly
             Mrs Banjo passed away."

21.   The  element  of  remaining  notwithstanding  an  adverse  immigration
    decision is  factored  into  later  considerations  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge which I will come to in due course.  For the  moment  it
    is to be noted that those passages just  quoted  indicate  the  Judge's
    careful consideration of the immigration history and  of  the  personal
    circumstances of the Appellant, including making express  note  of  the
    family  life  enjoyed  between  the   Appellant,   his   children   and
    grandchildren.  This is not a case where it can be said that the  Judge
    was not alert to any of the positive features of the  Appellant's  case
    that were being advanced on his behalf.

22.  At paragraph 49 the Judge has made reference to the missed  opportunity
    of making an application in 2005 and acknowledges that "it is one  more
    matter to simply bring into account when considering Article 8".

23.  At paragraph 53 the Judge again makes  reference  to  the  circumstance
    that "[t]he appellant should have returned home when he  was  still  in
    his middle sixties" following the rejection of  the  application  under
    paragraph  317.   This  is  further  echoed  at  paragraph  54  of  the
    determination where the  Judge  states:  "It  should  not  improve  the
    position of the appellant today to simply say that  he  has  overstayed
    for many years and is now 77 and in a much weaker position overall  and
    should be allowed to stay  on  that  basis;  it  was  argued  that  the
    requirements of immigration control must prevail."

24.  I have already made reference to paragraph 55  in  which  the  positive
    features advanced on behalf of  the  Appellant  are  set  out.   In  my
    judgment the inclusion of this paragraph in the  determination  clearly
    indicates that the  Judge  gave  full  recognition  to  those  positive
    features of the Appellant's case.  That particular paragraph  concludes
    with the sentence "All of these factors  would  make  his  removal  now
    disproportionate under Article 8(2)".   Mr Al-Rashid  has  seized  upon
    this sentence as indicating that the  Judge  appears  to  be  making  a
    favourable finding on proportionality and underscores this  observation
    by reference to Judge Simpson's comments at paragraph 3(d) of the grant
    of permission to appeal.

25.  Ms Kenny makes the submission that the final sentence at  paragraph  55
    is no more than a recitation of the submissions made by  Mr  Al-Rashid,
    the opening sentence of the paragraph making it clear that the judge is
    having regard to those submissions within that paragraph.  I accept  Ms
    Kenny's submission.  Even if this were not the case, in the alternative
    it seems to me that  the  final  sentence  of  paragraph  55  can  only
    sensibly be  read  as  indicating  favourable  factors  to  go  into  a
    proportionality balance and cannot sensibly be read as a conclusion  on
    the case inconsistent with the subsequently stated  conclusion  in  the
    following paragraphs and in the section of the determination under  the
    heading "Decision".

26.  The history of the Appellant overstaying and remaining  notwithstanding
    an adverse immigration decision is again referenced at paragraph 57  of
    the determination.

27.  The Judge then reaches his conclusion at paragraph 58 in these terms:

         "For these reasons (and giving full weight to all the matters urged
         on his behalf) I find his  removal  to  be  entirely  proportionate
         under Article 8(2) in the overall interests of immigration  control
         and  the  general  interests  of  others  (including  for   example
         inevitable future use of the national health service)."


28.  At paragraph 59 of the determination the Judge goes on to consider  the
    circumstances if the Appellant were to seek  to  avail  himself  of  an
    application to return as a dependent relative, but emphasises that  the
    Appellant "cannot be permitted... in  effect  to  simply  bypass  these
    requirements"  of  immigration  control  by  remaining  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

29.  In my judgment the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is  clear
    and adequate.

30.  I reach the conclusion that the Appellant has not identified any  error
    of  law  in  the  approach  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,   but
    understandably disagrees with the outcome.  This is not  a  basis  upon
    which I am able to  interfere  with  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  The Judge has come to an evaluation open to him on the
    evidence  and  adequately  and  clearly   reasoned.    In   all   those
    circumstances I find no error of law.  The decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stands.  The appeal of the Appellant is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

31.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
stands.

32.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.



The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the hearing on 6 January 2015.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis   Dated: 14 January 2015
