
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: IA/04488/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at: Birmingham
Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On: 7th March 2018
 On 16th April 2018
|                                             |                            |
|                                             |                            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     EO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Howard, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria.  She appealed to this Tribunal,
    with permission, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge
    J.W.H Law) to dismiss her human rights  appeal,  at  that  stage  still
    linked  to  the  appeals  of  her  husband  and  two   minor   children
    (IA/04499/2015, IA/04508/2015 and IA/04483/2015).


 2. In a written decision dated the 6th July 2017 I found that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in its approach to s117B(6) of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and to  that  limited  extent  set  the
    decision aside.   I upheld the reasoning  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    when it rejected the Appellant's case under 276ADE(1)(vi): she had  not
    demonstrated  that  there  were  "very  significant  obstacles  to  her
    integration" in Nigeria and  there  was  no  error  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's approach to that issue.


 3. The linked appeals were adjourned for re-making. In my 'error  of  law'
    decision I noted that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  unchallenged
    findings of fact in respect of the length of time  that  the  Appellant
    and her husband had spent in the UK.  It  was  accepted  that  in  both
    cases, the appellant had entered the UK sometime during  1997  and  had
    remained here continuously ever since. In the case of  the  Appellant's
    husband 'AMMO', there was a precise date of entry: the 10th  May  1997.
    It was no doubt for that reason that the directions I gave in  July  of
    last year focused on his position:


         "I note the unchallenged finding of fact by the First-tier Tribunal
         that both adults have  lived  in  this  country  since  1997.  [The
         Appellant's husband AMMO] gives his precise date of arrival as 10th
         May 1997. It appears to me that absent any 'suitability' issues  he
         prima facie now qualifies for leave to remain under  the  terms  of
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the rules:


         "(iii) has lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  20  years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment);"


         I direct that the  Respondent  now  give  urgent  consideration  to
         whether AMMO should now be given leave to remain pursuant  to  this
         provision, taking into account the terms of paragraph 276A0 of  the
         Rules:
         276A0. For the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1) the requirement to
         make a valid application will not apply when the Article 8 claim is
         raised:
         (i) as part of an asylum claim, or as part of a further submission
         in person after an asylum claim has been refused;
         (ii) where a migrant is in immigration detention. A migrant in
         immigration detention or their representative must submit any
         application or claim raising Article 8 to a prison officer, a
         prisoner custody officer, a detainee custody officer or a member of
         Home Office staff at the migrant's place of detention; or
         (iii) in an appeal (subject to the consent of the Secretary of
         State where applicable).
         The Respondent is to advise the Tribunal in writing no  later  than
         4pm on the 4th August 2017 as to whether leave to remain is  to  be
         granted to AMMO on  the  basis  of  the  long  residence  provision
         currently in the rules at paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).


         The Appellants will have until 4pm  on  the  11th  August  2017  to
         advise whether they wish to pursue this appeal.


         Liberty to apply.


         Subject to the responses to my directions the matter  will  be  set
         down for rehearing in Birmingham on the  first  available  date  in
         September 2017.


 4. Regrettably that timetable was unduly optimistic on my part, since  for
    reasons unknown the Tribunal administration did not send my decision to
    the parties until the 15th August 2017 and the appeal was not re-listed
    until the 7th March 2018.


 5. The Secretary of State's response to my directions was set  out  in  an
    email from SPO Mr Mills on the 13th September  2017.  The  contents  of
    that email can be summarised thus:


   i) The Respondent does not accept that either  of  the  adult  Appellants
      should  now  be  given  leave  to  remain  in   light   of   paragraph
      276ADE(1)(iii);


  ii) The rule requires the applicant to have accrued 20 years residence  at
      the date of application. Notwithstanding what 276AO might  suggest  to
      the contrary, this requirement of the rule must be complied  with.  If
      the adult Appellants in this case wish  to  avail  themselves  of  the
      'long residence' provision in 276ADE(1)(iii) they need to  make  fresh
      applications;


 iii) In any case AMMO may  not  be  granted  leave  to  remain  under  that
      provision because he  has  two  criminal  convictions  such  that  the
      'suitability'  requirements  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(i)  would  be
      engaged.


                 Sub-section (i) requires that the applicant "does not  fall
                 for refusal under any of the grounds in section  S-LTR  1.2
                 to S-LTR 2.3 and S-LTR 3.1".


                 S-LTR 1.6 states that an application will be refused where:


                   "The  presence  of  the  applicant  in  the  UK  is  not
                   conducive to  the  public  good  because  their  conduct
                   (including convictions which  do  not  fall  within  the
                   paragraphs S-LTR 1.3 to 1.5) character of  associations,
                   or other reasons, make it undesirable to allow  them  to
                   remain in the UK"


                 AMMO was convicted on the 9th  April  2010  of  an  offence
                 under the Fraud Act 2006  and  received  a  sentence  of  6
                 months in prison. On the 27th March 2012 he  was  convicted
                 of an offence under the Identity  Documents  Act  2010  and
                 received a  further  custodial  sentence  of  6  months  in
                 prison.


  iv) Mr Mills was of the view that these convictions, coupled  with  AMMO's
      "very  poor  immigration  history",  would  mean  that   leave   under
      276ADE(1)(iii) may well be refused.


 6. This response from Mr  Mills  put  the  Appellant's  representative  Mr
    Howard in some difficulty. He had hitherto been  under  the  impression
    that the Respondent accepted that the 'suitability'  requirements  were
    met. He had not had an opportunity to take instructions on the  alleged
    criminality of the Appellant's husband. For that reason  I  decided  to
    adjourn the proceedings in respect of AMMO and the children, since  the
    criminal convictions had a relevance  not  just  to  his  prospects  of
    success under the Rules, but to the question of  whether  it  would  be
    'reasonable' to expect the children to leave the UK.  This  would  give
    Mr Howard an opportunity to address this new forensic challenge.


 7. In respect of the Appellant, however, I was not  satisfied  that  there
    was any further need to adjourn her case. At the date  of  the  hearing
    she had, on the unchallenged findings made by the First-tier  Tribunal,
    lived continuously in the UK for more than twenty years. The Respondent
    had expressly accepted, in her letter of the 13th January 2015 that the
    'suitability requirements'  of  the  Rules  were  met.   The  Appellant
    therefore prima facie met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).


 8. Mr Mills accepted that as a matter of fact that was so, but urged me to
    consider the temporal requirement contained in the opening  section  of
    the rule:
         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
         date of application, the applicant:
   i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-LTR
      1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5. in Appendix FM; and


  ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the grounds of
      private life in the UK; an


 iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years (discounting
      any period of imprisonment)


              ....
 9. Since the Appellant had made her application for  leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds in February 2012 she could not,  at  the  date  of
    application, have demonstrated 20 years residence. It was the Secretary
    of State's position that in  order  to  benefit  from  this  rule,  the
    Appellant would need to make a new application.


    Discussion and Findings


10. There is, as far as I am aware, no material difference to the Appellant
    whether  her  appeal   is   allowed   with   reference   to   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii) or on Article 8 grounds 'outside of the rules'.   Either
    way, confirmed Mr Mills, she  would  be  on  the  'ten  year  route  to
    settlement'.  I am however satisfied that the appeal could  be  allowed
    either way.


11. As I indicated in my earlier directions it seems to me that  under  the
    terms of paragraph 276AO it is open to  the  Tribunal,  on  appeal,  to
    dispense with the requirement that a formal application is made:
         276AO. For the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1) the requirement to
         make a valid application will not apply when the Article 8 claim is
         raised:
         (i) as part of an asylum claim, or as part of a further submission
         in person after an asylum claim has been refused;
         (ii) where a migrant is in immigration detention. A migrant in
         immigration detention or their representative must submit any
         application or claim raising Article 8 to a prison officer, a
         prisoner custody officer, a detainee custody officer or a member of
         Home Office staff at the migrant's place of detention; or
         (iii) in an appeal (subject to the consent of the Secretary of
         State where applicable).
12. Mr Mills argued forcefully that this provision did  not  apply  to  the
    temporal requirement in the opening  section  of  paragraph  276ADE(1);
    rather it only had the effect of removing the formal requirement at sub-
    paragraph (ii). What the point of that might  be  it  is  difficult  to
    discern.  It would mean that 276AO expressly removes the requirement to
    make an application in the  context  of  276ADE(1)(ii)  but  implicitly
    preserves that requirement in respect  of  the  Rule  overall.   If  an
    Article 8 claim such as this is only being 'raised' in the  context  of
    an appeal it would ordinarily be the case that it could not  have  been
    'raised' in the earlier application. If  Mr  Mills  is  correct  it  is
    difficult to see in  what  circumstances  rule  276AO  might  have  any
    utility at all.


13. The more straightforward way of  interpreting  the  provision  is  that
    where on appeal the case has developed so that a prima facie Article  8
    claim is now made out,    that is a  matter  that  can  be  taken  into
    consideration.  That is consistent with the 'one-stop' approach to  the
    appellate system.  It is  also  consistent  with  the  wording  in  the
    amended version of s85 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002:


           Section 85


         (1)      An appeal under section 82(1) against the  decision  shall
             be treated by the Tribunal as including an appeal against  any
             decision in respect of which the  appellant  has  a  right  of
             appeal under section 82(1).


         (2)      If an appellant under  section  82(1)  makes  a  statement
             under section 120, the  Tribunal  shall  consider  any  matter
             raised in a statement which constitutes a ground of appeal  of
             a kind listed in section 84 the decision appealed against.


         (3)      Subsection (2) applies to a statement made  under  section
             120 whether the statement was made before or after the  appeal
             was commenced.


         (4)      On an appeal under section 82(1) against  a  decision  the
             Tribunal may consider any matter which it thinks  relevant  to
             the substance of the  decision,  including  a  matter  arising
             after the date of decision.


         (5)      But the Tribunal must not consider a new matter unless the
             Secretary of Status has given the Tribunal consent to do so.


         (6)      A matter is a "new matter" if -


         (a)      it constitutes a ground of appeal  of  a  kind  listed  in
             section 84, and
         (b)      the Secretary of State has not previously  considered  the
             matter in the context of -


             (i) the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or
             (ii) a statement made by the appellant under section 120.

14. If the words in parenthesis at paragraph  276AO(iii)  "subject  to  the
    consent of the  Secretary  of  State  where  applicable"  are  read  in
    conjunction with section 85(5) the scheme becomes clear.  The  Tribunal
    is able to approach human rights appeals in a  holistic  and  pragmatic
    fashion, saving the need for the multiple applications,  considerations
    and possible appeals that the  'one-stop'  procedure  was  designed  to
    avoid,  whilst  the  Secretary  of  State   is   protected   from   the
    unanticipated appellate ambush.


15. The question therefore arises: is the fact that the Appellant  has  now
    accrued her twenty years a 'new matter' such that the  consent  of  the
    Secretary of State is required before it can be considered?  In  Mahmud
    (s85 NIAA 2002 - 'new matters') [2017] UKUT 488 (IAC) the Tribunal gave
    guidance on what might be considered a 'new matter' under the  statute,
    and found itself broadly in  agreement  with  the  Respondent's  stated
    policy position:



          1. Whether something is or is not a  'new  matter'  goes  to  the
             jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal in the appeal and  the
             First-tier Tribunal must therefore determine  for  itself  the
             issue.

          2. A 'new matter' is a  matter  which  constitutes  a  ground  of
             appeal of a kind listed in section 84, as required by  section
             85(6)(a) of the 2002 Act.  Constituting  a  ground  of  appeal
             means that it must contain  a  matter  which  could  raise  or
             establish a listed ground of appeal.  A matter is the  factual
             substance of a claim.  A ground of appeal is the  legal  basis
             on which the facts in any given matter could form the basis of
             a challenge to the decision under appeal.

          3. In practice, a new matter is a factual matrix  which  has  not
             previously been considered by the Secretary of  State  in  the
             context of the decision in section 82(1) or a  statement  made
             by the appellant under section 120.  This requires the  matter
             to be factually distinct from that  previously  raised  by  an
             appellant, as opposed to further  or  better  evidence  of  an
             existing  matter.   The  assessment  will   always   be   fact
             sensitive.


16. Mr Mills very realistically conceded that it  would  be  difficult,  in
    these circumstances, to argue that the additional  time  accrued  could
    amount to a 'new matter'. The original claim was on the  basis  of  the
    'long residence' provisions; that matter has now been considered  twice
    by the Secretary of State; the long residence was  now  a  bit  longer;
    that did not amount to a new factual matrix.


17. Drawing all of this together I find that paragraph 276AO enables me  to
    consider,  in  the  context  of  this  appeal,  whether  the  Appellant
    qualifies for leave under 276ADE(1).   On the facts  as  found  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal, she plainly does.  I  allow  her  appeal  on  that
    basis.


18. In the alternative I allow her appeal on Article 8  grounds.  If  I  am
    wrong about the operation  on  276AO  the  fact  that  the  substantive
    requirements of 276ADE(1) are today met effectively removes the  public
    interest in maintaining the refusal. The Appellant qualifies for  leave
    to remain under the Rules and so the  public  interest  in  maintaining
    immigration control expressly protected at s117B(1)  of  the  2002  Act
    cannot logically weigh against her.




    Decision


19. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.










                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             10th April 2018






