
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/04424/2014
     IA/04430/2014
     IA/04436/2014
     IA/04440/2014
     IA/04449/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 December 2014                           |On 26 January 2015            |
|Prepared 6 January 2015                       |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                      JOYCE ERETATYE IBRAHIM LAGUNDOYE
                    FUNMILOLA OLUWAFUMI IBRAHIM LAGUNDOYE
                         OLUWATOBI IBRAHIM LAGUNDOYE
                      KOLAWOLE IDRIS IBRAHIM LAGUNDOYE
                           JIMOH IBRAHIM LAGUNDOYE

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss R Rhind, IR Immigration Law LLP
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The principal appellant, to whom I will refer as "the appellant", is  a
    citizen of Nigeria. She appeals, with permission, against a decision of
    Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Edwards  who,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 18  September  2014,  dismissed  her  appeal  against  a
    decision made on 7 January 2014 to remove her to Nigeria and to  refuse
    leave to remain on Article 8 grounds.  The  other  appellants  are  her
    children.

2.   It is of note that the judge had found that the appellant did not  have
    an in country right of appeal.

3.   The appellant appealed on the basis that she  had  had  an  in  country
    right of because  she had been served with forms   IS151A  and  IS151B,
    which was an immigration decision which carried an in country right  of
    appeal,  and therefore the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  jurisdiction
    to hear her appeal. The other appellants had been served with forms  IS
    151A only and the fact that different  decisions  had  been  made  with
    regard  to  the  appellant's  children  was  irrational  as  they  were
    dependants  on  their  application.  Requests  had  been  made  to  the
    respondent to remake the decision but that had not  happened.   It  was
    alleged that the judge had formed an adverse view  of  the  appellant's
    case that had tainted his view of her appeal and he was wrong  to  find
    that she did  not  have  a  family  or  private  life  which  would  be
    interfered with by her removal.  It was also claimed that the judge had
    failed to have regard to the totality of  the  evidence  regarding  the
    appellant's family which included the fact that the appellant's son had
    had a serious injury requiring treatment over a  period  of  two  years
    which had prevented him leaving Britain  and  that  the  children  were
    settled in their schools here and there have been  considerable  delays
    in the appeals being heard.

4.   It was stated that the judge had failed to  have  regard  to  the  fact
    that the appellant only sought leave to remain "until her  husband  had
    completed his undergraduate degree - which would be  in  January  2015.
    He failed to have regard to whether it would be proportionate as at the
    time of the appeal of 12 September 2014 for the  respondent's  decision
    to be upheld".

5.   It was claimed there was no  proper  consideration  of  the  Article  8
    rights of the appellant.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Ransley who stated that it was arguable that  although  the  judge  had
    found that the appellant  did  not  have  a  right  of  appeal  it  was
    irrational for him to have gone on to consider it. Moreover, permission
    to appeal was granted on  the  basis  that  the  judge  had  not  given
    sufficient reasons for finding that the appellant  was  not  exercising
    private and family life in Britain.

7.   Judge Edwards in paragraph 3  of  the  determination  stated  that  the
    appellant had arrived in Britain with a multiple entry visit visa valid
    until 21 June 2010 on 27 December 2009.  She had  been  issued  with  a
    further multi-entry visit visa valid from 20 April 2011 until 20  April
    2013 and had then made three visits to Britain as  a  consequence,  the
    last being on 15 September 2012.

8.   On 26 January 2014 she had made an application for leave as  a  Tier  4
    partner but that been  refused. The judge went on to say that between 3
    April 2009 and 2 February 2011 three unsuccessful attempts to apply for
    leave to remain under Article 8 had been  made before on 18 April  2013
    making the application which led to the appeal before him.

9.   With regard to the issue of whether or not  he  had  jurisdiction,  the
    judge stated in paragraph 7 that First-tier Judge Law sitting as a duty
    judge had found there was no right to an in country right of appeal  by
    the children and by the appellant and had dismissed all  their  appeals
    on  26  February  2014  for  want  of  jurisdiction.   He  stated  that
    "Unfortunately, it appears that while the determinations in respect  of
    the children were served that in respect of this appellant was not, for
    some unknown reason".  He went on to say that Miss Rhind had sought  to
    persuade him that Judge Law had been in error and the children did have
    a right of appeal and that he should join them in the  current  hearing
    but that he had refused to do so as there was  nothing  before  him  to
    show that Judge  Law's  decision  had  been  overturned  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the High Court and he was not prepared or indeed  able  to
    act as an appeal Tribunal from Judge Law. He said therefore that he was
    left with the decision that there was no valid appeal for the  children
    but in any event decided to consider the evidence before him to see  if
    any appeal should have succeeded or not.

10.  He pointed out that the appellant could not  succeed   under  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules and in the section headed "The Law - Human  Rights"
    he stated that he was concerned with the  foreseeable  consequences  of
    the  refusal  of  leave  to  remain   where   there   were   compelling
    circumstances that justified a grant of leave outside the Rules.

11.  He noted the appellant's immigration history and the reasons given  for
    the application for the extension of  stay.  He  also  noted  that  the
    appellant's eldest child, Jimoh, had sustained a  serious  knee  injury
    which had required three operations  but  noted  that  the  appellant's
    general practitioner had stated that Jimoh had made a full recovery and
    that no further problems were anticipated.

12.  In paragraph 21 he stated that the evidence placed before him  was  not
    at all impressive  and  there  had  been  nothing  to  show  that  this
    appellant could not cope alone while her husband was  away  from  home.
    He said there was nothing exceptional about the case and  that  nothing
    turned on the injury to Jimoh.  He concluded that the  appellant  could
    not succeed under the Rules and there was nothing to justify the  grant
    of leave to remain outside the Rules.

13.  In her submissions to me Miss Rhind referred to form IS151A  which  had
    been served on all the children and pointed out that the  form  IS151B,
    the forms for the children, stated that they  had  a  right  of  appeal
    after removal from the  United  Kingdom.   With  regard  to  the  first
    appellant, form IS151B stated that she had  a  right  of  appeal  under
    section 82(1) and which stated that if she had a right  of  appeal  she
    would not have to leave Britain while the appeal was in progress.   She
    stated that the refusals related back to  an  application  made  on  18
    April 2013 and that at that time the appellant still had a  valid  visa
    and that they had been given leave to  enter.   She  claimed  therefore
    there was jurisdiction for the Tribunal to deal with appeals in country
    and that it was not for the Upper Tribunal to  decide  whether  or  not
    there was a right of appeal - that was a decision for the Secretary  of
    State.  She pointed out that the Rule 24 statement lodged on behalf  of
    the respondent did not challenge the jurisdiction point.  Moreover  she
    argued that the judge had erred in not considering the  rights  of  the
    children and that that  decision  was  irrational.  She  accepted  that
    applications had been  made for the appellants  to  remain  as  Tier  4
    dependants in December 2012 and January 2013 and that  those  had  been
    refused without a right of appeal but  stated  that  thereafter   human
    rights application was made the refusal  of  which  should  engender  a
    right of appeal.

14.  I note the terms of the letter of 8 January 2014 to IR Immigration  Law
    LLP which referred to the first appellant's  application.   The  letter
    states:

         "1.  Thank you for your letter of 28/05/2013 in which  you  request
             that your client's case is  reconsidered  under  the  European
             Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).  A response was sent to you
             on 03/01/14 explaining that reconsideration wasn't possible as
             the policy on reconsiderations has changed as  of  12/11/2012.
             Therefore a new human rights decision has been considered with
             the information already provided."

15.   Thereafter  the  writer  of  the  letter  set  out   the   appellant's
    immigration history including the fact that an application for leave to
    remain on human rights grounds had been made and refused on 18 May 2013
    with  no  right  of  appeal.    Having   considered   the   appellant's
    circumstances under the Rules including EX1 of Appendix  FM   and  Rule
    276ADE the respondent concluded that the appellant did not qualify  for
    leave to remain on Article 8 grounds.

16.  The letter, however, went on to state

         "Your client has now been served form IS15A on 07/01/2014 informing
         your client of her immigration status and  liability  to  detention
         and removal.  Your client may appeal against the decision to refuse
         her human rights application under Section 82 of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on the basis that one  or  more  of
         the grounds of appeal  contained  within  the  notice  of  decision
         IS151B attached. Your client is entitled to remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom whilst the appeal is pending."

17.  The first appellant was served with form IS15A  parts  1  and  2  which
    refer to a right of appeal on the basis that the decision was  unlawful
    because it was incompatible with her rights under the ECHR.

18.  Judge Law found Section 92(4) which refers to  a  right  of  appeal  on
    human rights grounds did not apply because the appellant had not proved
    that her asylum  or  human  rights  claim  had  been  made  before  the
    respondent's decision to remove.  He referred to the  determination  in
    Nirula [2012] EWCA Civ 1436.  He stated therefore he found  that  there
    was no valid appeal before the Tribunal. For the reasons given below  I
    consider that the appellant did have a right of appeal and, indeed, the
    respondent has never argued that she did not.

19.  I have considered the documents  before  me.  The  notice  of  decision
    served on the  appellant makes it clear  that  the  decision  was  made
    under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. It stated that
    she has a right of appeal under Section  82  (1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and asylum Act 2002  and refers to  subsections  82(2)  (h)
    (g). It is on that basis that the appellant has an in country right  of
    appeal under Section 92 (2) of that Act - the decision is one to  which
    section 82 (2) (g) applies.

21.  However, there is no  indication  that  such  decisions  were  made  in
    respect of the other appellants.  They  are,  of  course,  clearly  the
    dependents of their mother and as such their right under Article  8  of
    the ECHR are relevant in this appeal.

22.   The Senior Presenting Officer who drafted the Rule 24  notice  invited
    the Tribunal to  determine the appeal with a fresh  oral  hearing   "to
    consider whether the appellant's human rights claim  under  Section  92
    NIAA 2002" (sic).

23.   I consider that the Judge erred when he stated that the appellant  did
    not have an in-country right of appeal and that he did not consider the
    appellant's  human  rights  claim  in  sufficient  detail:  these  were
    material errors of law. I therefore set aside the determination of  the
    Judge of the First-tier tribunal.  Moreover,  I  consider  that  it  is
    appropriate to remit this appeal for a fresh hearing in the  First-tier
    as I consider that the terms  of  the  Senior  President  of  Tribunals
    Practice Directions are met.

24.   I have therefore found that the appellant has an in-country  right  of
    appeal but her children do not. However, in effect that  is  of  little
    importance as their rights are inextricably linked with  those  of  the
    appellant and will have to be considered    at the fresh hearing.






  Notice of Decision
The appeal is allowed the extent that  it  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
tribunal for a hearing afresh on Article 8 grounds.



Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy





































