
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/04299/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 October 2015                   |On 29 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                THOMAS WAMBUA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss L Beats, of Bruce Short, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya, born  on  22  December  1984.   He
    applied on 29 September 2014 for leave to remain in the UK on the basis
    of his family and private life.

 2. A letter by the respondent dated 14  January  2015  explains  why  that
    application  is  refused  in  terms  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    respondent's decision in that  respect  is  not  in  dispute.   Further
    proceedings are taken only under Article 8 of  the  ECHR,  outside  the
    Rules.

 3. The refusal letter acknowledges that the appellant has a child  aged  3
    who has lived in the UK  all  her  life.   The  child  lives  with  the
    appellant's former partner, a citizen  of  the  Czech  Republic.   (The
    child is not a citizen of the UK, and is not a "qualifying  child"  for
    purposes of part 5A of the 2002 Act.)   The  refusal  letter  considers
    whether there are exceptional circumstances  which  might  require  the
    grant of leave outside the Rules, but finds none, because the appellant
    would be going to Kenya with the child.

 4.  The  respondent  did  not  maintain  that  reason  for  refusing   the
    application in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  possibility  was  not
    canvassed there.  It was agreed in the UT that the case  has  proceeded
    throughout  on  the  mutual  assumption  that  there  is  no  realistic
    likelihood of the appellant and his child moving together to Kenya.  It
    has not been suggested that he has ever contemplated that course.

 5.  The  facts  which  emerged  in  the  FtT  were  that  the  appellant's
    relationship with the mother of the child  broke  down  some  6  months
    after the child was born.  However, contact is maintained on  a  weekly
    or fortnightly basis by informal agreement (not in terms of any written
    arrangement or after resort to the  courts).   The  child's  mother  is
    married to a Gambian national, and expecting his child.

 6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie dismissed the appellant's appeal by
    determination promulgated on 21 May 2015.

 7. The appellant has permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
    grounds that the First-tier Tribunal erred:

      1. At paragraph 30 when assessing the best interests of the child:

          i) In assessing the best interests of the child the FTT has erred
             in law by failing to exercise anxious scrutiny, in  particular
             by placing reliance  on  the  appellant's  ex-partner's  newly
             established family unit with her  husband  and  unborn  child.
             There was no evidence led at the hearing from Miss  Kadlecova,
             as she was not in attendance, although a statement was lodged.
              Further there was no evidence or statement in  evidence  from
             her husband, Lamin Gibba.  Therefore there was  no  assessment
             possible of the family relationship between the child,  Tiami,
             and her stepfather and therefore it was not open to the FTT to
             assume her best interests would be placed in this  environment
             when no evidence was led in  relation  to  this.   Further  no
             assessment was made of the impact on Tiami of the  removal  of
             her father given the current contact enjoyed.

         ii) ... the FTT erred in law  by  failing  to  conduct  a  careful
             appraisal of the child's circumstances and the extent to which
             her welfare would be better served by allowing  the  appellant
             to remain in this country, thereby making it possible for  the
             child to continue to develop a proper  relationship  with  her
             father who is actively involved with her upbringing.   It  was
             accepted by the FTT at  paragraph  30  that  he  was  actively
             involved through informal  contact.   The  FTT  did  not  give
             sufficient consideration to  what  was  in  the  child's  best
             interests or give her welfare  the  degree  of  importance  it
             ought to have received in terms of the impact the loss of  her
             father would have on her.

      2. The FTT has erred in law at paragraph 34:

          i) By failing to recognise that family life cannot  be  continued
             by the  occasional  visit,  email  or  skype  (see  Mansoor  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2011]  EWHC  832
             (Admin) at paragraph 16 per  Blake  J).   It  is  accepted  at
             paragraph 30 that the appellant is 'actively involved  in  her
             life through informal contact'.  ... the FTT erred in  law  by
             failing to assess the impact on the child's welfare of  direct
             contact becoming indirect contact.   Further  of  the  contact
             being sporadic compared to the current contact  which  it  was
             accepted takes place on an informal basis.

         ii) Further FTT  at  paragraph  34  states  that  contact  can  be
             maintained through electronic  communication  and  'occasional
             visits, perhaps annually'.  It goes on to state that FTT  were
             'satisfied her co-operation can be secured' to facilitate such
             visits.  ... the FTT erred in law as no evidence  was  led  on
             this point in Miss Kadlecova's statement and the only evidence
             available to the court, as detailed in paragraph 31, was  from
             the appellant who, when asked, advised the  court  he  had  on
             such assurance.  It is submitted  that  no  assessment,  apart
             from at paragraph 30, has been made of the impact of  removing
             her father on Tiami's  welfare  or  what  considerations  were
             taken account of.

      3. The FTT has erred in law at paragraph 35:

          i) The FTT erred by referring to the  appellant's  removal  as  a
             'fair balance between competing interests' and refers  to  the
             public interest in the maintenance of  a  fair  and  effective
             immigration policy.  ... those  competing  interests  are  not
             elaborated on or explained and that the  evidence  before  the
             FTT was that the  appellant  had  never  breached  Immigration
             Rules or overstayed on any of his previous student visas.  ...
             therefore it is not clear what those competing interests  were
             when there  was  no  adverse  immigration  history  and  clear
             evidence  of  a  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  his
             daughter.

      4. The FTT has erred at paragraph 33:

          i) By finding that the  status  of  Miss  Kadlecova  is  unclear.
             There was  evidence  submitted  in  the  Second  Inventory  of
             Productions lodged with the court in the form of  payslips  of
             her previous employment and a letter  confirming  her  current
             employment (At D of Second  Inventory  of  Productions).   ...
             these documents illustrated she was exercising  Treaty  rights
             as a worker in terms of the EEA Regulations 2006 and therefore
             had the right to reside in the UK.

 8. On 4 August 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew  granted  permission,
    on the view that arguably insufficient consideration had been given  to
    the best interests of the child, bearing in mind  that  regular  direct
    contact would not continue.

 9. In a Rule 24 response the respondent says that the judge identified all
    relevant circumstances regarding the relationship  between  father  and
    daughter, noting that residence of mother and child was  contingent  on
    mother continuing to exercise her treaty rights in the  UK,  not  being
    settled here, and that it would be perverse for  the  appellant  to  be
    granted discretionary  leave  in  the  UK  outside  the  Rules  on  the
    precarious basis of his daughter's  and  her  mother's  residence,  the
    judge having noted that they are both nationals of the Czech  Republic.



10. In submissions Miss Beats said that the judge  went  wrong  in  finding
    that the child's best interests would be served in the new family unit,
    when there had been no oral evidence from the mother,  only  a  written
    statement, and no evidence at all  from  her  husband.   There  was  no
    reason to assume that the  situation  would  be  in  the  child's  best
    interests.  It was accepted that the appellant has regular contact.  No
    consideration was given to the replacement of  ongoing  direct  contact
    with a relationship which would be indirect and  sporadic.   There  had
    been no evidence that the child's mother would co-operate in respect of
    the child visiting Kenya.

11. I observed that the determination was not  specific  about  whether  it
    contemplated that contact would be by way of the child visiting  Kenya,
    or only by the way of the appellant travelling to the UK.   The  latter
    seemed to be the more realistic possibility.

12. Miss Beats further submitted  that  there  had  been  evidence  of  the
    child's mother being in employment, i.e. that she was exercising treaty
    rights at the time of the hearing, and that she had lived here for some
    years.  Rather than  the  position  being  unclear,  the  gist  of  the
    evidence was that mother and child were likely to  remain  in  the  UK.
    Based on  the  best  interests  of  the  child  in  having  an  ongoing
    relationship with the appellant, the determination should be  reversed.



13. Mrs O'Brien relied upon the Rule 24 response.   She  pointed  out  that
    everyone concerned in the case (appellant, child, child's  mother,  her
    husband) lacks settled status in the UK.  The evidence was not there to
    show that the child's mother has consistently exercised  treaty  rights
    or that she could expect to be able to remain in the UK in  the  longer
    term.  There was no evidence that she had obtained a residence card  or
    that her husband was likely to be able to remain.  Given the paucity of
    evidence, the judge was not wrong to find the  position  unclear.   The
    judge plainly knew that the child was currently living with her mother,
    who has always been her primary carer, and with her husband.  There was
    nothing irrational in  inferring  that  the  situation  was  likely  to
    continue and was in the child's best interests.  There was  nothing  to
    suggest  to  the  contrary.   The  realistic  outcome  was   that   the
    appellant's departure from the UK would result in weekly or fortnightly
    contact being replaced by contact on perhaps an annual basis.

14. Mrs O'Brien accepted my observation that there is a presumption that it
    is in the best interests of a child to have ongoing contact  with  both
    parents, and that regular and direct contact must  be  presumed  to  be
    more  beneficial  than  contact  which  is  mainly  indirect  and  only
    intermittently direct.  She said that the judge sensibly found that the
    appellant, who is well educated, would be able to afford to  return  to
    the UK to engage in contact.  Finally, she submitted that although this
    may not have been a case with only one possible outcome, there  was  no
    error in the judge's assessment of the proportionality balance.

15. In reply, Miss Beats submitted that the child's mother had been in  and
    out of employment but at the hearing she was employed again  and  there
    was nothing to suggest  that  would  not  continue,  although  she  was
    pregnant.  The evidence was also that she and her partner  had  applied
    for residence cards.  The judge carried out no  real  consideration  of
    the impact on the child of reduced contact.  Miss Beats  also  accepted
    that this was not a case with only one possible outcome, but maintained
    her submission that the  judge's  assessment  was  legally  flawed  and
    should be reversed.

16. I reserved my determination.

17. Another judge might have inferred that mother and  child,  more  likely
    than not, would continue to reside in the UK.  However, their status is
    precarious rather than assured, which would have had to be  taken  into
    account.  The point in my view was finely balanced.  There is no  legal
    error in the finding that it is unclear whether the child's mother will
    be able to satisfy the provisions  of  the  regulations  on  which  her
    status is contingent.

18. It was for the appellant to place before the tribunal the  evidence  to
    support any findings he sought.  The judge had to reach his  assessment
    on the evidence he had.  On that evidence, there was nothing to suggest
    that the child's residence in a family unit with  her  mother  and  her
    mother's husband was in any way adverse to her  interests.   It  was  a
    situation accepted by the appellant and he has not suggested that there
    was anything at all wrong with it, or  that  it  should  not  continue,
    wherever he is to  reside.   This  aspect  of  the  grounds  is  rather
    fruitless.

19. The judge did not fall into an error of the type described in  Mansoor.
    He recorded the submission at paragraph 31 that indirect contact  would
    continue, and he accepted that such contact would be maintained, but he
    did not consider that to be the equivalent of direct contact.  The more
    important conclusion is that  he  held  that  occasional  visits  might
    continue, perhaps annually  and  that  the  child's  mother  would  co-
    operate.  On the state  of  the  evidence,  there  could  be  no  other
    reasonable inference than that she would co-operate with  such  contact
    in the UK.  The possibility of contact in Kenya was not explored in the
    First-tier Tribunal and it is clear enough that it is  the  possibility
    of contact in the UK which the judge had in mind.

20. The judge did not  have  to  say  anything  further  about  the  public
    interest in the maintenance of effective immigration control.  That  is
    well established by the case law, and confirmed by part 5A of the  2002
    Act, section 117B (1).

21. The best interests of a child are a  primary  but  not  an  over-riding
    consideration.  The appellant's departure from the  UK  would  diminish
    but not end direct contact between them.  There  was  nothing  to  show
    that there would be any seriously adverse effect upon her  if  she  saw
    less of her father to the extent the judge found.  The obvious  factors
    in the balance were on the one hand the public interest in  maintaining
    the Rules, and on the other diminished  but  not  extinguished  contact
    between father and child.  The determination makes it quite plain  that
    is what the judge had in  mind.   Particularly  given  the  immigration
    status of all parties, he was entitled to strike the balance as he did.

22. The appellant has failed to identify any error on a point of law  which
    might justify setting aside the determination.  It shall stand.

23. No anonymity order has been requested or made.




                    [pic]
                    Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                    15 October 2015


