
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04414/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th July 2016                     |On 19th August 2016                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           NICOLE JUANITA WILLIAMS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Seelhoff, A Seelhoff Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State in respect  of  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Metzer  who  allowed  the
    appeal brought by the Appellant in the First-tier Tribunal against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse to grant her further leave
    to remain in the United  Kingdom.   The  Respondent  is  a  citizen  of
    Dominica whose date of birth is recorded as 31st October 1982.

 2. The facts which presented to the judge in the First-tier Tribunal  were
    that the Respondent was pregnant and just about to give birth;  it  was
    imminent.  Her partner at the time  of  the  hearing,  and  indeed  the
    decision, had indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 3. Not content with the decision to allow the appeal, by Notice dated  1st
    February 2016 the Secretary of State made application for permission to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis that there was no  sufficient
    reason for the judge to look outside the Immigration Rules.

 4. On 27th June 2016 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Grimmett  granted
    permission having found that it was arguable that Judge Metzer may have
    erred in his assessment under Article 8 ECHR as it was said not  to  be
    arguably not  clear  why  the  circumstances  referred  to,  amount  to
    compelling circumstances.

 5. Judge Grimmett clearly had in mind the guidance in the case of Singh  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74 in  which
    the guidance in the case of Nagre was approved of.

 6. Mr Walker was very realistic in his submissions to me and  rightly  so.
    The effect of  the  British  Nationality  Act  1981  is  that  had  the
    Appellant been required to leave the  United  Kingdom  before  she  had
    given birth, the unborn child would not have been able to benefit  from
    the provisions of that legislation and would not have  been  a  British
    citizen.  It was also the case that the  Appellant  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was shortly to  give  birth.   Those  are  clear  facts  which
    presented and were in my judgement a sufficient basis for the judge  to
    look outside the Immigration Rules.  I say in passing  that  it  is  of
    course entirely a matter for the Secretary of State how  much  time  is
    granted to individuals who are successful on human rights grounds.  The
    judge was only concerned  with  the  legality  of  removal  but  in  my
    judgement there was nothing irrational or perverse about  the  decision
    made by the judge.  It  was  open  to  him  to  find  that  those  were
    compelling reasons and indeed I might have found them to be  so  myself
    were I seized of the matter in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 7. In the circumstances the appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

 8. No anonymity direction.

Signed                              Date 19 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
