
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04895/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 12th May 2014                                |On 15th May 2014           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                             MALIK MUDASSAR AZIZ
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  21st  June  1982.   He
    appeals with permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge Kamara) who dismissed his appeal against the decision of refusal
    by the Respondent to vary his leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant and also  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom.

 2. The Appellant was first granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as  a
    student on 23rd April 2005, valid until 31st July 2008.  He was further
    granted periods of leave as a student  until  30th  November  2009  and
    leave to remain was granted as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  until  1st
    October 2012.

 3. On 29th September 2012, the Appellant  applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant under the points-based  system  to
    continue his study towards  a  BA  (Hons)  in  Economics  and  Business
    Management at Newcastle University.  The application was refused by the
    Respondent under paragraph 245ZX(ha) of the Rules on the basis that the
    grant of entry clearance or leave to remain  to  undertake  studies  at
    degree level or above were limited to a maximum of  five  years  unless
    one of the exceptions applied.  The Respondent, in the refusal  letter,
    stated that none of the  exceptions  applied  but  the  Appellant  was,
    however, awarded 30 points for a CAS and  the  10  points  claimed  for
    funds.  There was no separate consideration given  to  the  Appellant's
    circumstances in relation to the decision made to remove him  from  the
    United Kingdom.

 4. The Appellant sought to appeal that decision and Grounds of Appeal were
    lodged on 11th February 2013.

 5. Thus the matter was listed before the First-tier Tribunal.   The  issue
    that I have had to decide in this appeal relates to what the  Appellant
    has described as a "procedural irregularity" at the time of the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing.  As the determination of Judge Kamara  reflects,
    at paragraph 6, when the matter came before him on the hearing date  of
    15th October 2013 the Appellant did not appear.   At  paragraph  6  the
    judge considered the case file and that the notice of hearing had  been
    sent and therefore decided to proceed with the case in the  absence  of
    the Appellant.  It appears that the Respondent  was  represented  by  a
    Presenting  Officer  who  made  submissions  and  the  judge  therefore
    determined the appeal in his absence in a determination promulgated  on
    16th October 2013 and dismissed his appeal.  In respect of the  removal
    decision he found that to  be  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and
    therefore allowed the appeal to that limited extent.  The  findings  in
    relation  to  the  Immigration  Rules  are  set  out  very  briefly  at
    paragraphs 10 and 11 referring to the history recited  in  the  refusal
    letter.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision on the basis of
    a procedural irregularity having been made on the basis that he had not
    received the notice of hearing and also raised in the grounds that  the
    decision made did not reflect accurately his  immigration  history  and
    the courses that he had undertaken.

 7. The hearing was originally listed before the  Upper  Tribunal  on  30th
    April 2014.  Mr Aziz appeared in person.  At  that  hearing  it  became
    plain from documentation that the Appellant produced on that  day  that
    the chronology and history set out  in  the  decision  letter  was  not
    accurate.  He had produced documents to  show  that  he  had  completed
    different courses than that  in  the  summary  and  ultimately  in  the
    decision letter.  This was relevant to the issue of whether or not five
    years, the relevant period would have been  crossed.   At  the  hearing
    also Mr Aziz gave an account concerning  his  absence  at  the  hearing
    centre when the case was listed.  The Respondent was not aware  of  the
    courses and, according to the Appellant, the earlier degree course that
    he had undertaken for which he had been  granted  leave  at  Manchester
    College did not go beyond the first semester because  the  college  was
    closed down.  It was not possible to ascertain from the case file as to
    what applications had been made for leave to remain as  a  student  and
    the documentation that had been produced with each application with any
    certaincy.  Thus the hearing was  adjourned  until  12th  May  for  the
    Respondent to confirm details concerning grants of leave in view of the
    Appellant's account, which the Respondent had not been aware of  before
    the hearing.

 8. The appeal came before the Tribunal on 12th  May.   Mr  Deller,  Senior
    Presenting Officer appeared on behalf of the Respondent.  He produced a
    short schedule of applications relating to Mr  Aziz.   However,  as  he
    conceded, whilst the record had been prepared from the case information
    database, in the short time available to access the file,  it  was  not
    possible  to  provide  any  further  detail  concerning  the   previous
    applications.  Thus the  schedule  was  not  complete.   Mr  Aziz  also
    produced at the hearing further documentation including a copy  of  the
    Respondent's guidance.  It became abundantly  clear  that  the  factual
    basis of the Appellant's case was different from that set  out  in  the
    decision letter and that was relevant to  whether  paragraph  245ZX(ha)
    applied.  It was further plain that from hearing from Mr Aziz  that  he
    stated that one of the exemptions applied in  his  case  based  on  the
    studies that he had undertaken which had not been taken into account by
    the Respondent and this included having  studied  a  foundation  course
    between September 2006 and August 2007 but also again between the  date
    of September 2008 and May 2009.  Furthermore whilst he had  been  given
    leave to enrol in September 2007 to  undertake  a  Degree  in  Business
    Administration at the Manchester College of Professional Studies in mid-
    August of 2008 the college was closed down and thus he  took  no  exams
    and had only completed the first semester.  It was his case that he had
    not undertaken degree level study in the way set out  in  the  decision
    letter.

 9. The principal issue that I have to decide relates  to  whether  or  not
    there was  a  procedural  irregularity.   As  noted  in  the  grant  of
    permission by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nicholson,  the  history  in
    respect of the Appellant and his  conduct  was  a  relevant  factor  in
    reaching a conclusion on this issue.  The case file and  evidence  from
    the Appellant demonstrates that on 9th April 2013 the  Appellant  wrote
    to IAC Bradford requesting an oral hearing.  Originally  the  case  had
    been listed as a paper appeal.  On 15th May 2013 a letter was  sent  to
    the Appellant noting his request for an oral  hearing  and  asking  for
    additional payment to be made.  It appears that that additional payment
    was made and the appeal was listed for hearing at North Shields on  3rd
    October 2013 which was the nearest hearing centre  to  the  Appellant's
    address at that time in Newcastle.   The  Appellant  then  requested  a
    change of venue by fax in view of a change of address as he was  moving
    to the south of England.  A further hearing  date  was  sent  for  15th
    October 2013 for the appeal to be heard at Taylor House.  The notice of
    hearing does give the address of the Appellant.  He states that he  did
    not receive it.  Having heard Mr Aziz and having  considered  the  case
    file, I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that there  was  a
    procedural irregularity and that it is more likely than not that he did
    not receive the notice of hearing.  It is plain from the history that I
    have just recited that Mr Aziz sought to pursue his appeal at the  time
    it was listed, seeking an oral hearing and also paying  the  additional
    expense but also seeking a change of venue when he had changed address.
     He has also appeared before the Upper Tribunal and thus I am satisfied
    that he was  actively  seeking  to  pursue  his  appeal  and  in  those
    circumstances I accept that it is more likely  than  not  there  was  a
    procedural irregularity which led to the Appellant  not  receiving  the
    notice of hearing.  As the grant of permission notes, the judge was not
    at fault he could not have known but in the light of that irregularity,
    and the fact that the  Appellant  does  wish  to  put  forward  to  the
    Tribunal his case, it is in the interests of justice to set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

10.  I canvassed with Mr Deller, what the appropriate course should be  for
    the next stage.  In the light of the  error  of  law  being  one  of  a
    procedural irregularity, he submitted that  in  the  normal  course  of
    events and in the interests of justice, that the Appellant should  have
    his  opportunity  to  put  his  case  to   the   First-tier   Tribunal.
    Furthermore, the Appellant submitted that in the light of  the  complex
    issues before the Tribunal that he would wish to have  the  opportunity
    to seek legal advice and have a solicitor to  act  on  his  behalf  and
    therefore the appeal could not proceed.

11. In those circumstances I am satisfied that the  appropriate  course  is
    for the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  be  set  aside  and  to
    determine the appeal with a fresh oral hearing by way  of  remittal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  This is based on the nature of the  error  of
    law in this case, namely procedural unfairness or irregularity that had
    occurred and  therefore  it  fell  within  the  Practice  Statement  at
    paragraph 7.2(a) (as amended).

12. Due to the nature of the error of law, the Tribunal will be required to
    hear the oral evidence of the Appellant and consider the  documentation
    provided on his behalf and factual findings will have to be made.  Also
    the Respondent will be required to procedure a complete  chronology  of
    the applications made and evidence produced on behalf of the  Appellant
    in respect of each course.  Therefore having given particular regard to
    the overriding objective of the efficient disposal of appeals and  that
    there is an issue of  procedural  irregularity  that  has  occurred  in
    respect of this appeal and that there are issues of fact  that  require
    determination which have not been accessed when the case was before the
    First-tier Tribunal I therefore remit the appeal.  The case  is  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House in accordance  with
    Section 12(2)(b) of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  and
    paragraph 7.2 of the Practice  Statement  of  10th  February  2010  (as
    amended).

13. The following directions are made:

      i) The Appellant shall file and serve upon the Respondent and upon the
         Tribunal a statement setting out his full immigration  history  and
         appending to that statement  any  documentation  relevant  to  that
         chronology no later than fourteen days before the hearing.

     ii)  The  Respondent  shall  file  and  serve  an  updated   chronology
         concerning the applications made on behalf  of  the  Appellant  for
         leave to remain, such a document to be filed no  later  than  seven
         days before the hearing.

    iii) Any policy guidance relied upon by  the  Appellant  shall  also  be
         filed and served by  him  no  later  than  seven  days  before  the
         hearing.

Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and the decision is set  aside.
 The appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  at  Taylor  House
for a hearing in accordance with Section 12(2)(b) of the  Tribunals,  Courts
and Enforcement Act and paragraph 7.2 of  the  Practice  Statement  of  10th
February 2010 (as amended).



Signed                              Date 14th May 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
