
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04456/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 October 2016                            |On 20 October 2016            |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                JOSEPHINE [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Bexson, of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on  6  May  2016  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hendry which allowed the  appeal  of  Ms  [K]
    following a second stage Article 8 assessment.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the respondent and  to  Ms  [K]  as  the  appellant,  reflecting  their
    positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The background to this matter is that the appellant came to the  UK  in
    2003 and was here unlawfully until 2011.  During that period, she had a
    relationship  with  a  British  national  and  on  the  basis  of  that
    relationship was granted leave from 6  March  2011  to  5  March  2014.
    However, the relationship was characterised by domestic violence  which
    left her traumatised and, sadly, during that relationship the appellant
    suffered three miscarriages. The relative seriousness of the abuse  she
    suffered was not disputed and nor were her mental  health  difficulties
    arising from that abuse, compounded by her HIV diagnosis.

 4.  After  leaving  her  abusive  partner,  the  appellant  formed  a  new
    relationship with a close family friend, Mr [A].   Due  to  her  mental
    health difficulties and caution following her abusive relationship, she
    had not moved in with Mr [A], however, but maintained that they  viewed
    each other as life partners who intended to be together for the rest of
    their lives.

 5.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hendry  refused  the  appeal  under   the
    Immigration Rules but allowed it outside the Rules after  conducting  a
    second stage Article 8 assessment.

 6. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal were as follows, verbatim:

         "Material Misdirection in Law/Failing to Give Adequate Reasons

         In considering Article 8 the it is submitted neither the  appellant
         and her partner live together, nor are  they  engaged  or  married,
         they would be unable to meet the term partner within Gen1.2.  It is
         respectfully submitted eh FTJ has given inadequate  weight  to  the
         fact the appellant and her partner would thus be unable to meet the
         immigration rules in respect of appendix FM  in  carrying  out  the
         article 8 assessment.

         Further in conducting the article 8 assessment, the  FTJ  does  not
         follow the guidance in SS Congo in that it is  preferable  for  the
         circumstances of an appellant ought to change  rather  than  asking
         for preferential treatment outside the rule sat - [57].

         'Generally, it is fair that the applicant  should  wait  until  the
         circumstances have changed and the requirements in  the  Rules  are
         satisfied and then apply, rather than attempting to jump the  queue
         by asking for preferential treatment outside the Rules in advance.'

         It is also submitted in conducting the article  8  assessment,  the
         FTJ has used Article  8  to  circumvent  the  requirements  of  the
         immigration rules."

 7. The Secretary of State's challenge, in essence, was that the First-tier
    Tribunal's  approach  to  an  Article  8  assessment  outside  of   the
    Immigration Rules did not follow that set down as lawful and correct in
    SS (Congo) and in addition questioned the failure  to  address  whether
    the appellant could be  expected  to  seek  entry  clearance,  a  point
    clearly put to the judge by  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  as
    recorded at [50] of the determination which states:

         "50. In terms of proportionality, her new partner was also Ghanaian
             and they could establish their family life in  Ghana,  or  she
             could return for a short time and apply to enter the  UK  from
             there.  This was not a Chikwamba type of situation."

 8. The Court of Appeal has provided clear guidance for an assessment of an
    Article 8 claim outside the Immigration Rules.  The starting point  for
    any consideration must be the significant weight to be accorded to  the
    failure to meet the Immigration Rules; see Haleemudeen  v  SSHD  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 558.  It is now well understood that through Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph  276AD  Parliament  has  identified  those  cases  which  can
    legitimately expect to succeed on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds.  That  is
    something which a judge must give proper weight to at the outset of any
    second stage Article 8 assessment.

 9. It is also now well understood that it is only  when  there  are  other
    factors sufficient to outweigh the importance of Parliament's  view  as
    to what is in the public interest  that  the  second  stage  Article  8
    assessment can succeed.  The Court of Appeal has set this approach  out
    clearly in [29] of SS (Congo) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 387, thus:

         "It is clear, therefore, that it cannot be maintained as a  general
         proposition that LTR or LTE outside the  Immigration  Rules  should
         only be granted in exceptional cases.  However, in certain specific
         contexts, a proper application of Article  8  may  itself  make  it
         clear that the legal test for grant of LTR or LTE outside the Rules
         should indeed be a test  of  exceptionality.   This  has  now  been
         identified  to  be  the  case,  on  the  basis  of   the   constant
         jurisprudence of the ECtHR itself, in relation to applications  for
         LTR outside the Rules  on  the  basis  of  family  life  (where  no
         children are involved) established in the United Kingdom at a  time
         when the presence of one or other of the partners was known  to  be
         precarious: see Nagre, paras. [38]-[43], approved by this court  in
         MF (Nigeria) at [41]-[42]."

10. It was argued for the appellant that the First-tier Tribunal  did  make
    proper reference to the weight to be accorded to  public  interest  and
    the importance of the Immigration Rules.  At [73] the judge referred to
    the provisions of Section  117  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002. The judge identified that:

         "Section  117B(1)  specified  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
         immigration controls is in the public interest."

11. Ms Bexson also took me to paragraph [79] of the decision  which  states
    as follows:

         "I remind myself that the test is one of balance of  the  competing
         interests of each party.  It is of course in  the  public  interest
         that there is a  consistent  immigration  policy  and  I  note  the
         provisions of s.19 of the Immigration Act 2014 which sets  out  the
         public interest considerations.  However, in this case, there  were
         particular difficulties arising from the appellant's fragile health
         and the impact a return to  Ghana  would  have  on  her  after  the
         difficulties she had faced in recent years.  In terms of her family
         life and particularly  her  attempts  to  have  a  child  with  her
         partner, following several miscarriages in recent  years,  her  age
         and her HIV status, increased the weight of  the  argument  on  her
         side,  and  made  it  more  likely  that  there  would  be  a  real
         interference with the family life of her and her partner if she was
         returned to Ghana."

12. In my judgement, neither in [79] or elsewhere in the decision does  the
    First-tier Tribunal indicate that the  starting  point  in  the  second
    stage Article 8 assessment was the  failure  to  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules, the couple not being married, not being in a  civil  partnership
    and not having lived together for 2 years.  Certainly,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge identified factors at [79] that arguably could have  the
    potential to outweigh the public interest  in  which  Article  8  cases
    should succeed but the consideration of  those  factors  did  not  take
    place within the correct legal framework.

13. This error arises also at  [72]  in  which  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hendry states:

         "There seemed little doubt in this appeal, also, that  the  concept
         of the 'near miss' arose.  Had  the  appellant  and  Mr  [A]  lived
         together throughout their relationship, they  would  have  met  the
         criteria in Appendix FM.  A number  of  relevant  cases,  indicated
         that this concept carried little weight on its own, but that it may
         be relevant to the consideration of proportionality."

14. That is a clear misdirection as the courts have consistently  indicated
    that the concept of "near miss" does not have any role to play  in  the
    second stage Article 8 proportionality assessment.  Rather,  as  above,
    the failure to meet the Immigration Rules is something  which  must  be
    taken as a starting point which weighs against an appellant.

15. The second limb of the respondent's challenge also has merit. The First-
    tier Tribunal did not address the respondent's submission that the case
    could not be seen as exceptional or capable of requiring  leave  to  be
    granted outside  the  Immigration  Rules  as  the  appellant  could  be
    expected to return to Ghana to seek entry clearance.

16. The only reference in the judge's assessment of Article 8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules is in the final sentence of [75]  which  states  only
    that the case of Chikwamba has been taken into  account.   The  passage
    preceding that reference is only to the subjective evidence of  Mr  [A]
    and does not constitute a finding of the First-tier Tribunal that "even
    if returned for a short period of time", the appellant's mental  health
    would deteriorate significantly and therefore impact  significantly  on
    the ability of the couple to continue their relationship.

17. Indeed, it is difficult to see  how,  without  more  explanation,  that
    concluding that the appellant could  not  be  expected  to  seek  entry
    clearance was a rational conclusion here because, as recorded  at  [18]
    and [44], the appellant has  been  back  to  Ghana  for  short  periods
    notwithstanding her HIV diagnosis and mental health issues. There  does
    not appear to have  been  any  evidence  suggesting  that  she  was  in
    difficulty on those visits or that the relationship with Mr [A] was  in
    difficulty at those times. The evidence was also, as recorded at  [30],
    that Mr [A], still a Ghanaian  national  albeit  he  also  has  British
    nationality, also returns to Ghana once a year and nothing explains why
    the couple could not return together whilst the appellant sought  entry
    clearance.

18. For all of those reasons it is my view  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred materially in the legal approach to the Article 8 assessment  and
    failed to take into account material aspects of the  evidence  in  that
    assessment.  The decision must therefore be set aside to be re-made.

19. There was discussion before me as to the appropriate  disposal  of  the
    matter if an error was found in the terms  argued  by  the  respondent.
    The submissions indicated that the appellant's circumstances  have  now
    changed as she is cohabiting with Mr [A] and she has  further  evidence
    regarding her mental health treatment in the UK on which she wishes  to
    rely. After some consideration, this appeared to me to be a case  where
    the second stage proportionality assessment to be conducted now is on a
    different factual basis to that conducted previously in the  First-tier
    Tribunal and that it should therefore be remitted to the First-tier for
    that assessment to be made again on that new factual basis.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside.

The appeal will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]                               Date 20 October 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

