
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04000/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 31 October 2013                              |On 4 December 2013         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                            Mr Claude Tchatchoua

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Williams, Andrew Williams Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Brewer, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Claude Tchatchoua, was born on 17 July  1964  and  is  a
    male citizen of Cameroon.  By a decision dated 20  December  2012,  the
    appellant was refused a residence card as confirmation of  a  right  of
    residence under European Community law as the family member of  an  EEA
    national exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom.  The appellant
    appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Upson)
    which, in a determination promulgated on 4  June  2013,  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, Judge Wellesley-Cole wrote:

         "It appears the judge overlooked the fact that the appellant raised
         Article 8 in his grounds of appeal and for  that  reason  alone,  I
         give leave.  Whilst I do not find other grounds have  merit,  I  do
         not rule them out."

 3. As at the date of the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    appellant was living with his adult son.  It was through that residence
    and relationship that the appellant sought  to  confirm  his  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom as the family member of an  EEA  national.
    The respondent did not dispute the fact  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of Regulation 7 of the [2006 Regulations - CNL  to  insert
    reference].  The appellant accepted that  he  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom illegally but it was not  clear  when  he  had  done  so.   The
    appellant had committed a number of  criminal  offences  while  in  the
    United Kingdom.  In respect of  those  offences,  the  judge  found  as
    follows:

      i) Whilst the judge was aware that the appellant had been "very sorry"
         for his numerous driving offences (including  driving  with  excess
         alcohol on two occasions and driving whilst  disqualified)  he  did
         not accept that these could be explained away, as the appellant had
         sought to do, on the basis that the appellant had driven  in  order
         to assist a friend who was ill.

     ii) The judge did not  accept  that  the  appellant  had  attempted  to
         regularise his stay in the United Kingdom until  the  time  of  the
         present application.  He did not accept the appellant had forgotten
         to do so.

    iii) The  judge  noted  that  the  appellant  had  entered  on  the  sex
         offenders' register for seven years in November 2006.  He had  been
         imprisoned for six months for a sexual assault on  a  female  child
         under the age of 13 years in Snaresbrook  Crown  Court  in  October
         2008.  The judge found that the appellant was still subject to  the
         sex offenders'  notification  requirements  at  the  time  that  he
         completed his application form for a residence card.

 4. The judge noted the requirements of Regulation 20 and 21(5) of the 2006
    Regulations:

         "CNL to insert 20 and 21(5)"

 5. At [29], the judge wrote this:

         "It is clear that the appellant has a number of offences  committed
         over a lengthy period and with a certain amount of regularity.  The
         decision to refuse the appellant's application has, however, to  be
         based on his personal conduct and the convictions are not  capable,
         in themselves, of justifying the refusal.   The  appellant  entered
         the UK illegally on his own admission.  I find it is  not  possible
         to determine when that was.  I find that the  appellant  is  not  a
         credible witness and therefore what he has to  say  about  when  he
         might have entered the UK is of no  assistance.   Indeed,  even  in
         these proceedings he has given different years for that entry.  The
         convictions of the defendant show that he regularly  drives  whilst
         disqualified.  What is more, he has been convicted on two occasions
         of driving  with  excess  alcohol  and  on  four  occasions  whilst
         uninsured.  There is no evidence that he has ever passed a  driving
         test or obtained insurance.  I find that he clearly  poses  an  on-
         going risk to other road users be they drivers or pedestrians.  His
         latest  conviction  for  driving  whilst  disqualified  was  on  28
         February 2012 when he was sentenced to sixteen weeks' imprisonment.
          I find that the dependant does pose  a  present  and  sufficiently
         serious threat affecting a fundamental interest of society."

 6. There were two grounds of appeal.  The first ground is headed "Perverse
    Findings".  The grounds assert that  the  judge  had  placed  "so  much
    weight" on the fact that the appellant had entered the  United  Kingdom
    illegally and he could not remember the date when he had entered.   The
    grounds repeatedly refer to "minor" driving offences and  to  the  fact
    that the appellant was "only sentenced to six weeks'  imprisonment  for
    his last driving offence".  The grounds assert that "the IJ has  failed
    to show the appellant's previous offending means that he is  a  serious
    risk to the public".

 7. I find the ground  has  no  merit.   The  judge  has  directed  himself
    appropriately to the effect that  convictions  "in  themselves"  cannot
    justify the refusal of the appellant's application.  He  has,  however,
    correctly  noted  that  the  convictions  provide   evidence   of   the
    appellant's serious disregard for the road traffic laws of  the  United
    Kingdom and, perhaps more importantly,  that  a  pattern  of  behaviour
    which he has established (and the judge found is  likely  to  continue)
    poses a serious threat to other road users.  Given that  the  appellant
    has driven having consumed excess alcohol and  appears  never  to  have
    taken the trouble of passing a driving test or obtaining  insurance,  I
    have concluded that that finding was open to the judge on the evidence.
     The judge has not simply dismissed the appeal on the  basis  that  the
    appellant has previous convictions;  he  has  sought  to  identify  the
    characteristics of the appellant and his patterns of behaviour and  has
    used the evidence of the convictions, together with other evidence,  to
    conduct that analysis.  That was an approach which was  not  flawed  by
    legal error.  The grounds are, in effect, a disagreement with  findings
    which were open to the judge; it is clearly not appropriate to refer to
    motoring offences such as driving with excess alcohol as "minor".

 8. Further, the judge was clearly concerned that the appellant had  failed
    to disclose that he had been convicted of a serious sex  offence  on  a
    minor.   The  appellant  was  still  subject  to  the  sex   offenders'
    notification requirements (which he chose to ignore) when he  made  his
    application.  The judge was entitled to consider that conduct as adding
    to the threat which he poses to society.

 9. The second ground is more straightforward.  The appellant had  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.   The  judge  has
    failed to deal with the appeal on that ground.   However,  Mrs  Brewer,
    for the respondent, submitted that, on the basis of the evidence before
    the judge, the outcome of the Article 8 ECHR appeal was not  in  doubt.
    At the time of the hearing, the appellant was living with his adult son
    and no evidence had been produced that there were any  particular  ties
    of dependency between these two men which would  justify  allowing  the
    appeal on Article  8  ECHR  grounds  (see  Kugathas  -  CNL  to  insert
    reference).  At the Upper Tribunal hearing, the appellant  claims  that
    he is now in a relationship with a woman who has a child.  There was no
    evidence of  the  nationality  of  the  partner  or  the  child.   That
    relationship has only started since the date of the First-tier Tribunal
    determination.  Mrs Brewer submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    should not be criticised for failing to have regard to facts which were
    not even in existence at the date of his determination.

10. I agree with Mrs Brewer's submissions.  Although Article 8 is  referred
    to in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  it  is  clear
    that that  ground  was  not  argued  in  oral  submissions  before  the
    Tribunal.  Indeed, the appellant's representative's  skeleton  argument
    made no reference to Article 8 ECHR.  There is no documentary  or  oral
    evidence concerning the appellant's family life or private life in  the
    United Kingdom.  Further, although he is no doubt referring to the 2006
    Regulations, the judge wrote at [31]:

         "Having due regard to all of the information before me, I am unable
         to say the decision of the respondent was disproportionate.  I  can
         find no reason to interfere with that decision."

11. Had the judge gone on to consider the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds,
    I am left in no doubt that the findings as regards  to  proportionality
    which he made in respect of the 2006 Regulations  which  have  been  no
    different in respect of Article 8 ECHR.  There were no  submissions  on
    Article 8, no evidence of private/family life other than the fact  that
    the appellant was living with an adult son.  I agree  with  Mrs  Brewer
    that it is inevitable, in the light of  those  facts,  that  the  judge
    would have dismissed any Article 8 ECHR appeal.   Therefore,  whilst  I
    find the judge erred in law by failing to deal with Article 8,  I  find
    that the error is not such that the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal falls to be set aside.  If the appellant  considers  that  any
    new family life he has with any new partner will suffer interference if
    he is removed  from  the  United  Kingdom,  then  he  should  make  the
    appropriate application referring to those  new  circumstances  to  the
    Secretary of State.  So far as these proceedings  are  concerned,  this
    appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

12. This appeal is dismissed.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
                          Approval for Promulgation


|Name of Upper Tribunal Judge      |Mr C N Lane                       |
|issuing approval:                 |                                  |
|Appellant's Name:                 |Mr Claude Tchatchoua              |
|Case Number:                      |IA/04000/2013                     |

Oral determination (please indicate)


I approve the attached Determination for promulgation

Name:

Date:


Amendments that require further action by Promulgation section:

Change of address:

           Rep:                         Appellant:
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |

Other Information:
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |



