
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04882/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 16 June 2015                      |On 9 July 2015                        |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                   Mrs KA
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr David Clark, Senior Presenting Officer.
For  the  Respondent:     Mr  B  Inquai,  Legal   Representative   from   IR
Immigration Law LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    decision of the First Tier Tribunal Judge Tiffen who allowed the appeal
    of the  claimant  (hereinafter  referred  as  respondent)  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
    appellant) refusing her further leave to remain on the ground that  her
    marriage to an EU citizen was a  marriage  of  convenience.  The  Judge
    found that the appellant  had  not  discharged  the  burden  of  proof.
    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Judge  Levin,
    a judge of the First Tier Tribunal.

 2. The respondent is a national of Morocco and her date  of  birth  is  15
    February 1989.  She entered the United Kingdom  on  15  September  2013
    with entry clearance as a family member of an  EEA  national  until  23
    November 2013. On 8 October 2013 she applied for the grant of Residence
    card as the spouse  of  an  EEA  national.  On  13  December  2013  the
    appellant refused to issue her a Residence Card applying  Regulation  2
    of the Immigration [EEA ] Regulations 2006. The reason for the decision
    to refuse was that  the  appellant  was  satisfied  that  the  marriage
    undertaken by the respondent on 23 January 2013 was one of  convenience
    for the sole purpose of the respondent remaining in the United Kingdom.

 3. Judge Tiffen at Taylor House heard the appeal against the  decision  on
    26 January 2015. The appellant was represented at the hearing  but  the
    appellant was not and no reason was offered for the absence.

 4. In his decision promulgated on 3 February 2015, Judge Tiffen has  given
    reasons for allowing the appeal. The appellant contends in his  grounds
    of appeal to the Upper tribunal that the Judge of  the  First  Tribunal
    erred in law in allowing the appeal as the appellant had satisfied  the
    burden of proof upon her by producing and relying upon letters  written
    by the husband stating that the marriage was one of convenience. At the
    hearing the respondent gave evidence and stated inter alia that she had
    married her husband because she loved him and that it was  he  who  had
    filled her application for Residence Card and she had simply signed the
    form. She drew attention of the Judge to  the  copies  of  exchange  of
    messages between her and her husband  on  Facebook  while  she  was  in
    Morocco. She said that while she was in Morocco she had  never  thought
    of coming to the UK. She claimed that her husband had subjected her  to
    violence and rape. She adopted her written  witness  statement  as  her
    evidence in chief. The Judge found her to be  a  credible  witness  and
    stated that her evidence was supported by photographic evidence and the
    police report in her bundle.  The  Judge  said,  "I  accept  that  this
    Appellant has been the victim of domestic  violence  from  her  husband
    whom she married in Morocco following a short romance initially started
    on the  Internet."  The  Judge  went  on  to  say,"  There  is  nothing
    whatsoever  in  the  Appellant's  evidence  to  support  her  husband's
    allegation that so far as the Appellant was concerned the marriage  was
    not genuine." Taking account  of  the  relevant  case  law  (Papajorgji
    [2012] UKUT 00038) the Judge appraised the  evidence  that  was  before
    him. He said, "I have considered the chronology of events and note that
    the letter sent by the husband to the UKBA was sent at the same time as
    the Appellant claims that her husband raped her. In his second  undated
    letter he states that he asked the police to remove her from the  house
    but that does not accord with the Appellant's evidence  or  the  police
    report. The  Appellant  let  the  property  voluntarily  following  the
    assault upon her. I take into account that  the  Appellant  is  a  very
    young, slightly built vulnerable female  and  there  can  be  no  other
    explanation for the bruises and the police report other than  that  she
    is a victim of domestic abuse.  The  correspondence  from  the  husband
    therefore should be considered in the light of this and the  Respondent
    should have made further enquiries before reaching the decision."

 5. At the hearing before me Mr  Clark  for  the  appellant  amplified  the
    grounds of appeal and argued that the material  error  in  law  in  the
    decision is demonstrated by the fact that the Judge  did  not  consider
    the letter from the CPS, which stated that the husband had  been  found
    not guilty of the charges he had faced. This according to the appellant
    showed that the respondent was not credible and that her allegations of
    rape and domestic abuse were untrue. Mr Inquai asked  me  to  read  the
    letter from the CPS with care as the letter itself says that it is  not
    clear how the husband was found not guilty. He said that  the  decision
    of Judge Tiffen was one that was open to him to make and his  reasoning
    showed no material error of law.

 6. I reserved my decision, which I now give with the following reasons.  I
    agree with Mr Inquai that the decision of Judge Tiffen  does  not  have
    any material error of law. The Judge appraised all the facts  correctly
    and in the light of all the facts including the  credible  evidence  of
    the respondent he found that the appellant had failed to discharge  the
    burden of proving that the appellant's marriage was one of convenience.
    The alleged non-consideration of the CPS letter is not correct  as  the
    Judge said he could not understand how and why  it  happened.  Criminal
    trials and verdicts at the level  where  his  case  was  heard  do  not
    require  reasons  to  be  given.  So  one  cannot  speculate   to   the
    disadvantage of the respondent who the Judge found  to  be  a  credible
    witness.

 7. It is properly arguable that the decision to grant permission to appeal
    by Judge Levin was defective in that it does not spell out the material
    error of law, which the grounds had raised, and  which  were  arguable.
    However as this point was not  argued,  I  leave  this  matter  without
    further pronouncement.

 8. I dismiss this appeal. That means that the  decision  of  Judge  Tiffen
    will stand in its entirety including his  direction  on  anonymity  and
    award of fee.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:    7 July 2015

