
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/04620/2014
                                                               IA/04629/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 October 2014                            |On 21 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                Ms G A BLACK
                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Ms Chantelle Tamara Ellison
                           Mr Dylan Tatenda Ndlovu
                                                                  Claimants

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimants :    Mrs H Price, Counsel instructed by M A Consultants
(London)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1.   This matter comes before me for consideration as to whether  or  not
      there was an error of law in a  determination  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Judge Gibbs) promulgated on 25 June 2014.  For convenience I
      shall refer to the parties as  the  Secretary  of  State  who  is  the
      appellant in these proceedings, and to the claimants  who  are  mother
      and son.


Background

2.   The main claimant is a citizen of South Africa and her  date  of  birth
    is 3rd October 1975. She entered the UK as a visitor and  was  at  that
    time pregnant with the second claimant, Dylan, who was born in  the  UK
    on 17th February 2005.  She was refused an  extension  of  leave  as  a
    student with a right of appeal. The appeal was dismissed and her appeal
    rights were exhausted in 2007. The claimants were issued  with  notices
    as over stayers and removal  directions  were  made  under  section  10
    Immigration & Asylum Act 1999. The main claimant applied for indefinite
    leave to remain and under Article 8 on the basis of private and  family
    life.

3.   In the reasons for refusal dated 30th December 2013  the  Secretary  of
    State refused the application under paragraph 322(1) of the  rules  and
    went  on  to  consider  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the
    immigration  rules.  It  was  accepted  that  the  claimant   met   the
    requirements of R-LTRPT.1.1 a,b,d, (i) ,d(ii) but not d  (iii)  and  EX
    1.(a)(ii). It was accepted that the second claimant resided in  the  UK
    for all of his life.   The  main  issue  was  whether  or  not  it  was
    reasonable for him to move to South Africa. Neither  claimant  had  any
    immigration status in the UK.

4.    The  Tribunal  found  that  there  was  no  contact  with  the  second
    claimant's father, the main claimant was solely responsible for him and
    that she had had no contact with her family in South Africa since 2008.
    The Tribunal placed weight on the fact that the second  claimant  would
    be entitled to apply for British citizenship in February 2015.  It also
    placed weight on significant family ties as between the  claimants  and
    close relatives in the  UK  who  formed  a  family  unit.   The  second
    claimant was settled at school where he  attended  for  5  years.   The
    Tribunal took into account the four year  delay  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in making a decision.  Reliance  was  placed  on  Azimi-Moayed  &
    others(decisions affecting children;onward  appeals)[2013]  UKUT  00197
    (IAC).[13]

Grounds for permission

5.    The  grounds  argued  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to   consider   the
    feasibility of relocation of the second claimant  to  South  Africa  in
    terms of family support, social and cultural ties or adaptability,  and
    failed to consider and apply  EX.1  to the circumstances of  the  first
    claimant.

Permission

6.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge White  on  16  July
    2014 on both grounds.

Error of law hearing

7.   I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives.  The  Secretary  of
    State's main  concern is  that the  Tribunal  failed  to  consider  the
    alternative position for  the family  to live in South  Africa  and  in
    particular  the  second  claimant's  likely  position  and  ability  to
    integrate.  I am satisfied that the Tribunal engaged with the  evidence
    and made clear findings supported  with  sound  reasons.  The  Tribunal
    found the evidence from the first claimant  to  be  credible  [11].   I
    summarise the findings made:
         i)  the second claimant  had spent all of his life in the  UK  and
         was distressed at  the  prospect  of  moving  to  an  entirely  new
         country[12][14]
         ii) he was 7 years old at the date of hearing
         iii) he is settled at school[12]
         iv) he lives in a close  family  unit  with  his  mother  and  has
         significant ties  with  other  close  relatives   which   would  be
         severed [12]
         v) he has no contact with his  father  and  his  mother  is  solely
    responsible [11]
         vi) his mother is settled with family living in the UK
         vii)  there  are  no  financial  concerns  as  the  claimants  are
         supported family in the UK
         viii) it would be hard for the first claimant to  find  employment
         in South Africa where there would be no home for them.
         ix) weight was placed on the fact that Dylan would be  entitled to
         British citizenship in February 2015.
         x) weight was placed on the 4 year delay in reaching a decision by
         the Secretary of State.[12]

8.   I find no support for the argument that the  determination  was  "thin"
    and inadequately reasoned. Rather in  my  view  it  is  a  concise  and
    focused analysis of the relevant issues under the relevant rules.   The
    Tribunal is not required to deal comprehensively with  each  and  every
    issue.  The determination shows that the Tribunal  fully  engaged  with
    all the relevant issues and its approach was sound in law citing Azimi-
    Moayed & others (decisions affecting  children;  onward  appeals)[2013]
    UKUT 00197 (IAC) and having regard to where the best interests  of  the
    child lie.  The conclusion reached is  sustainable  based  on  findings
    made which   adequately deal with the reasonableness of any  relocation
    in South Africa[14].

9.   As a child who has lived in the UK for over  seven  years,  the  second
    claimant has lived in the UK for what is considered to  be  a  relevant
    period in developing social  and cultural ties.

10.  As to the second ground of appeal, I accept that  the  Tribunal  failed
    to specifically apply the provisions of EX.1. and dealt with  the  same
    in one sentence at [16]. However, I am satisfied that  this  is  not  a
    material error as the outcome would be the same. The substance  of  the
    findings in the determination show that  the  main  claimant  met  EX.1
    requirements having regard to its conclusion under paragraph 276ADE .



Decision
11.  There is no material error of law.
     The determination shall stand.






Signed                                  Date  21.10.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
No anonymity order.



The First -tier Tribunal made an award  for  a  fee  repayment  which  shall
    stand.

Signed                                  Date  21.10.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

