

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04641/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined on the papers at Field    |Determination Promulgated            |
|House                                |                                     |
|On Thursday 12 January 2017          |On Friday 20 January 2017            |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                             MISS KARLENE ELLIS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   The Appellant  is  a  national  of  Jamaica  who  appeals  against  the
Respondent's decision dated 13 January 2015 refusing her leave to remain  on
the basis of her private life and her family life with her  partner,  Trevor
Ellis.  Her  appeal  against  that  decision  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge O'Flynn in a decision promulgated on  1  April  2016  on  the
basis that there were no insurmountable obstacles to the  couple  continuing
their family life  in  Jamaica,  that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
Immigration Rules ("the Rules") in relation to her  private  life  and  that
there were no compelling circumstances which required consideration  outside
the Rules.

2.   Following a hearing on 22 November 2016, I found an  error  of  law  in
Judge O'Flynn's decision.  The  extent  of  that  error  was  a  failure  to
properly consider the position in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  partner's
mother, Mrs B, who suffered from dementia and for  whom  the  Appellant  and
her partner acted as carers.  My decision promulgated on  23  November  2016
("the Decision") makes clear that  the  error  found  relates  only  to  the
position of Mrs B.  The Decision is annexed hereto for  ease  of  reference.
Indeed, the only basis on which permission to appeal was sought  related  to
the position of Mrs B. But for the error of law which I  identified  in  the
Decision relating to Mrs B's position, therefore, I would have upheld  Judge
O'Flynn's decision.

3.   I gave directions at  the  behest  of  Counsel  who  appeared  for  the
Appellant on that occasion to allow the Appellant  to  update  evidence  and
for both parties to file skeleton arguments.  Both  parties  agreed  however
that no further oral evidence would be required  and  I  could  re-determine
the appeal on the papers.  The parties were given an opportunity to seek  an
oral hearing prior to the re-making of the decision.  Neither  party  sought
an oral hearing.   This  matter  therefore  comes  back  before  me  to  re-
determine the appeal on the papers.

4.   The events which followed the Decision are somewhat unfortunate.  By  a
letter dated 21 December  2016,  the  Appellant's  solicitors  notified  the
Tribunal that Mrs B had sadly passed away.   Moreover, it appears from  that
letter that this occurred before  the  last  hearing  before  me.   That  no
reference was made to this at the hearing was, it seems, due  to  a  failure
by Counsel who represented the Appellant on that occasion to note  that  her
brief included reference to this event but she had overlooked it.  There  is
annexed to the solicitor's letter a letter  from  Counsel  addressed  to  me
which apologises for this oversight.  Counsel  accepts  that  she  may  have
inadvertently misled the Tribunal by suggesting that Mrs B was  still  alive
at that date. Although I accept what Counsel says about not having made  any
positive submissions relating to Mrs B's health or life  at  that  time,  it
was implicit in her request for a  direction  permitting  the  Appellant  to
submit updated evidence in relation to Mrs B that Mrs B was still alive.   I
accept however the apology and that  she  did  not  intend  to  mislead  the
Tribunal.  I also accept that there was not time to correct the  information
following the hearing as the Decision was  promulgated  one  day  after  the
hearing.  Counsel has acted entirely properly since the last hearing.  I  do
not intend to take any further action in relation to what occurred.

Submissions

5.   The Appellant's solicitor's  letter  accepts  (as  it  must)  that  the
passing of Mrs B is  material  to  this  case.   It  is  submitted  (without
further particulars) that there remain insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
life being enjoyed by the Appellant and her  partner.   Reference  is  there
made to the bundle  and  skeleton  argument  submitted  for  the  First-tier
Tribunal hearing.  Again, no reference is made to  any  particular  document
but I have had regard to  the  evidence  in  the  bundle  when  reaching  my
decision.

6.   It is also said  in  the  letter  that  the  Appellant  "has  conducted
herself with dignity insofar as declaring the passing of her mother  in  law
and we would be grateful if this is taken into consideration when  making  a
decision on her immigration appeal".  Whilst I fully accept  that  no  blame
attaches to the Appellant  for  what  occurred  in  relation  to  the  (non)
disclosure of Mrs B's  death,  the  Appellant  is  of  course  bound  to  be
truthful in her evidence to the Tribunal.  The disclosure  is  therefore  no
more than the Tribunal is entitled to expect.

7.    The  solicitors  also  ask  that  I  re-make  the  decision   in   the
circumstances of the initial hearing  (by  which  I  assume  they  mean  the
circumstances at the time of the hearing before Judge O'Flynn)  rather  than
the circumstances at the date of their letter.  Whilst I have  sympathy  for
the Appellant's loss, the issue for me is whether removal  will  breach  the
Appellant's Article 8 rights based on current circumstances and not  whether
it would have done so if circumstances had remained  as  they  were  in  the
past.  I therefore decline that invitation and I have re-made  the  decision
based on the circumstances as they are now.

8.   I have  not  received  a  skeleton  argument  from  the  Respondent  in
compliance with the directions made in the Decision.   Given  the  terms  of
the letter from the Appellant's solicitor  and  that  there  is  no  updated
evidence produced, however, and since the Appellant has herself not filed  a
skeleton argument as such, it is perhaps unsurprising  that  the  Respondent
has not filed anything further.  In the circumstances, I have  proceeded  to
re-determine the appeal without hearing further from the Respondent.

The Appellant's case

9.   The Appellant is a national of Jamaica.  She was born in  1975  and  is
now aged forty years.  She came to the UK for a short period in  2001  as  a
visitor.  During her stay, she met  her  current  partner,  Mr  Ellis.   She
returned to Jamaica but came back to the UK in  December  2002  again  as  a
visitor.  She was then aged twenty-seven years.  On this  occasion,  though,
she did not return and she has remained in the UK since.  She had  leave  to
remain for a short period between 2003 and 2004 but otherwise  has  remained
as an overstayer.

10.  The  Respondent  accepts  that  the  Appellant  is  in  a  genuine  and
subsisting relationship with Mr Ellis.  He is also Jamaican  by  birth.   He
claims to have come to the UK from Jamaica with his mother, Mrs B, in  1958,
then aged nine.  He is now aged sixty-eight  years.   The  Appellant  claims
that Mr Ellis is British.  The Respondent did not accept  this.   Certainly,
he does not have a passport to prove that he  is.   However,  Judge  O'Flynn
found as a fact that he is.  Although  I  have  set  aside  Judge  O'Flynn's
decision, I adopt his reasoning at [23] of his decision  for  reaching  that
finding.  Even without that, I would have made the  same  finding  based  on
the letter dated 14 May 2007 [AB/42].  It is difficult to read  that  letter
other than as confirmation by the Immigration  Service  that  Mr  Ellis  has
been accepted as a British citizen.  Mr  Ellis  has  a  number  of  criminal
convictions in the UK and it would be surprising if the Respondent  had  not
sought to deport him had she been able to do so.  This letter appears to  be
recognition that she tried to do so but was constrained to accept  that  she
could not because he is British.

11.  Mr Ellis has fathered a number of children  in  the  UK.   The  precise
number appears in some doubt.  In one statement it is said  that  there  are
twelve.  In another, it is claimed that there are twenty-two.   It  is  also
claimed that he has a number of grandchildren. Certainly, there is  evidence
from birth certificates in the Appellant's bundle that there  are  at  least
twelve children.  They are  aged  between  forty-six  years  and  twenty-two
years.  The only evidence in relation to contact  with  any  of  them  comes
from Shanta who is the youngest child and who it  is  said  lives  with  the
Appellant and Mr Ellis and from another  of  Mr  Ellis'  daughters  who  has
written a short letter in support  of  the  Appellant.   The  Appellant  and
Shanta both say that they have a close relationship akin to that  of  mother
and daughter.  There are a number of photographs in the bundle which may  be
intended to show this.

12.  The Appellant is not permitted to work. She has  though  been  carrying
out work of a voluntary nature and there is some support  for  this  in  the
bundle.  There are  also  some  letters  of  support  from  friends  of  the
Appellant and her partner.

13.  The Appellant has been convicted of an offence in 2009  for  possession
of an offensive weapon.  She was given a community sentence  which  she  has
served.  She expresses regret for this  offence  in  her  statement.  It  is
accepted by the Respondent that the Appellant has  complied  with  reporting
restrictions imposed on her.

14.  In terms of ties to Jamaica, the Appellant has a mother there  as  well
as three children who were born in 1994, 1996  and  1997  so  are  now  aged
between twenty-two and nineteen years. I note that, when  she  came  to  the
UK, they were aged between eight and five years.  Part  of  the  reason  why
she wishes to stay in the UK, she says is so that she can give her  children
a better life than she had.

Discussion and conclusions

15.   I deal first with the Appellant's case applying the Rules in  relation
to her family and private life.  In relation to the former,  she  is  unable
to satisfy the Rules because of her own status in  the  UK,  unless  she  is
able to meet paragraph EX.1.  EX.1.(b) reads as follows:-

    "[EX.1.] This paragraph applies if

      a) ...

      b) the applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in  the
         UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and
         there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
         continuing outside the UK.

    [EX.2.]   For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)   'insurmountable
    obstacles' means the very significant difficulties which would be faced
    by the applicant or their  partner  in  continuing  their  family  life
    together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail
    very serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."

16.  In  relation  to  her  private  life  applying  paragraph  276ADE,  the
Appellant could succeed only if she were able to meet  paragraph  276ADE(iv)
which provides that there  must  be  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  her
integration in Jamaica.

17.   The  insurmountable  obstacles  relied  upon  before  the   First-tier
Tribunal related to the Appellant's relationship with and care  provided  to
Mrs B.  That factor is no longer of any relevance.  As I note at [5]  above,
it remains asserted in the Appellant's solicitor's  submissions  that  there
are insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing in Jamaica but it  is
not said what those obstacles are.

18.  I have found at [10] above that Mr Ellis is a  British  citizen.   That
though does not amount to an insurmountable obstacle to  the  couple  living
together in Jamaica.  No doubt they would prefer to  live  together  in  the
UK.  That is though not the test.  As  noted  at  [11]  above,  although  Mr
Ellis has children (and possibly grandchildren) in the UK, his children  are
all adults.  There is no evidence as  to  the  ages  of  any  grandchildren.
There is very limited evidence of any contact with the children  other  than
with Shanta and Sheresa.  In relation  to  those  two  children,  both  have
written letters in support of  the  Appellant.   Shanta  confirms  that  the
Appellant  and  she  have  a  mother/daughter  relationship  and  that   the
Appellant has provided her with stability and guidance.  She  says  that  it
would give her "great pleasure" if the Appellant were allowed  to  stay  and
if she and Mr Ellis could marry and continue the life  together.   She  does
not though refer to any major impact on her own life if  the  Appellant  and
Mr Ellis were to move to live together in Jamaica.  That is to  be  expected
as she too is now a young adult.  Sheresa does not live with the couple  but
says she provides financial support to the Appellant as she is  not  allowed
to work and says that she would  continue  to  do  so.   She  describes  the
Appellant as "kind hearted".  There  is  though  no  evidence  that  if  the
Appellant and Mr Ellis were to go to live together in  Jamaica  there  would
be any significant impact on her personally.  She is aged forty-six so  that
is unsurprising.

19.  Mr Ellis was born in Jamaica.  He spent the first  nine  years  of  his
life there.  A significant period has elapsed since  he  left  Jamaica.   He
has lived for the  majority  of  his  life  in  the  UK.   His  own  witness
statement though does not state what would be the difficulties  for  him  to
go back to Jamaica.  He has siblings in  the  UK  and  as  noted  above  has
children (and possibly grandchildren) in the UK.   However,  other  than  in
relation to his mother, Mrs B, it is not said  that  those  provide  reasons
why he could not return to Jamaica.  There is no evidence from any of  those
relatives that he provides care for them in a way which  would  prevent  him
leaving the UK.  There is no evidence that he is in employment  in  the  UK.
He indicates that he is retired and in receipt of state  pension.   He  says
that he is also self-employed although it is not clear what  is  the  nature
of that employment. In any event, that would be unlikely  to  give  rise  to
insurmountable obstacles to him leaving the UK and relocating to Jamaica.

20.  In relation to the Appellant's private life, it is  said  by  Mr  Ellis
that she has many friends and lots of  associations  in  the  UK  and  there
would  be  "significant  obstacles"  to  her  enjoying  the  same  sorts  of
relationships and life if she was forced to leave the UK.  As I  have  noted
at  [12]  above,  there  is  evidence  of  some   support   from   voluntary
organisations to whom the Appellant has  offered  her  services.   There  is
also some limited expression of support from other  friends  who  attest  to
their friendship and to  the  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  Mr
Ellis. There is nothing in that evidence though to suggest  that  those  are
other than ordinary  friendships  or  that  they  are  an  obstacle  to  her
integration in Jamaica let alone a very significant  obstacle.   It  is  not
clear why Mr Ellis believes that the  Appellant  would  be  unable  to  form
friendships in Jamaica.  Whilst she has been  away  from  that  country  for
some fourteen years and may have therefore lost friendships that she  formed
before she left, there is no reason why she could not make new friends.

21.  That leads me on then to  the  Appellant's  circumstances  in  Jamaica.
She still has relatives there.  Her own  mother  is  there.   She  also  has
three children living there.  Whilst they are now  adults,  this  is  not  a
case where she has no-one  to  return  to.   Those  ties  would  undoubtedly
assist with reintegration in Jamaica.

22.  The Appellant is also said to suffer from a disease which  affects  her
joints and bones so that at times she is unable to walk.  She says that  she
suffers from severe pain but is able to control that by medication.   It  is
not said that she would be unable to obtain the same medication in  Jamaica.
 Although there is some evidential support in  relation  to  her  condition,
that is limited and there is no medical report dealing with  the  extent  of
the disease and the implications on that if the Appellant were to return  to
Jamaica.

23.  For those reasons, the Appellant cannot meet the Rules in  relation  to
her family and private life.  There are no insurmountable obstacles  to  her
continuing her family life with Mr Ellis in Jamaica.  He cannot  be  removed
if, as I have found, he is British.  It  is  a  matter  of  choice  for  him
whether to accompany the Appellant to Jamaica.   There  is  nothing  in  the
evidence to suggest that he could not do so if he so wished.  There  are  no
very significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration in Jamaica.   This
is not a case where she has no-one to return to in that  country.   She  has
also lived there for a considerable period before coming to the UK.

24.  The factors raised by the  Appellant  are  adequately  covered  by  the
Rules in relation to her family and private life.  However, for the sake  of
completeness, I have also considered her case outside  the  Rules,  applying
Article 8 ECHR and the test in Razgar.  I  accept  that  the  Appellant  has
formed a family and private life and that removal will interfere  with  that
in a way which engages Article 8.   The  only  issue  therefore  is  whether
removal is proportionate when the extent  of  the  Appellant's  private  and
family life is balanced against the public interest.

25.  When considering that issue, I am bound to have regard to section  117B
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   Immigration  control  is  in
the public interest.  The Appellant has formed her private and  family  life
whilst in the UK either  on  a  temporary  basis  or  (for  the  most  part)
unlawfully.  As such, I give little weight to either the family life or  the
private life of the Appellant.  I have already  explained  when  considering
the Appellant's case against the Rules why she can continue both her  family
and private life in Jamaica.   Those  findings  are  equally  applicable  to
consideration of the proportionality of the decision to remove her  applying
Article 8.  The  decision  to  refuse  the  Appellant  leave  to  remain  is
proportionate.



DECISION

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds  and  under  the
Immigration Rules

Signed        [pic]Dated:  12 January 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

                                  APPENDIX

                    ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   The Appellant  is  a  national  of  Jamaica  who  appeals  against  the
Respondent's decision dated 13 January 2015 refusing her leave to remain  on
the basis of her private life and her family life with her  partner,  Trevor
Ellis.  Her  appeal  against  that  decision  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge O'Flynn in a decision  promulgated  on  1  April  2016  ("the
Decision") on the basis that there were no insurmountable obstacles  to  the
couple continuing their family life in Jamaica,  that  the  Appellant  could
not meet the Immigration Rules ("the Rules")  in  relation  to  her  private
life  and  that  there  were  no  compelling  circumstances  which  required
consideration outside the Rules.

2.   The focus of the  appeal  and  the  Decision  is  the  care  which  the
Appellant and Mr Ellis provide to Mr Ellis's mother ("Mrs  B"),  who  is  an
elderly lady with dementia.

3.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M  Hollingworth
on 12 October 2016 on the basis that the Judge may have erred in failing  to
take into account Mrs B's rights and in relation to the weight to  be  given
to the evidence regarding her care and what would occur if that care was  no
longer available.   The  appeal  comes  before  me  to  decide  whether  the
Decision contains an error of law and if so to either re-make  the  decision
or remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for redetermination.

The Rules

4.   The Appellant cannot meet the Rules in relation to leave to  remain  as
the partner of Mr Ellis unless she can satisfy  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  because
she had no leave at the date of application.  Paragraph  EX.1.(b)  reads  as
follows:-

    "[EX.1.] This paragraph applies if

      c) ...

      d) the applicant has a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in  the
         UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and
         there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
         continuing outside the UK.

    [EX.2.]   For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)   'insurmountable
    obstacles' means the very significant difficulties which would be faced
    by the applicant or their  partner  in  continuing  their  family  life
    together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail
    very serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."



Submissions

8.   Ms Short for the Appellant formulated her  submissions  on  two  bases.
Firstly,  she  criticised  the  Judge's  fact  finding  on   the   evidence.
Secondly, she submitted that as a result of the Judge's failure to  consider
the evidence fully, he had fallen into legal error.

9.   Ms Short drew my attention to Mr  Ellis'  witness  statement  dated  23
October 2015 which summarises his evidence in relation to  the  availability
of alternative care for his mother.  That is as follows:-

    "[16] ... I have a great number of family members in the United Kingdom
    and I am looking after my mother together with Karlene as  she  suffers
    from dementia.  She will not take any  medication  from  anyone  except
    from Karlene and myself.  My siblings  do  not  assist  in  helping  my
    mother and it is of course difficult to cope with  the  fact  that  she
    suffers from dementia.  She will only allow Karlene and myself  in  the
    house and my mother could certainly suffer significantly if Karlene was
    forced to leave the country."

10.  Ms Short next drew my attention to the letter dated 27 March 2015  from
Ms  Susan  Cross,  Care  Coordinator  for  South  London  and  Maudsley  NHS
Foundation Trust.  As independent  evidence  of  Mrs  B's  needs,  Ms  Short
submitted that  this  evidence  should  have  been  given  some  weight.   I
therefore set out the content of the letter in full:-

    "I am writing as the Care-Coordinator involved with the  care  of  [Mrs
    B].  She is a lady with Probable Dementia in  Alzheimer's  Disease  who
    has significant care needs but limited insight into her needs.  Due  to
    her lack of insight [Mrs B] will not allow formal carers into her  home
    and currently her son (Trevor Ellis) and his  partner  (Karlene  Ellis)
    are providing the following:  supporting  her  with  her  personal  and
    domestic  care,  medication  management,   transportation   to   health
    appointments and transport to and from daycentre 3 times a week.

    In relation to the application for her Karlene Ellis to remain  in  the
    UK I can confirm that any care provided by her to [Mrs B] would be very
    beneficial, may help reduce the significant risks she  currently  poses
    and help her to remain living in the community."

Ms Short emphasised in particular the reference to Mrs B's lack  of  insight
into her situation.  This is  not  simply  a  case  of  a  person  requiring
physical care but a person who, due to  that  lack  of  insight,  would  not
understand the need for her to find  alternative  care  and  who  would  not
therefore accept a carer or other members of the family providing  the  care
currently provided by the Appellant and her partner.

11.  Ms Short next took me to the relevant passages of  the  Decision  where
the Judge purported to deal with this evidence as follows:-

    "[17]    It is submitted that one of the most important  considerations
    is Trevor Ellis' mother.  There was much oral evidence about  [Mrs  B].
    The appellant and her partner (sometimes both  or  one  or  the  other)
    visit [Mrs B] five or six days a week.  They stay from 7 o'clock in the
    morning until about 6pm or 7pm.  They live  abut  10-15  minutes  away.
    They give her medication and food, they bathe her and take her  to  her
    club.  [Mrs B] suffers from dementia and needs a lot of help.   She  is
    on her own from when they leave in the evening until when  they  arrive
    in the morning.  It is possible to leave her at night but when she sees
    the daylight she just wants to get up and go.  If the appellant and her
    partner were not able to help there is nobody else who could do it.   I
    have noted a letter confirming that the appellant and  her  partner  do
    care for his mother.

    ...

    [26] That the appellant and Mr Ellis  are  the  daily  carers  for  his
    mother, submitted Mrs King, presents  a  significant  obstacle  to  the
    couple returning to Jamaica.  I heard a great deal  of  evidence  about
    that and I accept that they play an important part in [Mrs  B's]  care.
    However, I note that Mr Ellis stated that is  mother  'is  supposed  to
    have a carer but she won't let anyone in her house'.   There  is  then,
    care available.  Mr Ellis was asked in examination-in-chief whether any
    of his siblings would be able to take over the care.   He  stated  'I'm
    not sure about my siblings, but I've got young ones who are willing  to
    help.' So there are, then, members of his own family who are willing to
    assist his mother, to say nothing of her entitlement to a carer.

    ...

    [28] It is difficult to see what the  insurmountable  obstacle  to  the
    appellant and Mr  Ellis  sharing  their  life  in  Jamaica  is.  It  is
    perfectly clear from the evidence that there are other members  of  the
    family who would be willing to help Mr Ellis' mother and,  further,  it
    is open to them to arrange for social services to become involved.   It
    may be difficult for her initially to come to  terms  with  new  people
    but, with care, such an arrangement can easily be  put  in  place.   Mr
    Ellis has (I note he was not entirely sure) around 19 or  20  children.
    He has grandchildren in the UK.  However, none of this would prevent Mr
    Ellis from relocating  to  Jamaica  with  his  partner.   None  of  his
    children are minors and, apart from Shante, none of them live  with  Mr
    Ellis.  Shante is 20 years of age and would  be  perfectly  capable  of
    looking after herself.

    ...

    [31] I now consider whether the appellant's private and/or family  life
    should be considered outside the Rules; I must consider  whether  there
    are compelling circumstances in this case.  For the same reasons  as  I
    have discussed when  considering  whether  there  were  'insurmountable
    obstacles' I cannot find that there are any compelling circumstances in
    this case.  The appellant has been in the UK without leave since  2004.
    I can take into consideration here that she has left her three children
    in Jamaica and, it would seem to me, that that is where her true family
    life should exist.  I have taken into careful  consideration  the  fact
    that the couple look after Mr Ellis' mother but I have found that there
    are other carers within the family who, as  Mr  Ellis  himself  stated,
    'would be willing to help'.   In  the  circumstances,  there  being  no
    compelling circumstances for me to consider, I  am  satisfied  that  an
    Article 8 assessment outside of the Immigration Rules is  not  required
    in this appeal."

12.  Ms Short submitted that  those  passages  showed  that  the  Judge  had
failed  to  consider  the  practical  realities  including,  as   previously
mentioned, the fact that Mrs B  would  not  accept  any  alternative  carer.
Although there is  reference  to  a  letter  at  [17]  confirming  that  the
Appellant and Mr Ellis care for Mrs B, Ms  Short  submitted  that  this  was
either reference to another of the letters produced in  evidence  confirming
the arrangements or at the very least the Judge had failed  to  engage  with
the content of the Care Coordinator's letter emphasising the point that  Mrs
B would not allow another carer in to  her  home  because  of  her  lack  of
insight.

13.  Ms Short submitted that this failure to properly consider the  evidence
had led the Judge into legal error both in relation  to  whether  there  are
"insurmountable obstacles" to the Appellant and Mr  Ellis  continuing  their
family life in Jamaica and whether removal of  the  Appellant  would  breach
Article 8 ECHR.  In relation to that latter point, Ms Short  also  submitted
that the Judge had failed to take into account Mrs  B's  Article  8  rights.
She accepted that the authority on which she relies in this  regard  (Beoku-
Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39) pre-dates the coming into force of Appendix  FM
to the Rules and that it is not entirely clear whether and in what  way  Mrs
B's  human  rights  fall  within  the   consideration   of   "insurmountable
obstacles" to the  Appellant's  family  life  continuing  in  Jamaica.   She
submitted however that the impact on Mrs B of Mr Ellis leaving the UK  would
cause very serious hardship  to  him  if  not  also  to  the  Appellant  and
therefore Mrs B's condition and the  impact  on  her  is  relevant  to  that
question.

14.  Mr Tarlow relied on the Respondent's rule 24 statement.  He pointed  to
the Judge's acceptance at [28] of the Decision that it  would  be  difficult
for Mrs B to come to terms with new carers.  The Judge  was  also  aware  of
the letter ([17] of the Decision).  The Judge reached a  finding  which  was
open to him on the evidence.  In relation to the Article 8 rights of Mrs  B,
Mr Tarlow submitted that, even if those could be relevant  to  the  question
of whether there are "insurmountable obstacles" to  family  life  continuing
in Jamaica, that consideration  could  not  materially  affect  the  outcome
given the other considerations set out in the Decision.

12.  At the end of the hearing, I reserved my decision and indicated that  I
would provide that in writing which I now do.  The parties'  representatives
agreed that, if I were to find an error of law, I could proceed  to  re-make
the decision in this  Tribunal.   In  light  of  Mrs  B's  age  and  medical
condition, Ms Short asked for the opportunity to submit updated evidence  in
relation to Mrs B's position and the care which the Appellant and  Mr  Ellis
now provide to her.  She accepted however that I  could  thereafter  re-make
the decision (if  I  found  an  error  of  law)  on  the  basis  of  written
submissions and without a further hearing.

Discussion and conclusions

13.  The Judge has considered the  relevant  evidence  in  relation  to  the
position of Mrs B and the alternative care which would be available  to  her
if the Appellant and Mr Ellis were to go to live in Jamaica.   What  he  has
not considered however is Mrs B's willingness  to  accept  alternative  care
arrangements and in particular what is said by the  Care  Coordinator  about
the impact on Mrs B of the absence of the Appellant and Mr Ellis.   This  is
not simply an elderly lady who requires physical care but  an  elderly  lady
with dementia who does not have insight into her  own  condition  and  would
not understand the need to accommodate alternative care arrangements.    The
main error  made  by  the  Judge  was  to  not  take  into  account  at  all
(alternatively to not give appropriate weight to) the comments of  the  Care
Coordinator and therefore  to  treat  the  option  of  alternative  care  as
decisive in relation to whether the Appellant and Mr  Ellis  could  relocate
to Jamaica.

14.  Whilst it is for the Judge to give  whatever  weight  he/she  considers
appropriate to the evidence  subject  to  an  irrationality  challenge,  the
Judge has been thereby led into legal error by failing to take into  account
the impact on Mrs B of  the  Appellant's  and  more  importantly  Mr  Ellis'
absence.  Whether the impact on Mrs B is a factor which  can  weigh  in  the
question of  whether  there  are  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  Mr  Ellis
leaving the UK to  live  with  the  Appellant  in  Jamaica  is  perhaps  not
relevant.  I accept that the impact on Mr  Ellis  of  having  to  leave  his
mother in the UK in order to go to live with the Appellant in Jamaica  might
potentially amount to very  significant  hardship  to  him.   As  such,  the
Judge's failure to take into account the evidence of  the  Care  Coordinator
is material to that question.

15.  I am less convinced by the challenge to the Judge's findings  regarding
Article 8 outside the Rules.  If there are insurmountable obstacles  to  the
Appellant enjoying family life with Mr Ellis in Jamaica for the reasons  set
out above, then there is no need to go on  to  consider  whether  there  are
compelling circumstances to justify the grant of leave  outside  the  Rules.
However, since, on any view, Beoku-Betts would  apply  to  consideration  of
Mrs B's rights in  an  assessment  outside  the  Rules,  this  might  become
relevant if the appeal fails under  the  Rules.   At  that  stage,  however,
other factors such as  the  Appellant's  immigration  history  would  become
relevant.  Those factors might well militate against a  grant  of  leave  to
the Appellant.

16.  For the above reasons, the  Decision  contains  an  error  of  law.   I
therefore set aside the Decision.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision did involve the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law. I set aside the Decision

In relation  to  the  re-making  of  the  decision,  I  make  the  following
directions:-

      1. Within 28 days from the date of promulgation of this decision,  the
         Appellant shall file and serve any additional evidence on which she
         wishes to rely in relation to the re-making of the decision.

      2. Within 28 days from the date of promulgation of this decision,  the
         Appellant shall also file and serve a skeleton argument setting out
         her submissions for the re-making of the decision.

      3. Within 28 days from the date of service of the Appellant's evidence
         and skeleton argument,  the  Respondent  shall  file  and  serve  a
         skeleton argument responding to the Appellant's skeleton  argument.



      4. Within 14 days from receipt of the Respondent's skeleton  argument,
         the Appellant may file and serve a  further  skeleton  argument  in
         reply if so advised.

      5. The appeal will thereafter  be  determined  on  the  papers  unless
         within 42 days from the date  of  promulgation  of  this  decision,
         either party requests an oral hearing.

      6. The parties may apply to the Tribunal on notice to the other  party
         if they seek a variation of  these  directions  or  any  additional
         directions.

Signed        [pic]Dated:  22 November 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
