
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04651/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th January 2016                  |On 22nd January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss C Charlton, Bhogal Partners Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. Although the Appellant before this Tribunal is the Secretary of State I
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Nigeria,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State  made  on  9th
    January 2015 to refuse her application for leave to remain in the UK on
    the basis of her private and family  life.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wilson  allowed  the  appeal  under  paragraph  276ADE(i)(vi)  of   the
    Immigration Rules.  The Secretary of State appeals with  permission  to
    this Tribunal.

Background

 3. The background to this appeal is that  the  Appellant  entered  the  UK
    lawfully in 2010 as an overseas domestic worker.  An extension of  stay
    was given until 4th March 2014.  She made two further applications  for
    leave to remain on the basis  of  her  private  and  family  life.  The
    application the subject of this appeal was made on the basis  that  the
    Appellant is HIV  positive  and  sufferes  from  mental  health  issues
    including severe depression and stress. The appellant claims  that  she
    has no-one to return to in Nigeria as she is estranged from her  family
    there and from her family members who live in the UK. The Secretary  of
    State refused that application on 9th January 2015 on  the  basis  that
    the appellant did not meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  (1)
    (vi)  of  the  Immigration  Immigration   Rules   as   there   are   no
    insurmountable obstacles to her returning to Nigeria, she has no family
    life in the UK and could not meet the requirements of Appendix  FM  and
    her return would not breach the UK's obligations under Article 3 and  8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights in respect  of  her  medical
    conditions.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the appeal  under
    paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) and found that  there  are  very  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's integration into any  community  including
    the Nigerian community and he allowed the appeal on that basis.

 4. The Secretary of State contended in the  grounds  of  appeal  that  the
    judge had not adequately engaged with the reasons for refusal  and  had
    not given adequate or valid reasons for concluding that the requirement
    of paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) is met. Permission to appeal  was  granted
    on the basis that it is arguable that the judge's approach to paragraph
    276ADE (1) (vi) was flawed and that the judge had made  no  finding  to
    suggest that the Appellant met the high threshold of Article 3  on  the
    basis of her  mental  health.  It  was  considered  arguable  that  the
    decision fails to offer an explanation as to what the 'very significant
    obstacles' are in circumstances where the appellant has been in the  UK
    for such a short period and had not experienced a catastrophic  failure
    of her mental health in the UK and has family in Nigeria from whom  she
    could be expected to seek shelther and support.

Error of Law

 5. In his submissions Mr Kotas accepted that it  was  lamentable  that  no
    Presenting Officer was present at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing  but
    he submitted that the judge ignored the fact that the Appellant arrived
    in the United Kingdom when she was aged 35 on a temporary visa, and  he
    submitted that this could not be divorced from the other findings  made
    by the judge in relation to  the  Appellant's  mental  health  and  HIV
    status.

 6. He submitted that the judge ignored the  evidence  in  the  Appellant's
    witness statement where she said that her parents died when many  years
    ago and that she has a 10 year  old  son  who  she  was  supporting  in
    Nigeria. He submitted that there must  have  been  a  period  when  the
    Appellant was coping in Nigeria where she was said to have worked as  a
    seamstress.  She also has the support of the Pentecostal Church in  the
    UK but the judge has not explained why she could not seek  the  support
    of the church congregation in Nigeria.

 7. At paragraph 13 the judge says: "The difficulty being as  this  relates
    to future events the evidence is conjectural".  Mr Kotas submitted that
    it cannot be right for the judge  to  refuse  to  speculate  about  the
    Appellant's future in Nigeria as speculation about the future  is  part
    of the assessment as to whether there are very significant obstacles to
    reintegration in Nigeria.  He submitted that the  judge's  findings  on
    this matter are unsustainable.

 8. Mr Kotas accepted that there was no Presenting Officer at  the  hearing
    to cross-examine the Appellant but submitted that the bare assertion in
    paragraph 29 of the Appellant's witness statement  that  she  has  lost
    contact with her 10 year old son could not have just been  accepted  by
    the judge who did not mention this.  He submitted that there were  also
    conflicts in the Appellant's evidence in that at paragraphs 23  and  30
    she made contradictions in relation to her HIV status and it is unclear
    how her sister found out about it.  He submitted that there are several
    credibility issues that the judge has not engaged with.

 9. Mr Kotas submitted that the judge  said  that  the  Appellant's  mental
    health issues are at the forefront  of  his  mind  but  has  not  given
    reasons for giving such weight to this issue. He submitted  that  there
    must be a more careful analysis as to how the mental health  issues  of
    the Appellant would impact on  her  ability  to  access  mental  health
    services in her own  country.   In  relation  to  the  Appellant's  HIV
    status, the medical evidence is that her prognosis is good  if  she  is
    accessing regular therapy.  He  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to
    engage with  what  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter  said  about  the
    availability of mental health services in Nigeria.

10. Miss Charlton submitted that the determination is  direct  and  to  the
    point.  The judge accepted the Appellant's credibility at  paragraph  7
    despite the discrepancies in her evidence and gave  reasons  for  that.
    She submitted that if the Home Office wished to attack credibility they
    should have attended the hearing and  that  Mr  Kotas  had  engaged  in
    conjecture as to how the Appellant would  have  answered  questions  in
    cross-examination.  She submitted that the judge  had  the  benefit  of
    hearing from  the  Appellant  and  was  entitled  to  accept  that  the
    Appellant was vulnerable and was  credible.   She  submitted  that  the
    judge did consider familial ties in Nigeria and found that  these  were
    not likely to be available to the Appellant.   The  judge  gave  proper
    reasons  why  he  accepted  that  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant reintegrating in Nigeria  and  was  entitled  to  reach  that
    conclusion on the basis of the evidence.

11. Mr Kotas submitted that if this case was put on mental  health  grounds
    in terms of Article 3 or Article 8 it would not have been allowed.   He
    submitted that there is no acknowledgement  in  relation  to  the  time
    spent in the Appellant's own country.

Error of Law

12. Paragraph 276ADE (1) of the Immigration Rules states as follows:

         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

             (i)  does not fall for refusal under any  of  the  grounds  in
             Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM;
             and

             (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain  on  the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and

             (iii)    has lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  20
             years (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

             (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has  lived  continuously
             in the UK for at least 7  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK; or

             (v)  is aged 18 years or above and  under  25  years  and  has
             spent at least half of his life living continuously in the  UK
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

             (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,
             has lived continuously in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
             the UK.

13. The issue to be determined by the judge in this case  was  whether  the
    Appellant, having lived in the UK for less  than  twenty  years,  would
    face "very significant obstacles" in integrating in Nigeria if she  was
    required to leave the UK.  The judge considered  the  medical  evidence
    from Dr Persaud and accepted, in  the  context  of  the  other  medical
    evidence, that the Appellant has HIV, severe depression and  some  form
    of psychosis [7].   The  judge  considered  the  discrepancies  in  the
    Appellant's oral evidence but accepted that the Appellant was  credible
    in light of her mental health  issues.  The  judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant has a sister in the UK who does not assist her,  noting  that
    in fact the Appellant accuses her  sister  of  physical  abuse  and  of
    throwing her out of the house some years earlier.  The  judge  accepted
    that there was no family support in the UK and that the  Appellant  has
    difficulty managing her personal life in the UK.

14. The judge did acknowledge the fact that the Appellant has two  siblings
    in Nigeria with whom she has little contact and that her first language
    was Yoruba [10]. However, the judge  concluded  that  "the  Appellant's
    physical and mental health is such that  she  has  real  and  practical
    difficulties in the UK at present" [11].  The judge accepted  that  the
    Appellant's first language  is  Yoruba  and  that  she  has  family  in
    Nigeria. At paragraph 12 the judge set out  his approach  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) as follows:

         "The phrase "very significant obstacles' to the integration of  the
         Appellant reintegrating" on a natural reading of must  include  all
         evidence both as to her family and language  but  also  as  to  any
         physical or mental health aspects that a person has.   Indeed  such
         an approach avoids the danger  of  splitting  the  analysis  partly
         under the Rules partly under Article 8 and missing consideration of
         the individual attributes of an Appellant."

15. Having set out this approach the judge went on at paragraph 13  to  set
    out the  factors  that  he  considered  amounted  to  very  significant
    obstacles.  These include the significant  difficulties  the  Appellant
    has  at  present,  the  likelihood  that  her  difficulties  would   be
    aggravated through losing the support of her current  congregation  and
    the effect upon her of the difficulties in accessing  UK  health  care.
    The judge decided that this is not a temporary situation  and  that  it
    was  conjecture  to  speculate  as  to  whether  a  comparable   church
    congregation would in due course be able to assist her in Nigeria.  The
    judge  considered  the  medical  evidence  and  decided   that   future
    difficulties in Nigeria would not be  temporary.   The  judge  said  at
    paragraph 13 "The Appellant's mental health being at the  forefront  of
    my analysis rather than her HIV position."

16. I am satisfied on the basis of the  judge's  analysis  of  the  factual
    background that he took into account all of the  evidence  before  him.
    Whilst Mr Kotas submitted that the judge  ignored  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had a 10 year old son it is clear that the judge was aware of
    the Appellant's situation and the judge does not have to make  findings
    on every element of the case.  The judge is required to  make  findings
    on all matters of conflict and resolve those and the judge  did  so  in
    this case.

17. I accept that the emphasis of the determination in this case is on  the
    Appellant's mental health issues and on how the Appellant has coped  in
    the UK.  However the judge very clearly had in mind the issue of  "very
    significant obstacles" and it is clear that the  judge  concluded  that
    the very significant obstacle in this case is primarily the Appellant's
    fragile mental health state.

18. Whilst I accept that this is a conclusion that not every judge may have
    reached in  this  case,  I  do  not  consider  that  this  decision  is
    irrational or that it was not based on the evidence before  the  judge.
    I accept that a judge making a decision on freestanding Article 8 or  a
    freestanding Article 3 may well have reached a different  decision  but
    in this case in these circumstances the judge was considering paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) and the judge reached a decision which he was entitled to
    reach on the basis of the  evidence  before  him  in  considering  this
    paragraph.

19. In these circumstances I am satisfied that the judge made  no  material
    error of law in the determination of this appeal.

Notice of Decision

20. The judge made no material error of law. The decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal shall stand.


Signed   Date: 21 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 21 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
