
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/04732/2014
     IA/04736/2014
     IA/04741/2014
     IA/04743/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 9 April 2015                               |On 11 May 2015                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

|1         |A Z                                                    |          |
|2         |A M                                                    |          |
|3         |M Z A                                                  |          |
|4         |M Y A                                                  |          |
|          |(ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)                             |          |


                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Singer, Counsel, instructed by Adam Bernard
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the appellants.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this  order  because  the  case  is  particularly  concerned  with  the
    condition of one of the appellants who is a minor with autism.

 2. This appeal is brought with permission of Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on
    the sole ground that:

         "Arguably the  judge  has  not  considered  or  therefore  properly
         applied the provisions of Section  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  (as
         amended).  This  may  arguably  have  impacted  materially  on  the
         judge's decision."

 3. This Section provides that:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -

         (a)  [irrelevant here]

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom".

 4. The appellants are citizens  of  Pakistan.  The  first  appellants  are
    married to each other and the third  and  fourth  appellant  are  their
    infant children. They have been in the United  Kingdom  lawfully  since
    the first appellant entered as a student on 6 February 2007.  The third
    appellant was born on 31 August 2006, which made him just over 5 months
    old when he arrived.  The fourth  appellant  was  born  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 27 March 2009.

 5. The first appellant was given leave to remain  as  a  student  and  the
    other appellants as her dependants.

 6. Although this was not known when he arrived in the United  Kingdom,  it
    is now clear hat the  third  appellant  is  autistic.   The  first  two
    appellants want the family to stay together in the United Kingdom and a
    major reason for this is that the third  appellant  will  receive  high
    quality care if he is allowed to remain but little if any support if he
    is returned to Pakistan.

 7. The appeal is against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing
    their appeals against the decision of the respondent in January 2014 to
    remove them from the United Kingdom.  It is  their  case  that  removal
    would interfere disproportionately with their rights under Article 8 of
    the European Convention on Human Rights.

 8. Despite Miss Fijiwala's best endeavours I have no hesitation in  saying
    the First-tier Tribunal did err  in  law.  Although  the  determination
    mentions Section 117B of the 2002 Act, I cannot discern anywhere in the
    Determination a consideration of whether it is unreasonable  to  remove
    the child, or either of them, or to  let  either  of  them  remain  but
    require the parents to go.

 9. I want to make it plain  that  I  am  not  unduly  concerned  that  the
    relevant section of the Act has not been set out in the  Determination.
    There is no merit in setting out things that are either not  considered
    or which manifestly  do  not  apply.  Here  the  criticism  is  one  of
    substance not form. Nothing in the Determination shows that  the  legal
    test identified above was actually considered.

10. Mr Singer recognised that the strongest element in  his  case  was  the
    disruption to the private and family life of the third appellant but  I
    must consider each of the appellants.

11.  This  is  not  a  case  where  the  adult  appellants   have   behaved
    disreputably.  From the standpoint of ordinary  common  decency  I  can
    understand them wanting to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  where  they
    think the best interests of their  child  will  be  met.  Autism  is  a
    difficult condition that is still not wholly understood but  the  third
    appellant is getting good treatment in  the  United  Kingdom  that  his
    parents would like to continue.  I do not criticise  them  for  wanting
    that for their child but this is not at all the  same  as  saying  that
    they have established a right to it.

12. I recognise that the fourth appellant has no  experience  all  of  life
    outside the United Kingdom but he is still very small and  his  private
    and family life is exercised essentially with his  parents  within  the
    family and I really cannot see any basis on which it  can  be  sensibly
    argued that it would not be reasonable  for  him  to  go  live  in  his
    country of nationality with his parents and brother. As  this  is  true
    for the fourth appellant it is all the more  true  for  the  first  and
    second appellants who will be returning to their country of nationality
    where they have lived for many years.

13. There is really nothing of substance to consider in their cases.

14. The error of law concerns only the treatment of  the  minor  appellants
    and as far as the fourth appellant is concerned I have no hesitation in
    saying that the appeal should be dismissed.

15. This case is really about the third appellant and any impact  that  his
    removal would have on others or their removal would have on him.

16. I have the  benefit  of  the  statements  from  the  first  and  second
    appellants. Miss Fijiwala did not wish to cross-examine.

17. The first appellant explained that she considered that she  had  strong
    links in the United Kingdom based on her residence.

18. She explained that the third appellant had been diagnosed  with  autism
    and has "significant difficulties in language, social  interaction  and
    communication and has restricted stereotype behaviours and mannerisms".

19. He is recognised as having special educational needs.

20. The statement then complains that he will not get proper  treatment  in
    Pakistan; rather he  would  receive  "inhuman  treatment"  because  his
    condition would not be understood and is not treated there.

21. The First Appellant said that the majority of cases of autism  are  not
    diagnosed in Pakistan and that many in Pakistan think that a child with
    condition that would recognised in the United Kingdom as autism  should
    be kept locked away in the home. This view if  often  attributed  to  a
    misguided belief in magic.

22. It may be that the  First  Appellant's  case  is  aptly  summarised  by
    paragraph 17 of the statement where she says:

         "I submit  that  my  child  suffers  learning  inability  and  have
         communication difficulties and development related  problems  which
         do not enable him to lead fulfilling lives.  The biggest problem he
         will face in Pakistan is lack of  awareness  for  the  society  and
         hence lack of  early  intervention,  due  to  social  stigma,  non-
         availability of trained doctors, expensive/limited  therapists  and
         no single physical organisation for all their needs  which  is  why
         even those parents  who  are  aware  of  autism  must  go  to  many
         locations and spend a lot of money on incompetent professionals and
         in most cases given wrong advice."

23. The second appellant's statement, although misguidedly referring  to  a
    "deportation", makes essentially the same points. The second  appellant
    also points out that the fourth appellant is well settled in the United
    Kingdom and has adapted to the British way of life.

24. The Third Appellant's annual report from his nursery  classes  prepared
    in July 2013 when he was not quite 7 years old refers to his  beginning
    to hold a pencil to form  letters  and  to  count  to  5.   It  is  not
    necessary to set out in detail all the points that are made  there.  He
    presented as a kindly little boy who  was  making  progress  but  whose
    development was behind that of his peers.

25. There is advice entitled "Proprioceptive and vestibular input  for  Z".
    I cannot find a date on this report. It emphasises  the  importance  of
    helping the third appellant by physical stimulation and "deep pressure"
    to help stimulate his spatial awareness.

26. There are speech and language therapy programme guidelines addressed to
    schools for the  third  appellant  for  the  Spring  term  2013.   This
    suggests various exercises to assist the third appellant develop and to
    assess his progress. This included for example strategies to  make  him
    ask properly for things that he needed. This appears to  be  one  of  a
    series of similar documents. It is illustrative of  the  care  that  is
    being expended on him.

27. There is a school report dated November 2013 which shows how the  third
    appellant was responding to stimulation given and how he was  beginning
    to grow in strength and to start to manage  a  pencil  well  enough  to
    start to think about writing his name.

28. There is a risk  assessment  dated  February  2014  saying  how  school
    activities needed to be linked at all times.

29. The documents show that the  Third  Appellant  needed  regular  therapy
    appointments and was being offered them by the North  East  London  NHS
    Foundation Trust.

30. There is a report dated 17 June 2013 from the Hatton School for Special
    Needs Centre. This confirms that the Third Appellant has one-to-one in-
    class support as well as one-to-one support  in  other  ways.   He  was
    beginning  to  learn  to  talk  but  still  only  a  few   words   were
    recognisable.

31. There are reports going back to July 2012 explaining how  he  had  been
    able to run and  walk  independently  and  his  mother  was  no  longer
    complaining of him falling over.  The mother is recorded as having  "no
    concerns regarding  his  gross  motor  functioning"  but  his  clinical
    practitioner found him "slightly clumsy".

32. I do not find it very helpful to list every document.  I have worked my
    way through the bundle provided and I have noted individual educational
    plans that have  been  prepared,  for  example,  from  an  occupational
    therapist school visits summary. I note the report from Dr  M  Finnigan
    of University College London Hospital who in August 2014  commented  on
    the third appellant's "poor speech development" and  confirmed  he  was
    diagnosed as having an "autistic spectrum disorder" at the age of 3.

33. There is a report from Hatton School following a meeting on 29 November
    2013.  This refers to a statement of  educational  needs  being  issued
    first in June 2011 and that provided  twenty  hours  per  week  and  an
    additional five hours per week for the first year of the  statement  in
    order to help him.  It also enabled him to take advantage of the speech
    and language therapist employed at the school.  It listed  the  special
    care that he needed and the role of  one-to-one  support.  This  bundle
    includes assistance for parents labelled "Maths at Home".  I take  this
    as indicative of the kind of high level support available in the United
    Kingdom.  There is similarly  a  document  giving  guidance  on  simple
    exercises that can be used to encourage fine motor  control  and  build
    stamina and strength.  The exercises to my untrained mind  seem  simple
    and are indicative of the level at which the third appellant  functions
    and how this is understood and addressed in the United Kingdom.

34.   There   is   a   report   being   a   printout   from    a    website
    www.diplomacypakistan.com referring to the paucity of  institutions  to
    train autistic children in Pakistan and how none  of  the  institutions
    that exist have properly trained staff.  The  same  article  warns  how
    untrained  instructors  can  mishandle  children  and  there  are  even
    examples of children being beaten.

35. More recently there is a letter from Hatton School dated 12 March  2015
    inviting  parents  and  carers  to  attend  the  meeting  run  by   the
    occupational therapist to help understand how children process  sensory
    information.  For example there is a document  entitled  "Turn  Taking"
    which suggests games and  strategies  to  help  socialise  children  by
    learning to take their turn.  Again I see this as an indication of  the
    kind of support that the Third Appellant  needs  and  how  it  is  made
    available to him in the United Kingdom.

36. The same idea  is  emphasised  in  a  "play  scheme  information  pack"
    referring to events in February 2015.  There  is  specifically  a  note
    from the head teacher  confirming  that  the  Third  Appellant  attends
    Hatton School as a physical needs child.   He  is  described  as  "non-
    verbal" and is assisted by a speech therapist every week.

37. All of these things I accept for what they are.  I do not suggest  that
    they  are  very  different  from  anything  that  has  been  previously
    considered by the Tribunal or that my findings differ in  any  material
    way.  I wanted the appellants to be able to realise from  the  Decision
    that I have looked at the papers.   I  do  appreciate  that  the  Third
    Appellant is getting help in the United Kingdom and there is no  reason
    to think there is much chance of him getting it  elsewhere.   No  doubt
    some provision will be available in Pakistan and no doubt they will  do
    their best to access it but they will be  removed  from  the  expertise
    available in the United Kingdom and this will impact on them and impact
    particularly  on the third appellant.

38. My difficulty lies in assessing how I process this information.  I have
    to ask myself whether the appellant has shown that  "it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom".  As far as
    I am aware the word "reasonable"  is  not  explained  anywhere  in  the
    legislation and I know of no authority that will help me understand it.
     Certainly nothing was cited before me.

39. I remind myself that I am dealing with an  asserted  right.  The  Third
    Appellant's case is that he has a right under the ordinary provision of
    the Rules because it would "not be  reasonable  to  expect"  the  third
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom.

40. Clearly this is not a case that would succeed if  the  appellants  were
    relying on Article  3  grounds.   Although  there  is  going  to  be  a
    significant diminution in his care it  is  nothing  like  the  kind  of
    diminution necessary to engage that high threshold.

41. Mr Singer recognised that and reminded me that this is a claim  brought
    on Article 8 grounds. It may be that the rule  is  a  little  different
    from the extra-regulatory obligation to  consider  whether  removal  is
    proportionate.  The fact is the appellant is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.
    His presence in the United Kingdom was with permission for  his  mother
    to attend a particular course and it has come to an end.

42. Mr Singer suggested that I contrast  his  position  with  that  of  the
    fourth appellant who might also want to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
    but about who much less can be said  because  he  is  not  an  autistic
    child.  Certainly the fact that the  third  appellant  is  getting  and
    needs this extra treatment makes a difference but I do not accept it is
    a difference that makes it unreasonable  to  remove  him.   It  is  not
    suggested that a short stay would address  the  difficulties.  This  is
    not, for example, like a young person who might be about to complete  a
    crucial stage in his education or even about  to  complete  a  step  in
    medical treatment.   It is about his being able to remain in the United
    Kingdom presumably until the end of his education and  no  doubt  after
    that.  It is to treat him as if he were a citizen of the United Kingdom
    solely because he has been here for some years  and  is  a  child  with
    special needs.  I cannot see where the reasonableness lies  here.  What
    is reasonable or not reasonable may  well  be  something  incapable  of
    accurate definition that something will be  much  easier  to  recognise
    than to attempt to define.

43. I also recognise that the first and second appellants are acting out of
    love for their child and I also recognise that although they  may  well
    have been advised they made an application which has little  chance  of
    succeeding (I do not know what they have been advised, it is not for me
    to speculate) they have certainly done  nothing  shameful,  still  less
    dishonest.  Anyone with ordinary human feelings will feel a  degree  of
    pity for them and understanding, maybe even respect for their desire to
    do everything they can for the child, but none of this  comes  near  to
    making it not reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  His special needs will not be addressed in Pakistan  as  they
    are addressed in the United Kingdom.  However I do find  it  reasonable
    to expect him to leave the United Kingdom and to go to his  country  of
    nationality.  I see nothing in this case which gives  him  a  right  to
    remain that he so wants.

44. I have set aside and remade the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    because the need for reasonableness had not been considered. I consider
    it right in other respects.  It is just something that was missed  out.
    I applied my mind specifically to the additional  requirement  that  it
    has to be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the  United  Kingdom
    and I am satisfied it is reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  It is sad  for  the  child  and  frustrating  for  the
    parents but people who enter the United Kingdom on  a  temporary  basis
    should expect to leave at the end of it and the fact that one  of  them
    has a particular social need does not change that.

45. It follows therefore that I dismiss the appellants' appeals.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |Dated 30 April 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |                                     |







