
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04681/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester, Piccadilly               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th August 2016                           |On 15th August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                             MISS AYESHA RIZWAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Moksud (agent for International Immigration
                  Advisory Services)
For the Respondent:  Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an application to the Upper Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, against a judgment of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lloyd)
    promulgated on 8th December 2015 in which she dismissed the Appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse her leave to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

 2. The Appellant's application was refused for a single reason.   She  had
    leave as a student due to expire on 20th July 2014.   She  applied,  in
    time, for further leave as a student. The Secretary  of  State  refused
    the application because according to the CAS  the  start  date  of  the
    course was 8th August 2014, more that 28 days after the expiry  of  her
    leave and thus it did not meet the requirements of  paragraph  245ZX(1)
    of the Immigration Rules.

 3. Judge Lloyd had the documents  submitted  with  the  application.   The
    Appellant had submitted an online application and an online  CAS.   She
    also posted a Course Statement.  There is a note  at  the  end  of  the
    statement which says that the course week, 11th to  15th  August  2014,
    was a welcome week which consisted of  induction  and  enrolment.   The
    Judge took the evidence of the CAS alone and found the  course  started
    on 18th August.

 4. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal on the  basis  that  the
    Judge misunderstood the evidence.

 5. Mr McVeety conceded that the evidence before the Secretary of State and
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge indicated that there  was  essentially  a
    "Fresher's Week" from 11th August.  There  were  no  lectures  but  the
    Appellant was required  to  attend.   He  accepted  that  the  "course"
    started on 11th August and thus did meet the requirements of the Rules.

 6. The Judge made a material error of law in misunderstanding the evidence
    about the true start date of the course.  For that  reason  I  set  her
    decision aside.  I redecide the case and allow the appeal.

 7. The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

    The appeal is allowed.

    No anonymity direction having been requested none is made.



Signed                              Date 12th August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
