
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA041512015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22 February 2016                      |On 23 May 2016                      |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                         mr Temitayo Ademola Fakunle
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Singer, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant has been granted permission to appeal  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore dismissing his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent to refuse him indefinite leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  ten  years'  continuous  lawful
    residence in the UK and to refuse him leave to remain under  Article  8
    of the ECHR.

2.   At the  hearing  below  Mr  Singer  conceded  that  the  appellant  now
    realised that due to the short breaks in his lawful  residence  in  the
    UK, he was unable to satisfy the Immigration Rules, and  therefore  the
    basis of his claim relied on consideration of  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, and in those circumstances, whether the decision  of
    the respondent was a disproportionate one.

3.   In respect of Mr. Singer's  first  argument,  I  find  that  the  judge
    failed to factor  into  his  decision  the  explanation  given  by  the
    appellant, which is recorded at paragraph 15 of the decision,  for  the
    first gap in his lawful residence from 31 August 2005  to  21  November
    2005,  recorded  at  paragraph  15  of  the  decision.   Likewise,  the
    explanation the appellant gave for the second gap in his leave  between
    31 August 2006 and 3 November 2006, recorded at paragraph 16.   I  find
    that these were material considerations in the balancing exercise under
    Article 8 of the  ECHR.   They  were  relevant  to  the  assessment  of
    proportionality.  The judge's failure to  consider  these  explanations
    and factor them into his proportionality assessment  was  an  error  of
    law.

4.   Mr. Singer's second argument  was  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    finding that there was no family life between  the  appellant  and  his
    uncle.  I accept that the case law in this  area  has  moved  on  since
    Kugathas was decided. However, the case law relied on by Mr Singer were
    case involving relationships between an adult child and  a  parent,  as
    was the case in Kugathas.  In any event as the appellant has lived with
    his uncle since arriving in the United Kingdom and  continues  to  live
    with him, it was incumbent on the judge to give detailed reasons why he
    thought that there was no family life between  the  appellant  and  his
    uncle.

5.   I accept Mr Singer's third argument that as this was not a  deportation
    case,  the  judge  erred  in  law  by   imposing   a   requirement   of
    exceptionality for the appellant to succeed  under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.  He argued, which I accepted, that the approach should be one  of
    whether the circumstances of the appellant were compelling and that  if
    the judge had factored into his assessment the appellant's explanations
    for the gaps in his leave to remain, the judge could  have  found  that
    there were compelling reasons for those gaps and that these  compelling
    circumstances could have made a  material  difference  to  the  judge's
    decision.

6.   It is also accepted Mr. Singer's argument  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider whether the appellant's return to Nigeria would have an impact
    on his uncle and his family.

7.   In the light of the above reasons I found that the judge erred  in  his
    findings on the appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the  ECHR.    The
    judge's decision cannot stand.

8.   The judge's decision is set aside and is to be remade by a judge  other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore.

9.   The appeal is remitted to Taylor  house  for  rehearing  on  Article  8
issues only.







Signed                                  Date 23 May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

