

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04569/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 8th August 2013                          |On : 9th August 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                                ranjit singh

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms Zsuzsanna Kiss of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   On 14th March 2012 Mr Singh's representatives submitted an  application
    for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom, on the  basis  of
    14 years' continuous residence.  Mr Singh is said to have  entered  the
    UK clandestinely in 1998 at the  age  of  16.   However,  the  evidence
    included  with  the  SET(O)  application  form,  which  could  not   be
    supplemented by Mr Singh's representatives in response to  a  'chasing'
    letter from the Border Agency in September  2012,  was  not  enough  to
    establish that he could avail himself of  the  'Long  Residence  Rule',
    paragraph 276A-B of HC  395.   The  application  was  refused  on  24th
    January 2013, and an appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    consequent decision to remove Mr Singh came before Judge Majid  on  1st
    May 2013.  The  appeal  was  dismissed,  but  Judge  Landes  identified
    arguable errors of law in the determination, and granted permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.    When the matter came before me today, there was no  appearance  by  or
    on behalf of the Appellant.  Notice of the hearing was  posted  to  his
    home address in  Ilford  on  11th  July,  and  has  not  been  returned
    undelivered.  I am satisfied that there has been  good  service  on  Mr
    Singh.  I therefore proceeded to hear the appeal in the  absence  of  a
    party, in accordance with rule  38  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure
    Rules.  Ms Kiss made submissions on behalf  of  the  Respondent,  based
    upon the documentary evidence adduced by Mr Singh, and I agree with her
    that Judge Majid did err in law, but that the appeal must be dismissed.

3.   For  his  first-instance  hearing,  Mr  Singh  had  compiled  a  bundle
    containing a dozen letters attesting to his long residence, as well  as
    evidence of his presence at a wedding in Smethwick  in  November  2003,
    but Judge Majid does not say in his determination what he makes of  all
    this.  He does misquote one letter, that of  Pastor  Ng'ambi,  who  had
    written that Mr Singh would attend his church whenever he was  visiting
    his family in Coventry, but that Mr Singh  actually  stayed  in  London
    most of the time for work reasons.  Dr Majid got  the  impression  that
    the Appellant was claiming to attend the church  in  Coventry  and  the
    Gurdwara in Ilford on the same day.

4.   Apart from not taking account  of  relevant  evidence,  Dr  Majid  says
    nothing at all about Article 8, which was raised in  both  the  Refusal
    Letter and in the Grounds of Appeal.  His determination  therefore  has
    to be set aside, and the decision on the appeal falls to be re-made  by
    the Upper Tribunal.  Looking first at Mr Singh's  claim  to  have  been
    here since 1998, the  only  evidence  for  that,  apart  from  his  own
    assertion, is brief letters from Gurpal Singh Gill, Pawan  Shandal  and
    Paramjit Singh.  None of these gentlemen gave evidence  at  the  First-
    tier hearing.  The only  person  who  did,  apart  from  the  Appellant
    himself, was Olu Jemiraye, who said that he had known the Appellant for
    four years.  The untested assertions in these three short letters  come
    nowhere near to establishing, on a balance of probabilities,  that  the
    Appellant has resided in the United Kingdom for at least 14 years.   As
    Ms Kiss also pointed out, the Appellant  is  said  not  to  speak  much
    English, and the services of a Punjabi interpreter  were  enlisted  for
    today's hearing.  If Mr Singh really came to this country as  a  minor,
    it is likely that he would have acquired much better English.

5.   Quite rightly, however, Ms Kiss  accepts  that  the  documents  in  the
    Appellant's Bundle do establish that he has been  residing  here  since
    2003.  We have a copy of his NHS card  and  a  letter  from  Dr  Gupta,
    saying that Mr Singh has been registered at his surgery since  February
    2003.  A letter from the Secretary  of  the  Gurdwara  Singh  Sabha  in
    Ilford states that Mr Singh has been a member of the congregation since
    2003, while two letters from private individuals also give that year as
    when they first made his acquaintance.  Then there are the  photographs
    of a wedding in Birmingham in 2003, at which the Appellant is present.

6.   Having been in the United Kingdom for at least ten years, Mr Singh  can
    safely be assumed to have formed a private life in  this  country,  for
    the purposes of Article 8.  (He has no  family  life.   At  the  first-
    instance hearing, he corrected what Pastor Ng'ambi said in  his  letter
    about Mr Singh having family  in  Coventry.)   Removal  to  India  will
    certainly interfere with that private life, so we can pass  quickly  to
    the ultimate question in Razgar, namely whether  such  interference  is
    proportionate.  Ms Kiss contends, and I  agree,  that  the  information
    about  the  Appellant's  private  life  is  exiguous.   Last  year  his
    representatives described him as leading a fairly  wretched  existence,
    doing menial jobs, eating at the temple, and staying  with  people  who
    had taken pity on him.  We do not know  what  his  connection  is  with
    Coventry, or how he can afford to go there if he has so  little  money.
    He was able to pay Kingswood Solicitors of Small  Heath  to  lodge  his
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, but the letters - some of which  are
    undated, while others are dated 2009 - all give the  same  address  for
    him in Ilford.  We are not told who else lives there, if anybody.

7.   The burden rests on the Appellant  to  show  that  he  has  established
    private life ties to the United Kingdom so  strong  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate to expect him now to return to  India.   This  he  has
    signally failed to do.  The appeal cannot  succeed,  either  under  the
    Immigration Rules or under the European Convention.


     DECISION

     The appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             8th August 2013



