
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA040582015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 May 2016                           |On 8 June 2016                      |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         chowdhury fazle noor rahat
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M K Mustafa, of Messrs Kalam Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Graham  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 15 October 2015  dismissed  the  appeal  brought  by  Mr
    Chowdhury Fazle Noor Rahat against a decision of the Secretary of State
    on immigration grounds but allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me, I will  for
    ease of reference refer to  her  as  the  respondent  as  she  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier.  Similarly I refer to Mr Chowdhury  Fazle
    Noor Rahat as the appellant as he was the appellant before  the  First-
    tier Judge.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  on  27  July  1991.   He
    entered Britain as a student in September 2010 and had leave to  remain
    in that capacity until 30 September 2014.  He  applied  on  27  October
    2014 for leave to remain on the basis of his family and private life in
    Britain.   His  application  was  considered  under  Appendix  FM   and
    paragraph 276ADE(1) of the  Immigration  Rules.   The  application  was
    refused on 12 January 2015. In a detailed  letter  of  refusal  it  was
    stated that the appellant could not meet the requirements  of  Sections
    EX.1(a) and (b) and EX.2 of Appendix FM. Although it  was  acknowledged
    that the appellant's partner had lived in Britain all her life and  was
    in employment here it was pointed put that that  did not mean that they
    could not live together in Bangladesh -  there  was  no  evidence  that
    there were insurmountable obstacles in accordance with EX.2  preventing
    the appellant from continuing  his  relationship  in  Bangladesh.   The
    appellant therefore could not  meet  the  requirements  of  Section  R-
    LTRP.1.1(d) and his application was refused under  Section  D-LTRP.1.3.
    It was also considered that the appellant could not qualify  under  the
    private  life  provisions  and  indeed  there   were   no   exceptional
    circumstances which would mean that he was entitled to leave to remain.

4.   The Immigration Judge having noted the terms of the refusal found  that
    the appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rules:  indeed she
    stated that the appellant accepted that he could not meet the financial
    requirements for the application and  that  he  sought  to  rely  on  a
    statement of additional grounds varying his application  on  the  basis
    that he should be considered as a partner under the  five  year  route.
    The judge went on  to  say  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    evidential requirements of the application and that as he had failed to
    provide mandatory evidence his application under Appendix FM could  not
    succeed and was dismissed.

5.   In paragraph 13 she  stated  that  having  considered  the  appellant's
    private life she was satisfied that  there  were  no  very  significant
    obstacles to his reintegrating into life in Bangladesh.

6.   However she went on to state that she  was  entitled  to  consider  the
    rights of the  appellant  under  Article  8  outside  the  Rules.   She
    referred to Section 117A(2) and Section 117B  of  the  Immigration  Act
    1974 and said  that she was required to carry out a balancing  exercise
    as to whether or not the appellant's circumstances engaged Article 8 of
    the ECHR and that she should decide  whether the proposed  interference
    was proportionate in all the circumstances.

7.   Having noted the terms of Section 117B she accepted that little  weight
    should be given to private life establishment by a  person  at  a  time
    when the person's immigration status is precarious but she went  on  to
    say that she accepted the submission that had he provided the mandatory
    evidence required he could have satisfied the Immigration  Rules  as  a
    partner under the five year Rule.  She said that  she  did  not  accept
    that the appellant's  presence  in  Britain  had  been  precarious  and
    therefore attached weight to his family and private life established in
    Britain.  She indicated that she took into account the  fact  that  the
    appellant spoke English and would be able to work here  and  considered
    that he would not be a burden on the taxpayer.

8.   In paragraph 18 she stated that,   balancing  the  public  interest  in
    requiring the appellant to return  to  Bangladesh  against  the  public
    interest in allowing him to remain in Britain,  she found that refusing
    the appeal and requiring the appellant to return to  Bangladesh  was  a
    disproportionate interference with his right in respect of  his  family
    life.  She therefore allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

9.   The grounds of appeal, on which Mr Avery relied at the hearing  pointed
    out that  the  judge  had  accepted  there  were  no  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant reintegrating into life  in  Bangladesh  and
    emphasised  that  she  had  not  made  a  finding   that   there   were
    insurmountable obstacles or compelling circumstances to prevent  family
    life from continuing elsewhere.  He pointed out that  the  requirements
    for entry into Britain were mandatory and were ones which the appellant
    and the sponsor had been fully aware of when  making  the  application.
    It was emphasised that Article 8 could  not  be  used  as  a  means  to
    circumvent the Immigration Rules.

10.  Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Collier.

11.  At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr  Avery  emphasised  that  the
    judge had found that the appellant could not meet the  requirements  of
    the Immigration  Rules.   He  referred  to  the  determination  of  the
    Tribunal in AM (Section 117B) Malawi [2015] 260  (IAC)  which  made  it
    clear  in  the  head  note  that  "A  person's  immigration  status  is
    'precarious' if their continued presence in the UK  will  be  dependent
    upon their obtaining a further grant of leave".  Moreover he added that
    nowhere had the judge identified any  compelling  reasons  outside  the
    Rules - this was clearly a requirement which had been emphasised by the
    Court of Appeal in SS (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387.   There  was  no
    evidence whatsoever that family life could not be considered elsewhere.
     In any event he suggested that a further application could be made  in
    Britain should the appellant be able to meet the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.

12.  In reply Mr Mustafa referred to paragraphs 44 to 46 of SS (Congo) as  a
    starting  point.   He  accepted  that  that  judgment  referred  to  an
    appellant requiring, if they could not meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules an arguable case outside the Rules  that  there  were  compelling
    circumstances which should lead to a grant of leave to remain.

13.  He stated that the judge had accepted that the appellant would be  able
    to meet the "five year Rule" and went on to say that although the other
    judge had not identified any compelling factors these were  clearly  in
    her mind when she set out the relevant factors in paragraph 18  of  the
    determination. He argued that therefore there was no material error  of
    law in the determination.

Discussion

14.  I consider that there are material errors of law in the  determination.
     It is clear that the judge found that the appellant could not meet the
    requirements of the Rules.  Moreover  she  found  that  there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to  the  appellant  and  his  wife  living  in
    Bangladesh.  Indeed there appear to be no obstacles  to  the  appellant
    making an application from Bangladesh to return to Britain  should,  as
    the judge indicated - although she merely stated that he might meet the
    requirements of the Rules - he might well be entitled to do.

15.  The reality however is  that  the  judge  gave  no  indication  of  any
    compelling or other factors  which  would  mean  that  the  appellant's
    appeal should be allowed on Article 8  grounds.   What  is  written  in
    paragraph 18 does not begin to show an arguable case that the appellant
    should be given leave outside the Rules  on  Article  8  grounds.   The
    judge has not indeed focused on any compelling or other  factors  which
    would mean that was appropriate. She was, moreover, clearly wrong  when
    she stated that the applicant's private life  was not precarious.

16.  For these reasons I set aside the decision of the judge.

17.  Mr Mustafa asked that I remit the appeal so that  the  appellant  could
    put forward evidence that it would be inappropriate to  expect  him  to
    leave the country. I agree to that course of action.  I  consider  that
    the requirements of the Senior President of  the  Tribunal's  Direction
    are, just, met in this case.

18.  This appeal is remitted to be heard de novo in the First-tier.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed to the extent that the appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier for a decision afresh on the issue of the  rights
of the appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 8th June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
