
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04387/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February 2016                  |On 25 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                             THOMAS TANYI AGBOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Rene of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Moxon, promulgated on 19  August  2015,  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision of 16 January 2015
    refusing the appellant's application for a permanent residence card  as
    confirmation of a right to reside in the UK.



Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Cameroon and was born on  24  July  1974.
    He entered the United Kingdom in  2007.   He  married  Alexia  Virginie
    Salome Gillot on 24 October 2008.  That relationship ended in July 2012
    and the couple divorced on 17 October 2014.  On 3  September  2014  the
    appellant applied for a permanent residence card as a confirmation of a
    right to reside in the United Kingdom.   The  respondent  refused  that
    application on the basis that the appellant had failed to show that his
    former partner had been exercising treaty rights for five years and  so
    did not  satisfy  Regulation  15(1)(b)  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  '2006   Regulations').    The
    respondent also refused the application stating that the appellant  had
    failed to show that he was divorced as only the decree  nisi  had  been
    produced.  However, by  the  time  of  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal the decree absolute had been disclosed and that did not remain
    in issue.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The Tribunal in dismissing the appeal  found  that  the
    documentation submitted shows significant gaps between  employment  and
    self-employment.  The Tribunal was therefore  not  satisfied  that  the
    sponsor had  provided  evidence  to  explain  the  gaps  and  that  the
    appellant had not made any effort to  explain  those  gaps  within  his
    statement.  The Tribunal found that the  appellant's  ex-wife  had  not
    exercised treaty rights continuously or at the time of their divorce.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  grounds  of  appeal
    assert that the judge erred by considering that under  both  Regulation
    15(1)(b) and 15(1)(f) the appellant had to  prove  that  his  wife  was
    exercising treaty rights up until the divorce.  The appellant relies on
    the case of Amos v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2011]
    EWCA Civ 55 ('Amos').  It is asserted that the regulation relied on  by
    the judge to dismiss the appeal is irrelevant to the  consideration  of
    the  appellant's  claim  which  is  based  on  five  years'  continuous
    residence.  On 18 December 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge  J  M  Holmes
    granted the appellant permission to appeal.  The  grant  of  permission
    sets out that it is arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to  follow  the
    required approach set out in the case of Amos and that given the  Court
    of Appeal's decision in NA [2014] EWCA Civ 995 it is also arguable that
    the judge's approach was flawed.

Summary of Submissions

The Appellant's Submissions

 5. There is one ground of appeal which essentially is that the  judge  did
    not consider the appellant's arguments that Regulation 15(1)(f) of  the
    EEA Regulations applied.  The appellant relies on the case of Amos.  It
    is asserted that the judge failed to follow the  step-by-step  approach
    as set out in paragraphs 16, 25 and 33 of Amos.  It  is  asserted  that
    the question on the facts of the instant case is which is the  relevant
    Regulation.  It is asserted that this issue does not feature at all  in
    the case of Amos although the judge was right to remind himself of Amos
    he made a material error of law by failing to engage with the  relevant
    issue which he was expressly invited to decide.  It is  also  submitted
    that the judge's decision offends the principles set out in  the  Annex
    to the judgment of Lord Justice Stanley Burton in  the  case  of  Amos.
    The relevant principle is said to be Article 16 general rule for  union
    citizens and their family members.

 6. It is asserted that the judge relied on the wrong Regulation to dismiss
    the appeal.  It is also asserted that the judge failed  to  record  the
    reasons that he was referred to that page, namely Article  16,  as  the
    evidence being relied on to support the submission that  the  appellant
    is entitled to a grant of  permanent  residence.   The  judge  did  not
    engage with that submission made to him.

The Respondent's Submissions

 7. The Secretary of State served a Rule  24  (of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008) response.  The respondent asserts that the
    First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  is  succinct  but  adequate.   It  is
    asserted that the judge identified the relevant issues and  notes  that
    the matter proceeded on submissions only and as a result  none  of  the
    deficiencies in the evidence relied upon to establish  the  appellant's
    wife's history of exercising treaty rights could be addressed.   It  is
    asserted that there is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 8. Mr Rene referred to the grant of leave to appeal  which  mentioned  the
    case of NA [2014] EWCA Civ 995 ('NA') in  which  the  Court  of  Appeal
    referred a question for a preliminary ruling from the Court of  Justice
    of the European Union  in  2014.   He  submitted  that  this  case  was
    pertinent to this appellant as it concerns what the position  ought  to
    be regarding the exercise of treaty rights at the date of divorce.   He
    made an application for this case to be stood over pending the  outcome
    of the ruling from the European Court.

 9. I indicated to Mr Rene that I had considered  the  case  of  Singh  and
    Others [2015] EUECJ C-218/14 that was recently decided in the  European
    Court which concerned a reference for a preliminary ruling. I indicated
    that the decision of the court in that case, which might have  been  in
    the appellant's favour, concerned the position where a  sponsor  leaves
    the host member state prior to commencement of divorce proceedings.  It
    was decided in that case that where the sponsor left  the  host  member
    state prior to divorce proceedings being initiated then  there  was  no
    right of residence on behalf of the partner in existence  at  the  date
    that divorce proceedings were initiated and therefore no retained right
    to residence in the host member state.  I indicated  to  Mr  Rene  that
    from the file before me I could not find any evidence that the  sponsor
    was exercising treaty rights at the date that the  divorce  proceedings
    were initiated. Although the exact date had not been  provided  it  was
    evident that it must have postdated 31 June 2012 (although I note  that
    June only has 30 days) when the appellant's sponsor has written to  the
    appellant indicating that she intended to initiate divorce proceedings.
     Mr Rene referred me to the respondent's bundle to a letter  from  HMRC
    which refers to '2012 to  2013  the  self-assessment  returns  are  not
    returned'.  I referred Mr Rene to the details in that document provided
    by HMRC which set out that self-employment commenced on  2  March  2011
    and ceased on 14 January 2012.  That was  at  least  five  and  a  half
    months before divorce proceedings would have been initiated.   Mr  Rene
    took  instructions  and  indicated  that  he  could  not  advance   any
    arguments.  He indicated that it was clear from the  records  that  the
    EEA sponsor was not exercising  treaty  rights  when  the  divorce  was
    initiated.  He also confirmed that she was not exercising  rights  when
    the decree absolute was pronounced in October  2014  as  there  was  no
    record  to  show  she  was  exercising  treaty  rights.   He  therefore
    indicated that he could not make any  submission.   Mr  Tarlow  had  no
    submissions to make in light of Mr Rene's position.

Legislative Provisions

10. Article 15 of the 2006 Regulations provides:

         'Permanent right of residence

         15.-(1)  The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in
             the United Kingdom permanently-

                  (a)  an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom
                  in accordance with  these  Regulations  for  a  continuous
                  period of five years;

                  (b)  a family member of an EEA national who is not himself
                  an EEA national but who has resided in the United  Kingdom
                  with the EEA national in accordance with these Regulations
                  for a continuous period of five years;

                  ...

                      (iii)     the  worker  or  self-employed  person  had
                      resided continuously in the  United  Kingdom  for  at
                      least the two years immediately before his  death  or
                      the death was the result of an accident at work or an
                      occupational disease;

                  (f)  a person who-

                      (i)  has resided in the United Kingdom in  accordance
                      with these Regulations for  a  continuous  period  of
                      five years; and

                      (ii) was, at the end of that period, a family  member
                      who has retained the right of residence.

             (2)  Once acquired, the right  of  permanent  residence  under
             this regulation shall be lost only through  absence  from  the
             United Kingdom for a period exceeding two consecutive years.

             (3)  But this regulation is subject to regulation 19(3)(b).'



Discussion

11. It is clear that Regulation 15(1) of  the  EEA  Regulation  whether  at
    15(1)(b) or at 15(1)(f) requires that the appellant has resided in  the
    United Kingdom for a continuous period of five years and at the end  of
    that period has either resided in  the  United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA
    national in accordance with the regulations throughout that  period  or
    under sub-paragraph (f) had retained the right of residence. In NA  the
    court, in setting out its reasons for a reference, considered  that  it
    was not clear whether the requirement is that at the  date  of  divorce
    the applicant must have a subsisting right in order to have retained  a
    right. At paragraph 21:

         "...

         6)   While there is some force in the Respondent's textual analysis
         of the title of Article 13 - in ordinary language a  right  is  not
         "retained" on divorce if it does not subsist on that date  -  there
         is no less force in the Appellant's submission that  the  "Gateway"
         construction accords with the need to interpret Article 13(2) in  a
         purposive manner, so as to avoid potential abuse by Union  citizens
         who are, for example, contesting custody or  rights  of  access  to
         their children  in  divorce  proceedings,  or  who  have  inflicted
         domestic violence upon their third country national spouse."

12. It is clear from the reasoning of the court in the case of  Singh  that
    the ECJ found that it was essential for the sponsor  to  be  exercising
    treaty rights and residing in the host Member State at  the  time  that
    divorce proceedings were initiated. The court set out  the  purpose  of
    derived rights:

         "50  As regards the right of residence in the host Member State  of
         nationals of third countries who are  family  members  of  a  Union
         citizen, attention should be drawn, as a preliminary point, to  the
         settled  case-law  of  the  Court  which  states  that  the  rights
         conferred on third-country nationals by Directive 2004/38  are  not
         autonomous rights of those nationals but rights  derived  from  the
         exercise of freedom of movement by a Union citizen. The purpose and
         justification of those derived rights are based on the fact that  a
         refusal to allow such rights would be liable to interfere with  the
         Union citizen's  freedom  of  movement  by  discouraging  him  from
         exercising his rights of entry  into  and  residence  in  the  host
         Member State (see, to that effect, judgment in O and  B,  C-456/12,
         EU:C:2014:135, paragraphs 36 and 45 and the case-law cited).

         ..."

13. Although the  question  referred  concerned  the  situation  where  the
    sponsor left the host Member State the reasoning applies by analogy  to
    the situation where the sponsor does not exercise  treaty  rights.  The
    court held:

         "58  It follows that, where a Union citizen in a situation such  as
         that of the spouses of  the  applicants  in  the  main  proceedings
         leaves the host Member State and settles in another Member State or
         in a third country, the spouse of that Union citizen who is a third-
         country national no longer meets  the  conditions  for  enjoying  a
         right of residence in the host Member State under Article  7(2)  of
         Directive 2004/38. It must, however, be examined whether, and under
         what conditions, that spouse can claim a right of residence on  the
         basis of Article 13(2)(a) of Directive 2004/38 where the  departure
         of the Union citizen is followed by a divorce.

         59   In accordance with  Article  13(2)(a)  of  Directive  2004/38,
         divorce does not entail the loss of the right  of  residence  of  a
         Union citizen's family members who are not nationals  of  a  Member
         State 'where ... prior to initiation of the divorce ... proceedings
         ... the marriage ... has lasted at least three years, including one
         year in the host Member State'.

         60   That provision thus corresponds  to  the  purpose,  stated  in
         recital 15 in the preamble to the  directive,  of  providing  legal
         safeguards for family members in the event  of  the  death  of  the
         Union citizen, divorce, annulment of marriage or termination  of  a
         registered partnership, taking measures in that respect  to  ensure
         that in such circumstances family members already  residing  within
         the territory of the  host  Member  State  retain  their  right  of
         residence exclusively on a personal basis.

         61   The reference in that provision to, first,  'the  host  Member
         State', which is defined in Article 2(3) of Directive 2004/38  only
         by reference to the exercise of the Union citizen's right  of  free
         movement and residence, and, secondly, 'initiation of  the  divorce
         ... proceedings' necessarily implies that the right of residence of
         the Union citizen's spouse who is a third-country national  can  be
         retained on the basis of Article 13(2)(a) of Directive 2004/38 only
         if the Member State in which that national  resides  is  the  'host
         Member State' within the  meaning  of  Article  2(3)  of  Directive
         2004/38 on the date of commencement of the divorce proceedings.

         62   That is not the case, however, if, before the commencement  of
         those proceedings, the Union citizen leaves  the  Member  State  in
         which his spouse resides for the purpose  of  settling  in  another
         Member State or a third country. In that  event  the  third-country
         national's derived right of residence  based  on  Article  7(2)  of
         Directive 2004/38 has come to an end  with  the  departure  of  the
         Union citizen and can therefore no longer be retained on the  basis
         of Article 13(2)(a) of that directive.'

         ...

         66   Consequently, it is clear that  the  spouse  who  is  a  Union
         citizen of a third-country national must reside in the host  Member
         State, in accordance with Article 7(1) of Directive 2004/38, up  to
         the date of commencement of the divorce proceedings for that third-
         country national to be able to claim the retention of his right  of
         residence in that Member State on the basis of Article 13(2) of the
         directive. [emphasis added]"

14. From the above passages the following principle  emerges.  The  sponsor
    must at the date of initiation of divorce proceedings  be  resident  in
    the host Member State and must be residing in accordance  with  Article
    7(1) - that is, exercising treaty rights. By  analogy  the  sponsor  in
    this case has not left the UK but  the  subsistence  of  the  right  of
    residence is dependent on her exercising treaty rights at the date that
    divorce proceedings were initiated.

15. As the appellant cannot demonstrate that  the  sponsor  was  exercising
    treaty rights at the time of the initiation of the divorce  proceedings
    the ECJ case of Singh does not assist  the  appellant  even  though  it
    might cast some doubt on the case of Amos v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department; Theophilus and the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] EWCA Civ 552 which set out that an appellant must  be
    able to demonstrate in an application for permanent residence  that  at
    all times  until  the  date  of  divorce  the  spouse  must  have  been
    exercising treaty rights.

16. The appellant does not meet the requirements of Article 16  as  he  did
    not reside as a family member  with  the  sponsor  who  was  exercising
    treaty rights for a continuous period of five years.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law.  The decision of the respondent stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 21 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

