
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04440/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th January 2016                 |On 11th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                     O K
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Abbas, of ST Law solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, OK, is a citizen of Pakistan.  No  order  for  anonymity
    was  made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Having  considered  all  the
    circumstances I do not make an anonymity order.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M Symes promulgated on 23rd June 2015, whereby the judge
    dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decisions   of   the
    Respondent to refuse the appellant further leave to remain  in  the  UK
    and to remove the appellant from the UK to Pakistan.

 3. By decision made on the 3rd November 2015 leave to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. Thus the matter appears before me to determine in
    the first instance whether or not there is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    original determination and to re-decide, if appropriate.

 4. The appellant entered the UK on  the  22nd  April  2004  as  a  student
    dependent spouse. She has two children by her husband, one  child  born
    on the 1st October 2002 and one born 23rd November 2007.

 5. It appears that the husband abandoned the appellant  and  the  children
    for another woman. The children appear to have  been  living  with  the
    appellant thereafter.

 6. The appellant's  leave  was  extended  at  various  stages  until  30th
    November 2007. It is unclear whether the appellant  had  leave  between
    November 2007 and October 2011. On the 24th October 2011 the  appellant
    was granted further leave on the basis of  her  relationship  with  her
    children.

 7. Again it is not entirely clear whether the children  were  living  with
    the appellant at the time. The decision refers to the  appellant  being
    granted discretionary by reason of her relationship with her daughters,
    who had been in the UK in respect of the eldest for over 10  years  and
    the youngest since birth in 2007. It appears however that the appellant
    had been suffering from a mental disorder  and  had  spent  significant
    periods of time as an in-patient in  a  hospital  dealing  with  mental
    health problems. By reason of her medical condition the  children  were
    in the care of the local authority and appear to have been living  with
    foster carers for some time.

 8. The appellant's contact with her  children  was  limited  to  telephone
    contact once a month from January 2015 onwards. Whilst  originally  the
    appellant had had no direct contact since April 2013 due to her  mental
    health, by the time of the hearing the appellant was having  supervised
    contact to her children on a monthly basis.

 9. There was a report before Judge Symes from Mr  Baldwin  of  North  East
    London NHS Trust, which indicated that the  Appellant  had  a  "schizo-
    affective disorder" that was in remission. The report also referred  to
    the fact that the appellant was unhappy that her children were not with
    her. The report also acknowledges  that  the  appellant  had  exhibited
    chaotic behaviour and had failed to engage with  medical  treatment  in
    the past.

10.  The  judge  considered  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    specifically Appendix FM paragraphs E-LTRPT,  specifically  E-LTRPT.2.4
    and EX.1-2. At paragraph 23 the judge  found  that  the  appellant  was
    exercising "access" rights to children in the UK  and  found  otherwise
    that the Appellant was in a genuine mother and child  relationship.  In
    effect Judge Symes found that the appellant meet  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules. Despite that Judge Symes dismissed the appeal.

11. The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision.  In  the  reply  the
    Respondent has set out the following:-

         "2.  The respondent accepts that there may have been a "slip of the
         pen" in the judge's determination ..."

12. It was not challenged that the appellant met the  requirements  of  the
    rules. As the appellant met the requirements of the  rules  the  appeal
    should have been allowed.  Accordingly there is a material error of law
    in the original decision. I set aside the original decision.  In  light
    of the findings made by the  judge,  which  stand  and  have  not  been
    challenged, the appellant meets the requirements of  the  rules  and  I
    allow the appeal under Immigration Rules.

Decision

13. There is a material error of law in the  decision.   I  set  aside  the
    original decision and substitute the following:-

         The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

14. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make a fee award.
    Taking account of all the circumstances especially the  fact  that  the
    children [were] not living with  the  appellant  at  the  time  of  the
    decision, I have decided not to make a fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
