

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
IA/04405/2015
                                                         IA/04399/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |       Decisions and Reasons       |
|                                     |Promulgated                        |
|On 23 April 2018                     |       On 03 May 2018              |
|                                           |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                                MANOJ KHADKA
                               ISHWORI PANDEY
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                  Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms M Chowdhury, Counsel instructed by Imperium  Group
                       Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmed, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Background

   1.       This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission to
      the respondent by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan on 3  January  2018
      in respect of the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moller
      who allowed these joint appeals under  the  rules  and  on  article  8
      grounds by way  of  a  determination  dated  22  November  2017.   For
      convenience, I refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier
      Tribunal.

   2.       The appellants are husband and wife and are  Nepalese  nationals
      born respectively on 28 November 1987  and  12  May  1993.  The  first
      appellant entered the UK on 18 January 2010 as a tier  4  student  and
      obtained further leave until 30 October 2014. He  married  the  second
      appellant in January 2014 and she then entered the UK in May  2014  as
      his dependant.


   3.       It appears that  at  some  point  the  appellant  approached  an
      organisation by the name of Amita Solutions which purported  to  be  a
      recruitment agency as well as immigration advisers.  He  sought  their
      assistance in finding providing employment and then in obtaining  Tier
      2 leave for him and an application under the points based  scheme  was
      made prior to the expiry of his leave. It then transpired  that  Amita
      Solutions defrauded the appellant and many others and  that  they  had
      provided him with a false CAS and so the  appellant  then  varied  his
      application to one for leave on private and family life grounds.  This
      was considered by the respondent both under and outside the rules  and
      refused on 20 January 2015 in eligibility and suitability grounds  and
      because no exceptional circumstances were apparent.


   4.       The appellants appealed and at a review hearing at Taylor  House
      in May 2017, the respondent conceded  that  the  appellants  had  been
      victims of fraud and withdrew her reliance on suitability grounds.


   5.       The appellants now have two children; a son born  on  7  October
      2015 and a daughter born on 26 September 2017.

   6.       The respondent's criticism of the judge are that he  placed  too
      much weight on the possibility that the appellants may  have  to  give
      evidence at a future  trial  relating  to  the  prosecution  of  Amita
      Solutions, that this was not a factor which should have played such  a
      significant role in the judge's assessment  and  decision  making  and
      that his findings on the family being without work  and  destitute  on
      return to Nepal and his subsequent conclusion that it would not be  in
      the children's best interests to leave the UK, were  all  inadequately
      reasoned and not shown as having been based on any evidence.


Appeal hearing

   7.       At the hearing before me I heard submissions from both  parties.
      Ms Ahmed expanded upon the grounds and argued that  the  judge  placed
      far too much weight on the possibility that the appellants may need to
      give evidence at a future trial when there was nothing to suggest that
      this would be the case. She submitted that even if such evidence  were
      to be required, the appellants would be able to seek  entry  clearance
      to return for that purpose. She submitted that the  judge  found  that
      the  appellants  would  have  no  support  and  that  there  would  be
      significant obstacles on return but there was no consideration of  the
      very significant obstacles test and no consideration of the length  of
      time they had both lived in  Nepal.  The  consideration  of  the  best
      interests of the children was also flawed. Again, the  judge  had  not
      explained what he had based his conclusions on. Without any  evidence,
      they were speculative. Ms Ahmed relied on EV (Philippines)[2014]  EWCA
      Civ 874 and Miah (s.117B - children) [2016] UKUT 131 for what  factors
      were relevant in consideration of these matters.


   8.       Ms Chowdhury responded. She submitted that the judge had focused
      on the possible future trial because the respondent  had  refused  the
      claim on suitability grounds and therefore he was required to consider
      that issue. He considered that the appellants would have no employment
      on return and that there was a risk of destitution on return.  As  the
      children were both born  after  the  application  had  been  made,  he
      considered their best interests as at the date  of  the  hearing.  The
      appellants had been living here for 8 years  (this  was  corrected  to
      less than 4 years for the second appellant at my intervention) and the
      fact that they had been victims of fraud was found to be a  compelling
      circumstance.


   9.       Ms Ahmad, in reply, submitted that  the  judge's  findings  were
      speculative. There was no indication as to the evidence relied  on  to
      support them and no reasons given.


  10.       That completed the hearing. I reserved my determination which  I
      now give with reasons.

Findings and Conclusions

  11.       I have considered the evidence before  me  and  the  submissions
      made. The determination is short and contains but a brief analysis  of
      the issues. That need not necessarily be a problem but in  this  case,
      the analysis is lacking. Despite what Ms Chowdhury argued, it is plain
      that the judge placed great  emphasis  on  the  possibility  that  the
      appellants may have to give evidence in the future at a criminal trial
      even though there was no evidence to confirm this would be necessary.


  12.       Ms Chowdhury sought to  defend  the  judge's  reliance  on  that
      factor (at paragraphs 44, 45, 48, 49, 52, 53, 56 and 64 by  submitting
      that he had to engage with it because of the respondent's  refusal  on
      suitability  grounds.  With  respect  there  is  no  merit   in   that
      submission. That ground of  refusal  had  been  withdrawn  before  the
      matter even came before Judge Moller and so apart from the summary  of
      the background given at paragraphs 2-5, there was no further  need  to
      dwell on this and  certainly  not  to  the  extent  of  several  other
      relevant considerations  (as  the  case  law  identifies)  which  were
      completely disregarded.
  13.       The respondent is also entitled to complain about the inadequacy
      of the findings and a lack of reasoning.  The  judge  finds  that  the
      appellants will be without work on  return  but  so  would  all  other
      appellants  returning  home  after   some   years   away.   With   the
      qualifications and experience obtained here, they would be well placed
      to look for employment on return. There is no evidence to support  the
      finding that they faced a risk of destitution. No  reasons  are  given
      for this conclusion and the  evidence  is  that  the  appellants  have
      family in Nepal. The first appellant at least has been back  to  visit
      and indeed returned for his marriage thereby showing he  still  has  a
      social and cultural connection  with  his  country  of  origin.  Their
      children are very young indeed and have no private/family life outside
      of their parents. They can be expected to return with them  and  there
      is nothing to indicate that it would not be in their best interests to
      do so. The appellants have both spent the majority of their  lives  in
      Nepal. The second appellant had lived here  less  than  4  years.  The
      first appellant, although having entered in 2010, was  aware  that  he
      was coming for a temporary purpose and any  private  life  established
      here (which is unspecified) was established during a time when his and
      his wife's stay was precarious and  carries  little  weight.  None  of
      these matters have been taken into consideration.


  14.       It follows that the judge's findings are  inadequately  reasoned
      and that insufficient reasons were given for his conclusions.


  15.       I set aside the entire determination and remit it for re-hearing
      to another First-tier Tribunal Judge. No findings are preserved.

 Decision

  16.       The First-tier Tribunal Judge made errors of law such  that  his
      decision must be set aside  and  re-made  by  another  judge  of  that
      Tribunal at a future date.

Directions

  17.       No later than five working days prior to  the  resumed  hearing,
      the appellants shall file and  serve  a  skeleton  argument  and  full
      statements of evidence.

  18.       Any other documentary evidence  relied  on  and  which  has  not
      already been submitted must also be filed within the same time  frame.



  19.       A hearing time of 2 hours shall be allocated as  agreed  by  the
      parties. Should an interpreter be required the appellants shall notify
      the First-tier Tribunal of their requirements as soon as they  receive
      the notice of hearing.


Anonymity

  20.       I was not asked to make an anonymity order and in any event  see
      no reason to do so.

      Signed:








      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal
              23 April 2018
