
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
IA/04714/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision Promulgated            |
|On 22 February 2016                        | On 7 April 2016                 |
|                                                  |                          |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                          Adeyemisi Ololade Adesida

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Nasim, Counsel instructed by Stephens Happyman
                    & Co Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 11 August 1976.

 2. On 25 January 2013 she made an application for further leave to remain.
     That application was refused in a decision dated 13 January 2015.   At
    the same time a decision was made to remove the appellant  pursuant  to
    Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 3. The appellant appealed against those decisions and her appeal was heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge N M K Lawrence on 23  July  2015,  whereby
    the appeal was dismissed.

 4. The respondent's decision  considered  the  application  for  leave  to
    remain with reference to Article 8 of the ECHR, in terms of the Article
    8 Rules relating to family and private life.   Consideration  was  also
    given to the issue of "exceptional circumstances" and whether  a  grant
    of leave otherwise than under the Rules was merited  under  Article  8.
    Articles 3 and 8 were also  considered  in  terms  of  the  appellant's
    health.

 5. The First-tier Judge ("FtJ") concluded that the appellant was not  able
    to meet the requirements of the  Article  8  Rules  and  dismissed  the
    appeal on that basis and with reference to Article 8 proper.

 6. The grounds of appeal before the Upper Tribunal contend that there were
    various errors in the FtJ's decision in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    immigration history, in relation to  the  nature  of  the  respondent's
    decision and otherwise in the appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT").  Other issues are raised in the grounds in terms of  the  best
    interests of the appellant's two children.

 7. In  the  respondent's  'rule  24'  response,  it  is  stated  that  the
    respondent's  preliminary  view  is  that  it  is  conceded  that   the
    respondent's decision does not substantively consider  the  appellant's
    Tier 4 application dated 25 January 2013, as it should have  done.   On
    that basis, it is suggested that the appeal be allowed to  the  limited
    extend that the respondent's decision of 13  January  2015  is  not  in
    accordance with the law.

 8. Before me it was agreed on behalf of the respondent that  the  FtJ  had
    erred in law in terms of the appellant's immigration history  which  it
    was accepted is not accurately set out in  the  respondent's  decision.
    It was also accepted that the FtJ did not in fact deal  with  a  matter
    that is said to go to the suitability requirements of the Rules, namely
    an allegation of deception in relation  to  an  English  language  test
    taken by the appellant on 18 September 2012, the English language  test
    having been used by the appellant to seek leave to remain.

 9. There was also the underlying error in the respondent's decision  which
    was to have failed to consider  the  appellant's  Tier  4  application,
    instead dealing with the application on the basis of Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.

10. In the light of the agreement between the parties before me, it is  not
    necessary to provide much elaboration of those issues.  It is  accepted
    on behalf of the respondent that  there  are  errors  in  the  decision
    letter setting out the appellant's immigration history.  In that sense,
    the FtJ could not be criticised for relying on the information set  out
    in the decision letter, although having said that, it is  contended  on
    behalf of the appellant that her immigration history is in fact set out
    in her witness statement and other documents in the  bundle  that  were
    before the FtT.  Indeed, it is the case that in her  witness  statement
    the  appellant  took  issue  with  the  respondent's  summary  of   her
    immigration history.  The FtJ has not dealt with that issue.

11.  At  [19]  the  FtJ  said  that  the  appellant  had  to  satisfy   the
    'suitability' requirements of the Rules, referring  to  the  allegation
    that she had used deception in order  to  obtain  an  English  language
    test.  However, there is in fact no finding by the FtJ on that issue.

12. The respondent accepts that the appellant actually made an  application
    for leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student, and that that application  was
    not dealt with in the respondent's decision dated 13 January 2015.

13. In the circumstances, having regard to the concession on behalf of  the
    respondent, and the other matters  to  which  I  have  referred,  I  am
    satisfied that the FtJ erred in law such as to require the decision  to
    be set aside. Again, in the light of the respondent's concession, I re-
    make the decision and allow the appeal to the limited extent  that  the
    respondent's decision is not in accordance with the law for failure  to
    determine the Tier 4 application.

14. Accordingly, there remains outstanding before the Secretary of State  a
    lawful decision to be made on the application with reference to Tier 4.



15. Having set aside the FtJ's decision, again the parties agreed  that  no
    findings of fact  should  be  preserved  in  the  respondent's  further
    consideration of the appellant's outstanding application.

    Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision is set aside.  I re-make the decision,
    allowing  the  appeal  to  the  limited  extent  that   there   remains
    outstanding before the respondent an application for  leave  to  remain
    which requires lawful consideration by the respondent.









Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      18/03/16


