
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04595/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 June 2016                               |On 11 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY



                                   Between

                              abdul deen koroma
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Eteko, IRAS & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGirr, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone. He came to  the  UK  in  or
    about 2002 and applied unsuccessfully for asylum. He  subsequently  met
    and married a national of the Netherlands. They married on 13  December
    2007.  On the basis of  this  marriage  the  appellant  was  granted  a
    residence card from 9 November 2009 -  9  November  2015,  but  shortly
    before expiry of that period  (on  15  October  2014)  he  applied  for
    permanent residence on the basis of his marriage. On  16  January  2015
    the respondent refused that application. One of the reasons she gave is
    conceded to be misconceived.  She referred to reg 10 of the Immigration
    (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations   2006   and  stated  that  the
    appellant did  not  have  a  retained  right  of  residence.  This  was
    misconceived because the appellant had separated  from  his  spouse  in
    2012, but they have never divorced. However the respondent also  relied
    on the appellant's inability to meet the requirements of reg  15(1)(b).
    The respondent stated: "[y]ou have provided no evidence  to  show  that
    she has been  exercising her treaty rights in the United Kingdom for  a
    5 year period."

2.   The appellant appealed. In a decision sent on 11 September 2016  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge (FtT) Judge Khawar dismissed his appeal.  The judge
    gave two main reasons. It is agreed between the  parties  that  one  of
    these was plainly wrong.  At [17] the judge  purported  to  refuse  the
    application because the appellant had not shown he had resided with  an
    EEA national for a continuous period of five  years,  stating  at  [17]
    that:

         "... the appellant's account is  that  he  resided  in  the  United
         Kingdom between some date (not specified) in 2008 until  some  date
         (not specified) in 2012 when  [the  couple]  were  separated.  This
         merely represents a period of at  best  four  years  of  continuous
         residence together."

3.   The error reflected in this finding was the assumption  that  "residing
    with "required cohabitation or living under the same roof. As the Upper
    Tribunal made clear in PM (EEA  -  spouse  -  "residing  with")  Turkey
    [2011] UKUT 90 drawing on the Court of Justice  judgment  in  Diatta  v
    Lord Berlin [1985] ECR 967, it is sufficient for the purpose of the EEA
    Regulations if the couple were both present in the UK even if separated
    and not cohabitating.  (The judge also misleadingly referred in [21] to
    the appellant not  having  any  retained  rights;  this  was  erroneous
    because, not being divorced, the appellant could not retain  rights  in
    any event.

4.   The other reason the judge gave for dismissing the appeal was that  the
    appellant could not show that his spouse  had  been  exercising  treaty
    rights continuously for five years, because:

         "his employment history (as set out in the witness statement  dated
         28 July 2015 of Wendy Gilbert of HMRC)  clearly  shows  substantial
         gaps within the appellant's spouse's employment record; at the very
         least it is clear from Ms  Gilbert's  witness  statement  that  the
         appellant's spouse was not employed between 11 November 2011 and 13
         July 2012, a period of approximately eight months."

5.   Leaving aside the valid challenge to the judge's mistaken  approach  to
    the issue of whether the appellant and his  spouse  met  the  "residing
    .... with" requirement (see above), the grounds relied on two  aspects.
    The first was that it was possible, on the authority of  the  Court  of
    Justice judgment in Maria Dias v SSWP  [2011]  "to  cobble  together  5
    years' legal residence out of time  periods  spent  the  UK,  sometimes
    exercising residence rights, sometimes not".

6.   In my judgement this ground must fail.

7.   As the  judge  correctly  pointed  out  at  [21]  the  case  which  the
    appellant primarily sought to rely on was Lassal  [20120]  ECRI  00007.
    But in this case the Court of Justice was concerned with the  issue  of
    whether residence prior to the 2006 Regulations could  be  deployed  to
    aggregate an individual's length of residence in the UK;  it  proceeded
    on the assumption  that  by  taking  into  consideration  the  pre-2006
    residence the individual in that case could  show a  continuous  period
    of residence amounting to five  years:  see  Dias  at  [43]  and  [66].
    Neither Lassal nor Dias said anything about the  ability  to  aggregate
    periods of residence between which  there  was  no  continuity.  Lassal
    concerned "continuous periods of residence... completed before the date
    of transposition of the Directive 2004/38 ..." (see Dias at  ]235]  and
    [65].

8.   The other ground which the appellant advances is  that  the  judge  was
    wrong to consider  that  in  order  to  show  continuous  residence  in
    accordance with the Regulations the appellant had to show that  he  was
    in continuous employment. By reference to  the  Case  C-230/03,  Mehmet
    Sedof  it was agued that it was possible to retain the status of worker
    despite the interruptions (Mr Sedof's periods of employment   had  been
    interrupted seventeen times, for periods  of  between  1  and  70  days
    amounting in total to 13 months, see [7].  This ground was not in  fact
    raised in the grounds but only by Mr Ekete in oral  submissions.  I  am
    prepared, however, to  treat  the  appellant's  grounds  as  varied  to
    include this ground because it was clear from the original grounds that
    the  "interruption" point was raised, albeit without any clear citation
    of authority to support  it.  Further,  even  though  the   Sedof  case
    concerns the  Turkish Association Agreements, not Directive 2004/38/EC,
    the principles it enunciates are entirely consistent with the Court  of
    Justice (and UK) cases dealing with this issue: see e.g. Martinez  Sala
    [1998] ECR 1-2 691.

9.   In essence the case law requires assessment  of  whether  interruptions
    have broken continuity of employment to be taken by having regard to  a
    wide ranges of factors, including whether a person has continued to  be
    connected to the labour market and has a  genuine  intention  of  being
    employed and a genuine chance of becoming employed.

10.  Whilst  the  judge  did  not  self-consciously  apply  such  a  rounded
    approach, I do not consider there was any error in  his  assessment  of
    the facts of the appellant's case. In the  appellant's  case  what  the
    judge properly relied on was that his spouse's employment record showed
    significant gaps. Within the period from the dates of marriage  to  the
    date of decision (13 December  2007  -  16  January  2015)  there  were
    significant gaps. There were a number of short gaps which stood  to  be
    disregarded, approximately two months in 2011 and three  months  in  18
    February 2013 and 18 June 2013 for example.  However there was  also  a
    very significant  gap: between 11 November 2011 and 13  July  2012  (an
    eight month gap).

11.  I would observe that a gap of some 300 odd days  is  very  considerably
    longer than the  70 days gap disregarded in  Sedof.   It  is  also  two
    months longer than the benchmark period of six months  contemplated  by
    the  Court of judge justice in Case C-393/96 P(R) I-441,  [1997]  ECR-1
    Antonissen, for being a period during   which  a  person  could   still
    claim to be a jobseeker.

12.  It may be that a different judge considering the  appellant's  spouse's
    employment history may have taken a different  view,  but  I  can  only
    interfere with the judge's assessment that continuity had  been  broken
    in the appellant's spouse's case if the  view  taken  was  outside  the
    range of reasonable responses.  I do  not  consider  that  the  judge's
    assessment fell into this category.

13.  Since the effect of this break (between November 2011  and  July  2012)
    was that the appellant's spouse  was  not  able  to  show  five  years'
    continuous residence in accordance with the  Regulations,  the  judge's
    decision that the appellant had not established residence on the  basis
    of being a family member of a  person  with  such  residence   was  not
    vitiated by legal error.

14.  Accordingly the appellant's challenge  must  fail.   My  conclusion  is
    that the judge did not materially err in law.





Signed                                  Date: 9 August 2016

            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
