
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/04295/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 December 2015                   |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                              michael agyapong
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, instructed by Kilic and Kilic
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against  the  decision  and
    reasons statement  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mulvenna  that  was
    promulgated on  21  April  2015.   Permission  to  appeal  was  granted
    primarily on the grounds that it was possible that the  judge  did  not
    have the appellant's 285 page bundle of documents when determining  the
    appeal.

 2. At the beginning of the  hearing  I  disclosed  that  the  appeal  file
    contained the appellant's 285 page bundle.  It was sent with  a  letter
    dated 19 March 2015 and was stamped by the Tribunal  in  Manchester  as
    received on 23 March 2015.  The bundle  contains  statements  from  the
    appellant and his wife and a wealth of financial documentation relating
    to the couple.  In the statements the appellant  and  his  wife  engage
    with the issues raised in the reasons for refusal letter.

 3. I indicated to both representatives that my preliminary view  was  that
    the judge did not have access to these  bundles  when  determining  the
    appeal because in paragraphs 16 and 17 the  judge  commented  that  the
    appellant had failed to engage with the reasons for refusal.  The judge
    could only have reached this conclusion  if  the  statements  from  the
    appellant and his wife were not available.

 4. I added that although the Tribunal received the bundle on 23 March 2015
    there was no way of knowing when the bundle was linked  to  the  appeal
    file.  Administrative problems occur from time to  time  and  it  would
    appear that this might be such a case.

 5. Although this was the appellant's appeal, Mr Mills addressed me  first.
    He admitted that when preparing the case he  had  recognised  that  the
    Home Office had received the appellant's bundle of documents  in  March
    2015, some weeks before the appeal  was  determined.   He  accepted  my
    observations and conceded that in such circumstances I could only  find
    that there had been a procedural error of such moment as to amount to a
    legal error.

 6. I agree and find that the decision and reasons statement  of  21  April
    2015 contains an error on a point of law to the extent that it must  be
    set aside.

 7. Mr Mills went on to address me in respect of how the decision should be
    remade.  He did not seek for this matter to be remitted to  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal.   He  had  examined  the  documents  submitted  by  the
    appellant and acknowledged that there was no reason to think  that  any
    of the documents were not genuine.  The bank  statements  revealed  the
    earnings of the appellant's EEA spouse and that they were  paid  weekly
    throughout the  relevant  period.   Although  original  documents  were
    usually required to help the Home Office verify claims, the standard of
    proof in an appeal was simply a balance of  probabilities  and  on  the
    volume of evidence now available that standard had been met.  Mr  Mills
    invited me to remake the original decision and allow the appeal against
    the EEA decision of 14 January 2015.

 8. I have no reason to go behind the concession made.  I find,  therefore,
    that the appellant has shown that he has acquired a permanent right  of
    residence in the UK and that he is entitled to  a  permanent  residence
    card under regulation 15(1)(b) of the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

Decision

I allow the appeal to the Upper Tribunal because the  decision  and  reasons
statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mulvenna  contains  an  error  on  a
point of law and is set aside.

I remake the decision and allow the  appeal  against  the  EEA  decision  of
15(1)(b).


                               Signed   Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
