
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05877/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On the 13th November 2014                       |On the 9th December 2014   |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                          Miss Lisa CHisha kapopole
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Yousefiam, instructed by DJ Webb & Co Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Miss Lisa Chisha Kapopole, date of birth 13th  September
    1984, is a citizen of Zambia.  Having considered the facts there is  no
    need for an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an  appeal  by  the  appellant  against  the  determination  of
    Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Digney promulgated on 26th  August
    2014, whereby the judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision by the respondent to refuse the appellant's application for  a
    derivative residence card under Regulation  15  A  of  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 3. By decision of 6 October 2014 I granted permission to appeal. The  case
    now appears before me to determine whether or not there was a  material
    error of law in the original determination.

 4. The appellant appears to have entered the United Kingdom on 19  January
    2006 on a visitor visa valid until 22 June 2006. The appellant  clearly
    overstayed. The appellant entered into a relationship with a Mr  Karem.
    It appears that Mr Karem had indefinite leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 5. As a result of the relationship the appellant gave birth to a child who
    is  a  British  citizen.  On  20  February  2013  the  appellant   made
    application  for  a  Derivative  Residence  Card  by  reason   of   her
    relationship with the child.

 6. The appellant's case was that shortly after the birth of the child  the
    relationship with Mr Karem came to an end. The appellant's case was and
    is that Mr Karem has had nothing to do with the child.

 7. Before me it was accepted that the only issue before the  Tribunal  was
    whether or not, if the appellant were removed from the United  Kingdom,
    the child, a British citizen, would be required  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom in accordance with Regulation 15A (4A) of the 2006 Regulations.

 8. In the course  of  the  hearing  the  judge  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant and her two sisters. On  the  evidence  available  the  judge
    found that Mr Karem was not in the United Kingdom and  would  not  care
    for the child. However the judge went on to  consider  that  the  child
    would not have to leave the United Kingdom because the appellant's  two
    sisters were in the United Kingdom and they could look after the child.

 9. The statements indicated that the sisters would not  be  able  to  look
    after the child. The status of one of the sisters is  not  settled  and
    she may have to leave the UK. The other sister indicated that  she  had
    two children and could not cope with a third. It does not  appear  that
    the sisters were asked about  the  matter  during  the  course  of  the
    hearing. The evidence to that extent was unchallenged.

10.  There may be a number of legal issues with  leaving  a  child  with  a
    relative without proper investigation having been carried out by social
    services, especially as to the suitability of such a placement. However
    there was no legal basis in the evidence for the finding that  the  two
    sisters would look after the child. That is a matter  that  has  to  be
    investigated properly. Without the evidential base to make that finding
    of fact, the judge was not entitled to conclude that the child would be
    looked after by the sisters.

11. That is a material error of law. The  appropriate  course  is  for  the
    matter  to  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  have
    considered whether any of the findings of fact  made  by  the  original
    judge should be preserved. However new findings of fact will have to be
    made on the basis of the factual situation that exists at the  time  of
    the new hearing. In the light of that I do  not  preserve  any  of  the
    findings of fact made by the original judge.

12.  There is a material error of law in  the  determination.   I  set  the
    decision aside and remit the matter for a fresh hearing in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


