
[pic]
IAC-AH-RG-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05729/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1 October 2014                               |On 27 October 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                          Jinil Parokkaran Poulose
                         (anonymity ORDER not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance by Legend Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 3 April 1983.  On 27 August
    2010 he arrived with leave to enter  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  migrant
    expiring on 28 June 2012.  In time he applied for further leave in  the
    same category.

The Decision and Grounds of Appeal

 2. On 16 January 2014 the Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application
    and decided to remove him to India by way of directions  under  Section
    47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act   2006.    The
    application was refused because the Appellant  had  failed  to  provide
    evidence of his relationship  to  his  father  who  was  his  financial
    sponsor  and  by  way  of  reference  to  paragraph  245ZX(d)  of   the
    Immigration Rules and paragraph 13 of Appendix C.

 3. The Appellant's solicitors lodged notice of appeal under Section 82  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the  2002
    Act).  The grounds assert that  the  evidence  of  Maintenance  (Funds)
    submitted was a bank account in the joint names of  the  Appellant  and
    his father and that the document evidencing the Appellant's  birth  had
    been sent at the Respondent's request.  Further, there was no need  for
    this latter document because the Appellant was a joint  holder  of  the
    bank account.

 4. Additional grounds of  appeal  refer  to  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention, the Appellant's private life and  his  expenditure  on  his
    studies so far in the United Kingdom.  Finally, the grounds submit  the
    decision under Section 47 of the 2006 Act was unlawful by reason of the
    determination in Ahmadi (s.47 decision: validity: Sapkota) [2012]  UKUT
    00147 (IAC) but they fail to take into account Section 51 of the  Crime
    and Courts Act 2013.

The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 5. The Appellant had requested an oral hearing.  He did not attend and the
    Respondent had informed the Tribunal  that  the  appeal  could  proceed
    without the Respondent being represented.  A determination  promulgated
    on 13 June 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Beach  dismissed  the
    appeal on all grounds.  She addressed the issue of the  bank  statement
    and a subsequently submitted passbook at paragraphs 12 and  13  of  her
    determination.  The bank statement in question showed the holder was Mr
    Poulose, Po.  There is reference to a  nominee  described  as  "Eliya".
    Subsequently, the Appellant filed with  the  Tribunal  a  copy  of  the
    Account Particulars from a bank passbook showing the Appellant  as  the
    first named joint-holder. The passbook showed it had been issued on  24
    May  2013,  some  eleven  months  after  the  Appellant  had  made  the
    application leading to the decision under appeal.

 6. The Judge considered this was post-application evidence which she could
    not consider by reason of Sections 85A(3)(b) or 85A(4) of the 2002 Act.
      She  concluded  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    Immigration Rules.

 7. She went on to consider the Appellant's claim that  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention was engaged.  She noted his witness statement  gave
    very little detail of his private life in the United Kingdom other than
    the assertion he had built up social ties and spent a lot of  money  on
    tuition, fees and maintenance.  No details of his studies were given or
    whether they had been completed or what effect removal to  India  would
    have on him.  She concluded  that  while  he  may  have  established  a
    private life the interference to it on removal would "be proportionate"
    and dismissed his appeal under the European Convention.

 8. The Appellant through his solicitors sought permission to appeal  which
    on 21 August 2014 was granted by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  PJM
    Hollingworth on the basis that it was an arguable error of law that the
    Judge had not taken account of the passbook.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 9. The hearing was set for 1400 hours on Wednesday 1 October 2014 at Field
    House.  By 1500 hours, there was no appearance by the Appellant or  any
    representative for him.  No message had been left at the reception desk
    in Field House and searches of the reception area did not disclose  the
    Appellant or any representative.

10. I contacted the Appellant's solicitors and spoke to a  Mr  Rohith.   He
    told me he had sent a fax the previous day to  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    state that his firm was withdrawing for lack of instructions  from  the
    Appellant.  In the circumstances I was satisfied  that  notice  of  the
    time, date and place set for the hearing had been properly given to the
    Appellant and, having considered the documents in the Tribunal file, it
    was just to proceed.  I asked for searches to be made for the fax which
    the solicitor said had been sent to the Tribunal.   My  clerk  reported
    back that searches had not revealed that the Tribunal had received such
    a communication.

11. Mr Kandola submitted the Judge had been correct to consider the page of
    the passbook was not admissible.  Additionally, the evidence which  the
    Respondent had requested in the form of a birth certificate to  confirm
    the relationship of the Appellant to his father had not been  produced.
    The document which had been produced was a statement by the Appellant's
    parents that they were the Appellant's parents  and  the  date  of  his
    birth.  The statement showed that duty had been paid  on  the  document
    and there were stamps by a notary as evidence of payment of stamp duty.
     The document was not a  birth  certificate  but  a  statement  by  the
    Appellant's  parents.   It  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules and the file showed that it  had  been  obtained  and
    submitted upon the Respondent's request  for  a  birth  certificate  in
    compliance with the requirements of paragraph 245ZX(d) and paragraph 13
    of Appendix C of the Immigration Rules.

12. Mr Kandola continued that the bank account  upon  which  the  Appellant
    relied as evidence that he would be maintained was in his father's sole
    name at the date of his application and by the date of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing had become a joint account.  The Appellant had  failed
    to discharge the burden of proof to show that he met  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules and the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
    did not contain an error of law.

Findings

13. The Judge's treatment of the admissibility of the copy of a  page  from
    the bank account passbook was in accordance with  Section  85A  of  the
    2002 Act.  Notwithstanding  the  assertions  of  paragraph  15  of  the
    grounds for appeal that the Appellant had mentioned in his  application
    the funds were in his own name it is evident that at the  date  of  the
    application this was  not  correct  and  indeed  on  the  documentation
    submitted continued to be an inaccurate statement until  25  May  2013,
    some eleven months after the date of the application.  Consequently the
    exceptions referred to in  Section  85A  are  not  applicable  and  the
    Appellant has failed to show that there is an error of law in the First-
    tier Tribunal's determination which therefore shall stand.

Anonymity

14. There has been no request for an anonymity order and I  see  no  reason
    for one.

DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal's determination did not contain an error of law
    and  shall  stand.   The  consequence  is  the  Appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed under the Immigration Rules and also on human rights grounds.


Signed/Official Crest                            Date 23. x. 2014




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




