
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05588/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 February 2015                           |17 February 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Monica Tandoch
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Boaitey, Counsel instructed by Phil Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   For ease of reference I shall refer to the parties  as  the  "Secretary
    of State" who is the Appellant in this matter and  to  the  "Claimant".
    This  is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in  respect  of  a
    determination by First-tier Tribunal (Judge Tipping) promulgated on  24
    October 2014 in which he allowed an appeal against the refusal to grant
    a residence card as a spouse under Regulation 7 of the EEA  Regulations
    2006.

2.   In a Reasons for Refusal Letter the Claimant applied  for  a  residence
    card as the spouse of an EEA national under Regulation  17  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006. The Secretary of State rejected the application
    on the grounds that she failed to show that she was lawfully married by
    proxy in accordance with Ghanaian law.  Further the Secretary of  State
    considered that the Claimant failed  to  meet  the  requirements  under
    Regulation  8(5);  there  was  insufficient  evidence  of   a   durable
    relationship.

Decision of the First -tier Tribunal

3.   In a decision  and  reasons  Judge  Tipping  found  that  the  marriage
    entered into was lawful according to  Ghanaian  law  [11]  and  further
    found legal recognition of the marriage in Portugal [13]. The  Tribunal
    reserved its decision and subsequently had regard to  further  evidence
    of a photocopy of a letter from the Portuguese Embassy dated  8  August
    2014 that was served on the Tribunal Judge after the hearing by way  of
    a letter dated 11 September 2014 and an amended skeleton argument  from
    Counsel instructed by the Claimant.  The Tribunal forwarded the same to
    the Home Office who made no response. The Tribunal  took  into  account
    the further evidence in reaching its decision.  It is  unclear  if  the
    original letter from the Portuguese Embassy was produced.  I have  only
    seen a copy.

Grounds of appeal

4.   The Secretary of State  submitted grounds  of  appeal  and   relied  on
    Kareem (proxy marriage -EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24(IAC) and TA  and
    Others (Kareem explained)[2014] UKUT 316, arguing that there needed  to
    be evidence to show that the proxy marriage was legally  recognised  in
    the member EU state.  The reference by the Tribunal to a generic letter
    from Portuguese authorities not specific to  the  appeal  and  was  not
    sufficient evidence.

5.   The Secretary of State argued that the Tribunal erred;   there  was  no
    independent and/or reliable evidence of recognition of the marriage  in
    Portugal.  Mere production of legal materials was insufficient.

6.   Permission was  granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Foudy  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that the Tribunal   erred  in  finding  that
    Ghanaian proxy marriages were valid in Portugal.

Error of law hearing

7.   The matter came before me this afternoon to  consider  whether  or  not
    there exists a material error of law in  the  Tribunal's  decision  and
    reasons.

8.   I heard submissions from Mr Parkinson, who in essence relied on  Kareem
    and TA and Others  submitting  that  the  evidence  relied  on  by  the
    Tribunal, namely  a  copy  letter  from  the  Portuguese  Embassy,  was
    insufficient to establish that proxy marriages were legally  recognised
    in Portugal.

9.   Ms Boaitey produced a lengthy skeleton argument.  She submits in  short
    that the evidence is sufficient to meet the requirements as set out  in
    Kareem and/or TA.

Discussion and decision

10.  I am  satisfied  that  there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination insofar as the Tribunal took into account evidence  of  a
    letter purporting to be from the Portuguese Embassy and which  made  no
    reference whatsoever to  any  legal  statute  or  legal  provisions  to
    support the contention that this proxy marriage is  legally  recognised
    in Portugal.  I find that the Tribunal failed to take proper account of
    Kareem and TA in relying on evidence that  was  wholly  inadequate  and
    insufficient to establish a material fact and  thereafter  in  allowing
    the appeal. The Tribunal failed to find that  the  proxy  marriage  was
    lawful in Ghana and also legally recognised in Portugal.   It  was  not
    sufficient to rely in the evidence of lawfulness in Ghana. The Tribunal
    further erred in failing to consider whether there was evidence to show
    a durable relationship under Regulation 8(5).

Decision re error of law

11.  There is a material error of law in the decision .
        Accordingly I set aside the determination.

Remaking the decision

12.  The Claimant was unable to  establish  that  she  was  a  spouse  under
    Regulation 7. The  only  outstanding  issue  is  the  consideration  of
    Regulation 8(5).  I heard further  submissions on   the  evidence  that
    was before the First-tier Tribunal  and  concluded  that  the  Claimant
    failed to show that she was in a durable relationship.   There  was  no
    evidence to show that the couple lived together prior to the  marriage.
    There was no evidence save bank statements, pay slips and utility bills
    in the name of the  EU  national  giving   his  address.   I  find  the
    evidence was insufficient to verify that the relationship was  durable.
    There was no  evidence  to  establish  that  the  parties  were  living
    together.

Notice of Decision

     I substitute a decision that the appeal is  dismissed  on  immigration
    grounds under       Regulations 7,  8(5)  and  17  of  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 16.2.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date 16.2.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
