

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: IA/05542/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 November 2017                           |On 11 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                               AJWINDER SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed, Counsel instructed by 12 Bridge
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. There is only one point in this appeal; it is whether the First-tier
       Tribunal was entitled in law to refuse to adjourn a  hearing  on  31
       January 2017 for the reasons given.

    2. This case has an unfortunately long history.  The  appellant  claims
       to have lived in the United Kingdom without permission  for  a  long
       time and he made an application to remain based on  fourteen  years'
       unlawful residence, although by the time the Secretary of State  was
       able to decide the application the requirements  of  the  Rules  had
       been changed so that twenty years' unlawful residence  was  normally
       necessary for a person to be allowed to remain.

    3. The appeal has been allowed previously by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       but the decision was overturned by the Upper Tribunal which directed
       that there be a further hearing in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  That
       hearing was listed for 31 January 2017 at Birmingham. The  appellant
       did not appear. The appellant has never previously failed to  attend
       or otherwise acted in a way that shows any kind of  irresponsibility
       towards the Tribunal or the decision-making process.   Further,  the
       hearing on 31 January 2017 did not have the hallmarks of someone who
       had lost  interest.   There  were  witness  statements,  there  were
       witnesses in attendance to support the  appellant  and  Counsel  had
       been instructed and appeared to do his job.  It therefore might have
       been thought rather surprising that the appellant  did  not  appear.
       He sent an explanation. One of his intended witnesses said  that  he
       had taken the appellant to hospital because he was  poorly  and  was
       complaining of a bad back.  That witness could not  be  expected  to
       say any more. He was not in a position to give opinions on the cause
       of the apparent pain or the extent of any disabling consequences but
       the fact that he took him to hospital was noted.

    4.  Nevertheless,  the  judge  was  not  impressed  and   refused   the
       application to adjourn but put the matter back in the list.  It  was
       her view that the appellant lived close enough to the  hearing  room
       to come later in the day and she gave time for that to happen.  When
       the case was next mentioned there had was some communication from  a
       medical practitioner.  It was in the form of a  standard  "Statement
       of Fitness for Work" for the purposes of  social  security  or  sick
       pay. It was dated 31 January 2017, being the date  of  hearing,  and
       reported that the appellant had "acute back pain with sciatica"  but
       this was in the context of a statement that the  appellant  was  not
       fit to work.  There is a note beneath that  that  records  that  the
       appellant "was seen in A/E this morning when RX with Naproxen.  Pain
       allegedly severe.  Zapain added".

    5. This  is  evidence  that  the  appellant  had  satisfied  a  medical
       practitioner that, because of back pain for which  apparently  well-
       known anti-inflammatory and painkilling drugs had  been  prescribed,
       he was not fit to work.  The appellant  works  as  a  builder.   The
       First-tier Tribunal Judge was perfectly entitled  to  note,  as  she
       did, that evidence that a person is not fit to work as a builder  is
       not evidence that a person is not fit to attend a hearing.

    6. Counsel before the First-tier Tribunal (not Mr Ahmed)  repeated  the
       application  for  an  adjournment,  which  was  again  refused,  and
       suggested that if the application had to be  refused  he  should  at
       least be allowed to call the available evidence and  the  appeal  be
       then adjourned part heard to a further occasion when  the  appellant
       might be better.  That, if I may say so, seems an extremely sensible
       approach by Counsel who was doing the best that  he  could  for  the
       appellant but it did not appeal to the judge.  The  judge  took  the
       view that the appellant had had proper notice of the hearing,  which
       he clearly had, that he had not provided  satisfactory  evidence  of
       unfitness to attend, which is clearly a  permissible  interpretation
       of the medical evidence, and ordered that the hearing  should  carry
       on.

    7. I remind myself very firmly that I am not  here  to  decide  what  I
       would have done but whether the decision of the judge was  unlawful.
       She reminded herself, correctly, of the decision of this Tribunal in
       Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) v SSHD [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).  The
       point  is  that  decisions  on  adjournment  applications  are   not
       exercises in judicial machismo or showing off but in deciding if  it
       is necessary to adjourn to dispose fairly of the appeal. The need to
       be fair encompasses more than the convenience of the parties.

    8. Mr Ahmed has made much of  the  appellant's  apparently  responsible
       attitude on earlier occasions but that does nothing  to  change  the
       essential fact  that  there  was  no  medical  evidence  before  the
       Tribunal that justified the conclusion that the  appellant  was  not
       fit to attend and give evidence.  The judge was  perfectly  entitled
       on the evidence she had got to be dissatisfied with the explanation.
        Once she was dissatisfied with the explanation she  then  conducted
       the hearing in a way which was consistent with her  dissatisfaction.
       She measured the appellant's evidence in the  form  of  his  witness
       statements with the other evidence that was heard, and  for  reasons
       that were entirely sensible was unpersuaded  by  that  evidence  and
       ruled against the appellant.

    9. Whilst I have appreciated Mr Ahmed's energetic efforts, and  he  has
       certainly given me cause to think, I am not persuaded that there was
       anything unlawful  in  the  judge's  approach  or  conclusions.   It
       follows therefore that I dismiss this appeal.




Signed



|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins, Upper Tribunal     |Dated: 9 January 2018                |
|Judge                                |                                     |









