
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05029/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd April 2016                   |On 9th May 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Lilabhai Bhimabhai Modhvadia
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Lawrence of Counsel, instructed by Just Legal
Group


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of Judge Colyer  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 25th September 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FTT and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is an Indian citizen born 4th June 1994 who  on  30th  May
    2014 applied for further leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 4. The application was refused on 28th October  2014.   The  Secretary  of
    State noted that the  Appellant  had  applied  using  form  SET(O)  for
    indefinite leave to remain.  The application was refused with reference
    to paragraph 298(i) of the Immigration Rules because the  Claimant  was
    seeking leave to remain with his mother (with whom he had  entered  the
    United Kingdom) but his mother did not have settled status.

 5. The Secretary of State therefore  also  refused  the  application  with
    reference to paragraph 322(1) of the Immigration Rules, being satisfied
    that a variation of leave to remain was being sought for a purpose  not
    covered by the rules.

 6. The Secretary of State did not accept that the Claimant  could  satisfy
    the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  in  relation  to  family  life,  or
    paragraph 276ADE in relation to private life.  The Secretary  of  State
    did not accept that there were any exceptional circumstances that would
    justify granting leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.

 7. The Claimant's appeal was heard by the FTT on 10th September 2015.   By
    the time of the FTT hearing the  Claimant's  mother  had  been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain, which leave was  granted  on  5th  February
    2015.

 8. The FTT concluded that the  Appellant  satisfied  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 298 and allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 9. The FTT found that the Claimant had established family  life  with  his
    mother, notwithstanding that he was 20 years of age, and  that  he  had
    established a private life, that engaged Article 8 of the 1950 European
    Convention on Human Rights.   The  FTT  found  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's  decision  interfered  with  the  private   and   family   life
    established by the Claimant, and  found  (in  paragraph  52)  that  the
    decision of the Secretary of State  was  disproportionate  and  not  in
    accordance with  the  law.   The  appeal  was  therefore  also  allowed
    pursuant to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

10. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was contended that it was unclear whether  the
    FTT had allowed the appeal with reference to paragraph 298, but  if  it
    had done so, the FTT had erred by failing to consider paragraph 298(iv)
    and (v) which are set out below;

         "(iv)    can, and will, be accommodated adequately by  the  parent,
             parents or relative the child was admitted  to  join,  without
             recourse to public funds in accommodation  which  the  parent,
             parents or relative the child was admitted  to  join,  own  or
             occupy exclusively; and

         (v)  can, and will, be maintained adequately by the parent, parents
             or relative the child was admitted to join,  without  recourse
             to public funds;"

11. It was also contended that the FTT had erred  in  finding  that  family
    life which would engage Article 8, had  been  established  between  the
    Claimant and his mother, with the Secretary of State  placing  reliance
    on Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  It was noted that paragraph 36,  which
    contained the FTT reasoning on this issue, was incomplete.

12. It was also contended that at paragraph 38 the FTT had erred in placing
    weight  upon  the  fact  that  the  Claimant's  removal  would  have  a
    significant effect on his employment and education,  and  reliance  was
    placed upon Nasim [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC).

13. It was contended that the FTT had erred in considering section 117B  of
    the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  by  failing  to
    appreciate that little weight should be given to the Claimant's private
    life because it had been established when his  immigration  status  was
    precarious.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Adio of  the  FTT  who  found
    that the FTT had erred in consideration of the Immigration  Rules,  but
    found no arguable error in relation to Article 8.

15. The Secretary of  State  renewed  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal, and permission to appeal was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Smith, who found it arguable that the FTT had erred, as  contended,  in
    consideration of Article 8.

16. Following the grant of  permission  there  was  no  response  from  the
    Claimant pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  Directions were  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Secretary of State's Oral Submissions

17. Mr Mills relied upon the grounds contained within the  application  for
    permission to appeal.  It was submitted that to allow the appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules without considering  paragraph  298(iv)  and  (v)
    amounted to a material error of law.

18. Mr Mills submitted that the FTT had  erred  by  failing  to  adequately
    explain why family life was engaged.  In addition the FTT had erred  by
    failing to attach little weight to the private life  built  up  by  the
    Claimant while he had a precarious immigration status.

The Claimant's Oral Submissions

19. In summary Mr Lawrence argued that the FTT had  not  erred  in  law  by
    allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.  I was asked to accept
    that paragraph 298(iv) and (v) did not apply because the Appellant  was
    entitled to rely upon sub-paragraph (vii) because he was over 18  years
    of age, and had  been  admitted  to  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to
    paragraph 302, and he had  demonstrated  sufficient  knowledge  of  the
    English language, and sufficient knowledge about  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

20. Mr Lawrence accepted that the FTT had materially erred by  failing,  in
    paragraph 36, to explain  why  family  life  was  engaged  between  the
    Appellant who is an adult, and his mother.

21.  Mr  Lawrence  argued  that  the  FTT  had  not  materially  erred   in
    consideration of the Appellant's private life, having correctly applied
    the factors contained within paragraph 117B of the  2002  Act.   I  was
    therefore requested not to set aside the decision of the FTT.

My Conclusions and Reasons

22. I announced at the hearing that the FTT materially  erred  in  law  and
    that the decision must therefore be set aside.

23. The FTT erred in allowing the appeal pursuant to paragraph 298.   I  do
    not accept Mr Lawrence's submissions  that  the  FTT  was  entitled  to
    disregard paragraph 298(iv) or (v) as those sub-paragraphs needed to be
    considered and findings made thereon.   The  FTT's  failure  to  do  so
    amounts to a material error of law.  No findings were made in  relation
    to the requirement that the  Appellant  must  be  accommodated  by  the
    parent with whom he is seeking to remain, and maintained adequately  by
    that parent.  In fact the FTT found at paragraph 36 that the  Appellant
    was no longer financially dependent upon his parents  (his  father  had
    passed away) and his widowed mother was now financially dependent  upon
    him.  To make such a finding, and then  allow  the  appeal  under  sub-
    paragraph (v) is an error of law.

24. As conceded by Mr  Lawrence,  the  FTT  erred  in  failing  to  provide
    adequate reasons for finding that the adult Appellant had established a
    family life with his mother.  It is possible for family life  to  exist
    between an adult child and his parent, that would engage Article 8, but
    in this case the FTT did not provide adequate reasons for reaching that
    conclusion, and paragraph 36, in which it is found that  the  Appellant
    has established significant family life with  his  mother,  is  clearly
    incomplete.

25. The error in concluding that  family  life  exists  that  would  engage
    Article 8, without giving an adequate explanation or reasons  for  that
    finding, infected the findings made by  the  FTT  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's private life.

26. In paragraph 52 the FTT finds that;

         "I find that the Appellant's family  and  private  life  should  be
         considered in its totality."

27. In addition the FTT erred in its  consideration  of  section  117B  and
    fails to attach little weight to the private life  established  by  the
    Appellant while his immigration status was precarious.  This  conflicts
    with the requirement in section 117B(5).  The Upper Tribunal  explained
    in AM (Malawi) [2015] UKUT  0260  (IAC)  that  a  person's  immigration
    status is precarious, if he only has limited leave to remain.  This was
    not properly applied by the FTT.

28. Therefore the decision of the FTT is set  aside.   Mr  Mills  submitted
    that no findings could be preserved, and  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the FTT to be heard afresh.  Mr Lawrence agreed.

29. I have considered  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements and find that it is appropriate to remit the appeal back  to
    the FTT because of the nature and extent of judicial fact-finding  that
    will be necessary in  order  for  this  decision  to  be  re-made.   No
    findings are preserved.

30. The appeal will be heard  at  the  FTT  hearing  centre  at  Nottingham
    Magistrates' Court and the parties will be advised of the time and date
    in due course.  The appeal is to be heard by an FFT  Judge  other  than
    Judge Colyer.

31. If either party seeks to adduce any further documentary evidence,  such
    evidence must be served upon the Tribunal and the other party at  least
    fourteen calendar days prior to the next hearing date.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FTT with no findings of fact preserved.

Anonymity

The FTT made no anonymity direction.  There has been no application  to  the
Upper Tribunal for anonymity.  I see no need to make an anonymity order.


Signed                              Date 26th April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The  issue  of  any  fee  award
will need to be considered by the FTT.


Signed                              Date 25th April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

