
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05473/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 October 2016                    |On 21 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                               gurjeevan singh
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, instructed by Super Immigration Services
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission of  UT  Judge  Warr  against  the
    decision of FtT Judge Meyler that was promulgated on 17 July 2015.

 2. After hearing  from  both  representatives,  I  reached  the  following
    decision.

 3. I am satisfied there is an element  of  unfairness  in  the  way  Judge
    Meyler determined the appeal.  As is clear from  paragraph  10  of  her
    decision and reasons statement, at the  hearing  she  agreed  with  the
    parties that the old 14-year long residence immigration rules  applied.
    Therefore, the parties presented their cases on that basis.   It  would
    appear from the second half of paragraph  10  that  after  the  hearing
    Judge Meyler changed her mind and thought  that  she  had  to  consider
    paragraph 276ADE of the rules.  Whether or not she was right to  do  so
    is immaterial because by moving the goalposts she failed  to  give  the
    parties an opportunity to engage with  the  issues  she  was  going  to
    determine.

 4. Having found there is legal error in the decision, I discussed with the
    parties whether the error affected the outcome.  Ms Aboni did not  seek
    to argue that the unfairness altered  the  respondent's  position  even
    though the presenting officer, Ms Hussain, should not have conceded the
    legal points in the way she did.

 5. Mr Pipe  did  not  argue  that  different  arguments  would  have  been
    presented.  He sought to pursue the arguments  presented  before  Judge
    Meyler in relation to what immigration rules applied.

 6. As indicated in the grounds of appeal he settled  when  an  application
    for leave to appeal was lodged, Mr Pipe initially believed Judge Meyler
    had erred in relation to a key issue.  He argued that the  old  14-year
    long residence immigration rules that applied at the date  of  decision
    did not contain requirements relating to English language  ability  and
    knowledge about life in the UK.  He sought to argue that  Judge  Meyler
    had erred by quoting the wrong version of the rules at paragraph 12  of
    her decision.  As a result, he argued, the judge  had  erred  when  she
    found at paragraphs 23 and 24 that the appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of long residence because  he  had  not  sat  the  English
    language or life in the UK tests.

 7. I was somewhat confused by this because the version  of  the  rules  on
    file, which were marked as having been handed up  by  Ms  Hussain,  the
    Presenting Officer in the FtT, included  such  requirements.   After  I
    took him to the relevant text, Mr Pipe admitted that he had misread the
    rules and withdrew this argument.

 8. Mr Pipe sought  to  introduce  a  further  argument.   He  took  me  to
    paragraph 276A1 of the version of the immigration rules in force at the
    date of application and argued that Judge Meyler should have had regard
    to the fact there was a provision for a person to secure  an  extension
    of leave if the  requirements  of  276B  were  met  other  than  having
    sufficient knowledge of the English language and life in the UK.

 9. Mr Pipe sought to establish that the appellant could benefit from  this
    immigration rule.  He returned to the argument  which  had  caused  the
    original problem with Judge Meyler's decision; what  immigration  rules
    applied?  Mr Pipe took me to the original grounds of appeal he  settled
    for the appellant when he  first  applied  for  permission  to  appeal.
    Those grounds were rejected by FtT Judge Pedro.

10. The same grounds were incorporated into the  application  made  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Judge Warr did not restrict the grounds even though he
    only expressly granted permission in respect of the fairness issue.

11. Mr Pipe argued in both sets of grounds that paragraph 276B as in  force
    on 16 June 2009  applied  because  that  was  the  date  on  which  the
    appellant applied for long residence.  The applicable rules were  those
    in force from 18 May to 30 June 2009, a copy of which was before  Judge
    Meyler and remains on the appeal file as I have  indicated  above.  All
    subsequent Statements of Changes in Immigration Rules, according to  Mr
    Pipe,  entitled  the  appellant  to  have  his  application  determined
    according to the rules at that date.

12. Ms Aboni disputed the transitional provisions applied in this  way  and
    relied on Judge Meyler's analysis.  She said the presenting officer, Ms
    Hussain, did not have authority to concede that the earlier version  of
    paragraph 276B applied.  The reasons for refusal letter  did  not  make
    such a concession and in any event such a concession would be  unlawful
    because the law did not permit such an interpretation.

13. Unfortunately,  neither  representative  had  copies  of  all  relevant
    Statements of Changes in Immigration Rules and neither sought  to  take
    me through the varied transitional provisions.

14. Mr Pipe referred me to the Court of  Appeal's  judgment  in  Singh  and
    Khalid v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74  in  which  he  said  the  relevant
    transitional provisions  had  been  examined.   I  have  examined  that
    judgment and do agree that  it  adequately  addresses  the  changes  to
    paragraph 276B and therefore does not assist.  In paragraph  8  of  its
    judgment, the  Court  does  identify  the  general  provision  that  an
    application pending at 9 July 2012 would be dealt with under the  rules
    as they were on the previous day; at the end of paragraph 9, the  Court
    mentions that the 14-year long residence provision  had  been  removed.
    Knowing the complexities of changes to immigration rules, this  is  not
    an adequate basis for me to accept Mr  Pipe's  submission  because  the
    Court was not worried about these provisions and simply made a  passing
    reference to the 14-year provision.

15. I have already recorded that  Mr  Pipe  had  to  admit  misreading  the
    relevant immigration rules and therefore this is a case where  care  is
    needed to ensure no mistakes are  made.   In  other  words,  there  are
    reasons why I cannot simply accept Mr Pipe's assertion.

16. I recall that I was caught out by  the  representatives  in  a  similar
    situation when I determined the appeal of Koori in the Upper  Tribunal.
    When resolving the matter in the Court of Appeal, Underhill LJ made the
    following observations.

         "39.  I agree that this appeal should be dismissed for the  reasons
         given by Elias LJ.  The multiple errors on the part of both parties
         which have made the case so complicated are very regrettable, but I
         would like to express my concern in particular about the failure of
         both parties' representatives below (not Mr Malik or  Mr  Sharland)
         to ensure that  the  Tribunals  were  aware  of  what  transitional
         provisions were in force as regards the changes to the  "seven-year
         rule".  In particular, in the Upper Tribunal, although it was clear
         that there was an issue about the  effect  of  HC  760  on  pending
         applications, neither the Appellants' former counsel nor the Senior
         Home Office Presenting Officer below brought a copy to the hearing,
         and the UT records that "both representatives agreed that we should
         examine the law for ourselves".  That is not good enough: tribunals
         are entitled to expect  to  be  referred  at  the  hearing  to  the
         relevant law and to hear submissions on it.  As it  turns  out,  HC
         760 had in fact been superseded in the relevant respect by HC  820,
         but the Tribunal was not told  that  even  after  the  hearing:  it
         reserved its decision, so there was the chance for the common error
         to be put right if the position had been checked.  I  have  to  say
         that although both representatives were at fault, in  my  view  the
         greater responsibility must lie on the Presenting Officer.   It  is
         notoriously difficult for those practising in this field to keep up
         with the constant  changes  to  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  one
         institution which ought always to be expected to have a good  grasp
         of the applicable current law is the Home Office, as the author  of
         the Rules, and the Presenting Officer  is  its  representative.   I
         have  thought   it   worth   making   this   point   not   out   of
         schoolmasterliness but because this is  only  the  most  recent  of
         several occasions on which I have become aware of  problems  caused
         by tribunals not being referred to  the  current  versions  of  the
         Rules (or other recent developments in the law).  I do not wish  to
         be critical of individual Presenting  Officers.   The  problem  may
         well  be  that  the  Home  Office's  procedures  for  disseminating
         "current awareness" are not good enough.  I hope some  lessons  can
         be learnt from what went wrong in this case."

                                   (Koori & Ors v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 552.)

17. It is not my role to trawl through the  immigration  rules  to  resolve
    this issue for myself.  Because it is Mr Pipe  who  sought  to  present
    arguments relating to the transitional provisions, it fell  to  him  to
    defend his position.  He did not.  He did not seek an adjournment;  and
    even if he had I cannot see why I would  have  granted  it  because  he
    should have been prepared for every eventuality and his argument  arose
    out of his grounds.

18. Because the appellant has failed to show that  this  was  the  relevant
    version of the immigration rules, I cannot find that he should be  able
    to benefit from it as an alternative.

19. I add that even if Mr Pipe is correct  about  which  immigration  rules
    apply,  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  the   appellant   would
    automatically have benefitted from the provisions in  paragraph  276A1.
    He did not apply in  that  capacity  and  there  was  no  duty  on  the
    respondent to consider an alternative to his application. In  addition,
    I am aware that Judge Meyler did not find that the appellant  satisfied
    the good character provisions in paragraph 276B(ii).  In paragraphs  21
    and 22 of her decision and reasons  statement,  she  indicates  factors
    weighing against the appellant in terms of the  public  interest.   She
    takes up these issues in paragraphs 33 to 39 and proceeds to  find  the
    public   interest   factors   outweigh   the    appellant's    personal
    circumstances.  If he could not satisfy the good character requirements
    in paragraph 276B, then the appellant could not benefit from  paragraph
    276A1.

20. It follows that there is no need for me to  reconsider  the  article  8
    issues.  The decision remains in accordance with the law because it  is
    speculative that the appellant might benefit from paragraph 276A1.  For
    the same reason, the fact paragraph 276A1 exists does not  disturb  the
    public interest considerations because the appellant has not  shown  he
    would benefit from it.  This means there is no reason to look again  at
    the proportionality assessment.

21. I conclude that any legal error in Judge Meyler's decision and  reasons
    statement does not require me to set aside the decision because  it  is
    immaterial.  She was faced by a complex legal  situation  and  was  not
    properly assisted by the representatives.  Even  so,  she  ensured  she
    made full and detailed findings  on  all  possible  arguments.   It  is
    because of her thoroughness that I can uphold her decision even  though
    a legal error is present; the  legal  error  is  not  material  to  the
    outcome.



Decision

Although the decision and reasons statement of FtT Judge Meyler  contains  a
legal error, the legal error is not  material  and  therefore  there  is  no
reason to set her decision aside.

Judge Meyler's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal is upheld.



Signed                                       Date
Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal               21 October 2016
