
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05434/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 October 2015                             |                              |
|                                              |On 14 October 2015            |
|                                              |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE S STOREY


                                   Between

                                     D F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Ti amiyu, Solicitor from Supreme Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) we make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form
    of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could  give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. A similar order was made  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and we make this  order  because  the  case  concerns  the
    welfare of child who is entitled to privacy.

 2. This is an appeal by a female citizen of Jamaica against the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against  the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State that she is not entitled to a residence card as a
    derivative right under EEA Regulations.

 3. The reason for granting permission is the grounds disclose  an  arguable
    case that there had  been  a  procedural  irregularity  amounting  to  a
    material error of law. The short point is that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge wrongly prevented the appellant's representative  from  developing
    his oral submissions by unnecessarily  and  brusquely  imposing  a  time
    limit.  The result of that is that the representative did not feel  able
    to say all the things that he needed to say and the appellant, who  lost
    her appeal, has a sense that she did not have a fair hearing.

 4. Whilst  on  the  papers  the  appellant's  case  does  not  seem  to  be
    particularly strong, there are issues of the welfare of the  child  here
    and there are serious contentions about  the  allegation  that  she  has
    entered the United Kingdom in breach of a  deportation  order.    It  is
    very undesirable when issues of such importance are  raised  that  there
    should be any doubt in anybody's mind that  they  have  been  ventilated
    properly and thoroughly.

 5. The evidence of the unsatisfactory conduct of the hearing comes not only
    from the assertions in the grounds  but  from  a  statement  made  by  a
    barrister, Mr E  Nicholson  who  is  well  known  to  the  Tribunal.  He
    witnessed the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal by reason of  being  in
    the building to conduct his professional duties  and  was  so  concerned
    about what had happened that he introduced himself to the representative
    in this case.

 6. We do  not  for  one  moment  suggest  the  judge  deliberately  behaved
    improperly but we are satisfied that she gave a regrettable  impression,
    which might  in  fact  be  true,  that  she  unnecessarily  and  wrongly
    prevented a representative from doing  his  job.  This  means  that  the
    hearing has not been done satisfactorily. Although the Tribunal probably
    has powers to limit submissions they should be exercised very sparingly.
    The rules  provide  for  oral  hearings  and  any  attempt  to  restrict
    submissions is likely to invite criticism and risk a  finding  that  the
    hearing was unfair.

 7. These issues were raised on an  earlier  occasion.  An  opportunity  was
    given for further consideration but there is no evidence from any source
    to suggest that Mr Nicholson's evidence is other than a fair summary  of
    what happened.

 8. Mr Tufan considered his position. Although making the point  that  there
    is  some  disagreement  about  whether  the  restriction   was   against
    submissions lasting fifteen minutes or thirty minutes, he accepted  that
    there is a concern that the hearing has not been conducted fairly and he
    did not oppose our suggestion that we find that the First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law.

 9. It is not appropriate to consider a fee award at this stage. Our finding
    is that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  and  the
    appeal has to be heard again in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Mr  Tiamiyu
    asked for the appeal to be heard at Taylor House which is an appropriate
    request given that the appellant lives in Hackney.  However  listing  at
    Taylor House is subject to very long delays and, although  we  noted  Mr
    Tiamiyu's concerns we made no order about where  the  appeal  should  be
    heard again.

10. We understand that the appeal has been listed for  rehearing  at  Hatton
    Cross. The appellant can ask for a transfer is she  wishes.  We  see  no
    need to give any directions about which hearing centre is used.  It  may
    well be that, when everything is taken into account, Hatton Cross is the
    best place but that is a matter for the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

11. The appeal is allowed. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
    aside. It must be decided again in the First-tier Tribunal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 13 October 2015                |










