
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05918/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 23 April 2015                      |                   On 27 May 2015     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                               prem viswanath
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 22 July 1988.  On 24  March
    2011 he entered with leave as a student, expiring on  6  January  2013.
    On 7 February 2013, out of time, he lodged an application  for  further
    leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under  paragraph  245ZX  of
    the Immigration Rules.

 2. On 17 December 2013 the Respondent refused the application on the basis
    that because the application had been made after the Appellant's  leave
    had expired he no longer had an established presence  studying  in  the
    United Kingdom and so had to show the higher level  of  funds  required
    under Appendix C (Maintenance (Funds)) of the  Immigration  Rules.   He
    had failed  so  to  do  and  therefore  his  application  was  refused.
    Additionally, the Respondent noted the application had been made out of
    time and therefore the Appellant did not have a right  of  appeal  from
    within the United Kingdom.

 3. On 29 January 2014 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal under  Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002 Act).  It was out of time but time was  extended  because  it  was
    accepted the Appellant had changed accommodation  and  there  had  been
    some delay in his receipt of the notice of decision.

 4. The grounds refer to an earlier application made by the Appellant on  3
    January 2013 which had been returned by the Respondent because  it  had
    not been possible to collect the payment of the fee.  The grounds refer
    to the determination in Basnet (validity of application  -  Respondent)
    [2012] UKUT 00113 (IAC).

 5. When extending time the Duty Judge C M Bell  made  directions  for  the
    Respondent to file and  serve  evidence  why  the  Appellant's  earlier
    application had been returned.  This direction had  not  been  complied
    with by the time of the hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 6. The hearing of the appeal  had  been  set  for  9  October  2014.   The
    Appellant attended.  By a decision promulgated on 17 October 2014 Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Kimnell  dismissed  the  appeal  stating  at
    para.13 of his decision that the evidence provided  by  the  Respondent
    recorded the fee could not be obtained and the Appellant  had  in  fact
    acknowledged that this was the case.   The  consequence  was  that  the
    second application leading to the decision under appeal had  been  made
    at a time the Applicant did not have extant leave and so he  could  not
    show that he had an established presence for study so  as  to  have  to
    meet the lower funding requirements of Appendix C.   He  dismissed  the
    appeal.

 7. The Appellant through his solicitors sought permission to appeal and on
    17 December 2014 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Lambert  granted
    permission to appeal on the basis that the Appellant  had  appeared  in
    person at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal and that little weight
    could be attached to his acknowledgement that the application fee could
    not be obtained by the Respondent.   The  burden  as  to  inability  to
    obtain payment of the fee was  on  the  Respondent  by  reason  of  the
    determination in Basnet.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. The hearing was set for 1400 hours on 23  April  2015.   There  was  no
    appearance by the Appellant or his solicitors.   The  clerk  telephoned
    the Appellant's solicitors who stated that they were no  longer  acting
    for the Appellant.  The clerk reported that the  solicitors  also  said
    they believed the Appellant had left the United Kingdom.

 9. Ms Fijiwala relied on the application for permission to appeal and  the
    grant of permission to appeal, accepting that the Respondent had failed
    to comply with the directions given on 5 February 2014.

Findings and Consideration

10. I was satisfied that notice of the time, date and  place  set  for  the
    hearing had been properly given to the  Appellant  in  accordance  with
    Rule 36 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  as
    amended and that it was just to proceed in the absence of the Appellant
    or any representative for him.

11. The substance of the appeal is against the decision made on Appellant's
    second and out of time application in respect of which he had  a  right
    of appeal which could be exercised only out of the  country.   In  that
    respect the appeal itself is invalid because at the time of the  appeal
    the Appellant was in the country.  This point appears not to have  been
    taken before the First-tier Tribunal.

12. Putting that to one side, the Respondent has failed to comply with  the
    Duty Judge's directions to  file  and  serve  evidence  to  enable  the
    Tribunal to determine whether the first application which had been made
    in time had been improperly returned and so inadequately considered  by
    the Respondent as invalid because the Respondent  had  been  unable  to
    obtain payment of the requisite fees.  The  notice  of  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal was lodged through the Appellant's solicitors.   It
    is reasonable to assume that the Appellant had received legal advice on
    the grounds for appeal and in those circumstances I do not  find  it  a
    material error of  law  that  the  Judge  should  have  relied  on  the
    Appellant's subsequent acknowledgment as  to  a  matter  of  pure  fact
    (whether or not he had the money in his account to pay the fee) that he
    did not have the money to pay the fee on the first application. However
    there was in fact no need for the Respondent in the  event  to  produce
    that information because as the Judge noted at para.13 of his  decision
    the Appellant acknowledged that  the  Respondent  had  been  unable  to
    obtain payment of the fees.  The Appellant has therefore not shown that
    the Judge made an error of law in respect of the Basnet point.

13. Even if the Appellant were to succeed on the  Basnet  point  there  has
    been no challenge to the  evidence  recorded  at  paragraph  6  of  the
    Judge's determination that:-

         The Appellant has been in the UK for more than  three  and  a  half
         years but has no  degree  and  will  be  returning  to  India  with
         nothing.  He therefore asks for one last chance.  He came to the UK
         in 2011 to study for a Diploma in Health and Social  Care  but  his
         college closed six or seven months after his arrival and he has not
         studied since.

    The Respondent's notice of decision  of  17  December  2013  refers  to
    para.14 of Appendix C of the Immigration Rules which provides  that  an
    applicant will have an established presence studying in the  UK  if  he
    has current leave and at the date of decision:-

         He has finished a single course that was as least six  months  long
         within the last period of leave for:

         His requirement to study on a single course where he has  completed
         at least six months of that course.

14. On the Appellant's own admission he was not at the date  of  either  of
    the  two  applications  able  to  satisfy  these  requirements  for  an
    established presence in the United Kingdom.  The  consequence  is  that
    regardless of the Basnet point, his appeal was doomed to fail.

15. In these circumstances the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not
    contain a material error of law such that it should be  set  aside.  In
    any event no differently constituted Tribunal would  have  reached  any
    other conclusion.

Anonymity

16. There was no request for anonymity and having heard the  appeal  I  find
none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law
    such that it should be set aside and so it shall stand.  The effect is:


    The appeal of the Appellant is dismissed.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official Crest                                              Date  22.
v. 2015



Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

