
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05513/2015
                                                               IA/05522/2015
                                                               IA/05511/2015
                                                               IA/05518/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 February 2016                   |On 15 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     W M
                                     P M
                                    J M M
                                     C M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Delgado of Benchmark solicitors LLP

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier  Tribunal.   However,  in  the
interests of protecting the identity of  the  two  minor  children  in  this
case, I make an anonymity direction.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of  reference,
       I refer below to the parties as they were in the First-Tier  Tribunal
       albeit that the Secretary of State is technically  the  Appellant  in
       this particular appeal.  The Secretary of  State  appeals  against  a
       decision of First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  Greasley  promulgated  on  10
       August 2015 ("the Decision") allowing the Appellants' appeal  against
       the Secretary of State's decisions dated  20  January  2015  refusing
       their application for indefinite leave to remain as a Tier 1  migrant
       and dependents and directing  their  removal  to  Zimbabwe.   By  the
       Decision, the Judge did  not  deal  with  the  Tier  1  decision  (it
       apparently being accepted that the Appellants could not succeed under
       the Rules in that regard) but allowed the appeals  on  the  basis  of
       Article 8 ECHR.  Permission to appeal was granted on 26 November 2015
       by First-Tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett.  The matter comes before me to
       determine whether  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Decision  involved  the
       making of an error of law.

    2. The background facts so far as it is necessary  to  recite  them  are
       that the First Appellant who is a national of Zimbabwe arrived in the
       UK in May 2008 as a highly skilled migrant  with  leave  valid  until
       April 2010.  The second Appellant is his wife and the third Appellant
       is his eldest child.  They arrived in the UK as his dependents on  31
       May 2008.  The third Appellant was born in Zimbabwe on 15 March 2005.
       The fourth Appellant is the first  and  second  Appellants'  youngest
       child who was born in the UK on 21 January 2014.

    3. The Appellants sought further leave to remain as a Tier 1 migrant and
       dependents in April 2010.  Their application  was  refused  initially
       and on reconsideration and appeal.  However,  a  further  application
       made in April 2011 although initially refused succeeded on appeal and
       the first to third Appellants  were  granted  leave  valid  until  23
       September 2014.  In September 2014, the Appellants sought  indefinite
       leave to remain as a Tier 1 migrant and dependents.  That application
       was refused on the basis that the  First  Appellant  could  not  show
       continuous lawful residence.  There were other reasons given for  the
       refusal but this was the main reason given (and it appears  from  the
       Decision that the Judge may have found that this was the only  reason
       which was sustainable although the findings in relation to the Tier 1
       decision are not clear).  The second Appellant was also  refused  for
       failure to demonstrate sufficient knowledge of the English  language.
       As noted above, the Judge  did  not  find  that  the  appeals  should
       succeed in relation to the refusal of indefinite leave to remain  and
       I need say little more about this decision  save  in  so  far  as  it
       impacts on the Article 8 claims.

    4. The decision made by the Respondent was a section 47  decision  which
       therefore also directed the removal of the  Appellants  to  Zimbabwe.
       As such, the Appellants were entitled to raise human rights in  their
       appeal and did so.  It was  on  this  basis  that  the  appeals  were
       allowed.  The Judge appears to have  concluded  that  the  Article  8
       claim could not succeed under  the  Rules  as  he  goes  directly  to
       consideration  of  whether  there  are   exceptional   circumstances.
       Indeed, this was the basis on which the  Respondent  has  sought  and
       obtained permission to appeal.  The Judge  considered  whether  there
       were exceptional circumstances at  [26]  to  [30]  of  the  Decision.
       Having considered section 117B Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
       Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act"),  he  concludes  that  removal  of  the
       Appellants would be disproportionate and that their  appeals  succeed
       under Article 8.

    5. The Respondent accepted in her grounds of appeal that the  Judge  was
       entitled to consider Article 8 even though no formal application  had
       been made.  Having regard to section 85 and 86 of the 2002 Act,  that
       is clearly correct. The Respondent pointed out that the Judge had not
       considered the  Appellants'  cases  under  the  Rules  and  that  the
       Appellants could  not  meet  the  Rules  in  relation  to  Article  8
       (although that is a point to which I  will  need  to  return  when  I
       consider whether there is an error of  law  in  the  Decision).   The
       Respondent submitted that there was no evidence to  show  that  there
       are exceptional circumstances in this case.  Permission to appeal was
       granted on the basis that the Judge had failed  to  consider  whether
       there are exceptional circumstances outside the Rules.

    6. This matter comes before me to determine whether there is an error of
       law in the Decision and,  if  so,  to  remit  it  to  the  First-Tier
       Tribunal to re-make the Decision or to re-make the  Decision  myself.
       I indicated at the hearing that I found there to be no material error
       of law and that I would provide my reasons in  writing  which  I  now
       turn to do.

Decision and reasons

    7. At the start of his submissions, I pointed out to Mr Walker that  the
       third Appellant arrived in the UK on 31 May 2008  and  had  therefore
       been in the UK for seven years as at the date of  the  hearing  on  3
       August 2015.  There is accepted to have been  no  formal  application
       under Article 8 in this case.  I therefore discussed with  Mr  Walker
       what would be the relevant date for determination of the seven  years
       that a child is required to be in the UK  in  order  to  come  within
       paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  Mr Walker accepted  that,  where  the
       Article 8 claim was not raised by way of an  application,  the  Judge
       would be entitled to consider the seven  years'  requirement  at  the
       date of hearing.  Even if that was wrong, he  accepted  that  section
       117 of the 2002  Act  does  not  contain  a  similar  restriction  in
       relation to the date of application and  the  third  Appellant  would
       therefore be a qualifying child for the purposes of section  117B(6).
       The Judge had  not  considered  this  in  the  Decision.   There  was
       therefore an error of law in his analysis.  That did not  necessarily
       impact on whether there was an error of law in the  overall  Decision
       but I noted that this may impact on whether any error of law  in  the
       Judge's  Decision  in  relation  to  exceptional  circumstances   was
       material when viewed against that background.

    8. Mr Walker accepted that the Judge had reached a finding that it would
       not be reasonable to expect the third Appellant to return to Zimbabwe
       at [30] even if  not  expressed  precisely  in  this  way  (which  is
       unsurprising since the Judge did not consider  the  Article  8  claim
       within the Rules).  Mr Walker therefore  very  fairly  and  correctly
       conceded that he was in some difficulty in submitting that there is a
       material error of law in the Decision.

    9.  The  Judge  has  considered  in  the  Decision  whether  there   are
       exceptional circumstances.  What appears to  have  impressed  him  in
       this case is not only the  position  of  the  two  children  but  the
       reasons why the first Appellant was unable to succeed in his  Tier  1
       application, the fact that most if not all of the family's  residence
       was lawful albeit precarious and the contribution which the first and
       second Appellants make to the UK.  He also took  into  account  their
       links with Zimbabwe which he found had effectively been  broken.   As
       the Judge notes, the evidence in this case was not challenged by  the
       Respondent which  is  unsurprising  since  there  was  no  Presenting
       Officer in attendance.  The Judge was though entitled to have  regard
       to the factors which he did as exceptional circumstances and to  find
       that those were exceptional circumstances  which  justified  allowing
       the appeal on Article 8 grounds even though the Appellants could  not
       meet the Rules.  I might not have reached the  conclusion  which  the
       Judge did on the evidence but I am not satisfied  that  there  is  an
       error of law in the Decision.  The Respondent's grounds  are  nothing
       more than a disagreement with the outcome.

   10. Further, and in any event, even if I had found there to be  an  error
       of law in the Decision, I would not  have  found  that  error  to  be
       material for the reasons which I set out at [7]  and  [8]  above  and
       which Mr Walker accepted made it difficult to argue that the  appeals
       should not succeed on Article 8 grounds.  The third  Appellant  is  a
       qualifying child for the purposes of section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act
       (and  probably  also  meets  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  save  for  the
       requirement that  there  be  a  valid  application).   Once  that  is
       accepted, and given the age of the third Appellant it  would  clearly
       be disproportionate to remove the other Appellants to Zimbabwe.   Any
       error of law in the  Judge's  findings  in  relation  to  exceptional
       circumstances would therefore be immaterial.

   11. For the above reasons, I am not satisfied that there  is  a  material
       error of law in the Decision and the Decision is confirmed.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law. The First-tier Tribunal Decision promulgated  on  10  August
2015 is therefore  confirmed  with  the  consequence  that  the  Appellants'
appeals succeed under Article 8.


Signed      [pic]      Date 10 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
