
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/05116/2015
                                                               IA/05118/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 September 2016                  |On 29 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               SHAMIMA SHAHIN
                              MD ALZAMI RAHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Karim, Counsel, instructed by Haque & Hausman
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.
    The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh born on 17 July 1982  and  22
    March 1987 respectively.  They had appealed against  the  decisions  of
    the respondent dated 16 January 2015 to refuse  their  application  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom pursuant to paragraph  245ZX  and
    paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.  The  second  appellant  is
    the dependant of the first appellant who is a Tier 4  Migrant  pursuant
    to  paragraph  313B  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   For  the  sake   of
    convenience however I shall continue to refer to the  parties  as  they
    were referred to in the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Ford who in a decision dated  28  July  2016  gave  permission  to  the
    respondent to appeal stating that it is arguable that the reasons given
    for the finding that the bank statements were genuine  are  inadequate.
    He further stated that the decision does not make sense as insufficient
    reasons were given  for  rejecting  the  document  verification  report
    provided by the respondent and found it an arguable material  error  of
    law.

4.    The  respondent  in  the  grounds   of   appeal   asserted   a   false
    representation allegation and accepts that it is for her to demonstrate
    such allegation as the burden of proof rests upon her.  The  judge  was
    wrong to allow the appellant's appeal given the fact that the  evidence
    produced by the respondent was from a third-party  source.   The  judge
    noted that there was a document verification report  showing  that  the
    bank accounts submitted by the appellant did not exist and neither  did
    the solvency certificate transpire to be genuine.

5.   A letter the appellant provided purporting to be from Citibank dated  9
    February 2016 did  not  address  the  points  raised  in  the  document
    verification report and neither does it explain how it is now said that
    the account number and solvency certificate does not exist.  There  are
    several spelling errors on the letter and the judge should  have  found
    the letter as unreliable evidence.

6.   At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to  whether
    there was a material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Mr Bramble in his submissions said that the  judge  had  not
    adequately considered the two sides of the position set forward by  the
    appellant and the respondent.   He  also  pointed  out  to  a  Robinson
    obvious point which is not in the grounds of appeal that  at  paragraph
    14 the  judge  stated  that  the  civil  standard  of  the  balance  of
    probability applies and the burden of proof is on the appellant,  which
    is clearly wrong because the burden of proof is on  the  respondent  in
    this case.

7.   Mr Bramble said there was a clear dispute and it was incumbent  on  the
    judge  to  give  reasons  as  to  which  side   was   more   reasonable
    unbelievable.  Mr Karim in his submissions said that  the  judge  found
    the appellant credible and was entitled to  accept  that  the  document
    produced by her from Citibank was credible.

8.   In respect of the burden of proof  error  he  said  that  it  does  not
    prejudice the respondent in  fact  it  prejudices  the  appellant.   He
    further said that the judge took into  account  all  the  evidence  and
    referred to the document verification report in several  paragraphs  of
    his decision.  This shows that he was mindful that he  was  considering
    both the document verification report  and  the  letter  from  Citibank
    provided by the appellant before the appeal.

My Decision as to Whether there is an Error of Law in the Decision

9.   The first issue I will point out is that  the  judge  made  a  material
    error of law at paragraph 14 when he put the burden  of  proof  on  the
    appellant as opposed to the respondent.  In cases where the  respondent
    alleges fraud or forgery the burden of proof first rests on her,  after
    which it is for the appellant  to  show  that  there  is  a  reasonable
    explanation.

10.  Mr Karim states that this does not make any difference and it does  not
    prejudice the respondent.  I disagree.  It is not  about  prejudice  to
    the respondent or otherwise.  It is about  the  judge  not  taking  the
    correct step-by-step approach  to  his  decision.   If  the  judge  had
    understood the burden and standard of proof in cases of fraud,  he  may
    have come to a different conclusion.  The  letter  that  the  appellant
    provided on 9 February 2016 entitled "To Whom It May Concern" from  the
    Citibank Limited falls dismally short  of  addressing  all  the  issues
    raised by the document verification report.

11.  Any responsible bank  when  confronted  with  a  document  verification
    report from government authorities would give  reasons  for  why  their
    stance as taken at the date of the  document  verification  report  was
    wrong and  why  it  has  now  changed.   The  judge  gives  no  reasons
    whatsoever for why he accepted the letter from Citibank two years after
    the event.  The judge's findings at paragraph 16  merely  say  that  he
    takes into account further evidence from Citibank and seems to rely  on
    the appellant's evidence which he finds to be credible. That is clearly
    not sufficient in  light  of  the  respondent's  document  verification
    report.

Notice of Decision

12.  I have no hesitation whatsoever in  deciding  that  there  has  been  a
    material error of law in this decision and I set it aside.  I  send  it
    back to the First-tier Tribunal to be placed  before  any  judge  other
    than Judge Sweet.


Signed   Mrs S Chana                         Date 25th day of September
2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana

