

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/05344/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 18 March 2016                         | On 7 April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                        MS FREDERICA RUBY ESTHER WYSE
                       (ANONMYITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Ume-Ezeoke, Counsel, instructed by Charles Ete
& Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone aged  69.  She  has  been
      granted permission to bring an appeal against the decision  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Lingam sent on 8  September  2015  dismissing  her
      appeal on  human  rights  grounds  against  a  decision  made  by  the
      respondent on 10 January 2015 refusing to vary her leave to remain and
      to remove her by way of directions  under  s.47  of  the  Immigration,
      Asylum and  Nationality  Act  2006.  The  appellant  had  been  coming
      regularly to the UK on a  visitor's  visa  since  2007.  On  the  last
      occasion she entered the UK on 14 May 2014 on  a  6  months  visitor's
      visa valid until 20 March 2016 and submitted  an  in-time  application
      for indefinite  leave  to  remain  based  on  Article  8  grounds.  In
      rejecting this application the respondent stated that she did not meet
      the requirements of the Immigration Rules and had not shown there  was
      an exceptional basis for her to stay outside the Rules.


   2.   In refusing her appeal against this  decision  the  judge  concluded
      that the appellant had not shown she met the substantive  requirements
      of the Rules or that the respondent was not entitled to refuse her  on
      general grounds of refusal under para 322(1)  as  well.  At  [38]  the
      judge decided  it  would  be  appropriate  for  her  to  consider  the
      appellant's Article 8 circumstances outside the Rules as "the Rules do
      not  adequately  consider  all  of   the   appellant's   family   life
      circumstances in the UK".


   3.    In the  course  of  her  findings,  the  judge  accepted  that  the
      appellant had become a widow in 2002 and had lost a son  in  2009.  By
      virtue of the appellant having  made  trips  to  the  UK  to  see  her
      daughter, the judge accepted that there was a close relationship  with
      her daughter and probably with her daughter's spouse and children, but
      concluded that, applying the principles set  out  in  Kugathas  [2003]
      EWCA Civ 31, her bond with her daughter and family "does  not  suggest
      something more than normal emotional ties"  ([47]).  The  judge  found
      that she was in relatively good health, has a respectable pension  and
      also has property in Sierra Leone. The judge did not accept  that  the
      appellant's claim that her home situation in Sierra Leone  had  become
      untenable as a result of continued thefts and  burglaries.  The  judge
      also considered that the appellant would have support on  return  from
      her neighbour and lawyer as well as other friends.


   4.  At [26] the judge referred  to  the  evidence  before  her  from  the
      appellant's neighbour in Sierra Leone and his mention that he regarded
      himself as the appellant's son. The judge stated that  this  indicated
      that he had a high regard for the appellant and  genuinely  cared  for
      her well-being and "would avail himself to the appellant if required".


   5. At [28] the judge said:


         "I find it not credible that despite the appellant being  born  and
         raised in Sierra Leone; having led a married life and having raised
         two children; having enjoyed a  respectable  position  with  UNICEF
         based in Sierra Leone, that she practically  had  no  knowledge  of
         anyone she could rely upon to assist her with her general household
         chores or that even if with the small social group  she  claims  to
         associate with that no one is able to recommend a  reliable  person
         to  help  with  her  care  or  household   chores,   simply   lacks
         credibility. The evidence and probable reality is that she has  not
         looked for or hired help to assist her.  Therefore  her  claim  she
         would be without reliable help or assistance is not credible".

   6.   At [34] the judge noted that "[t]he  evidence  is  that  she  has  a
      reliable and supportive neighbour,  a  trustworthy  lawyer  and  loyal
      friends who would probably be accessible to the appellant  should  she
      require assistance..."


   7.  In light of her finding that the appellant did not family  life  ties
      within the meaning of Article 8(1) the judge stated at [48]  that  she
      declined to proceed to assess proportionality. However,  at  [49]  she
      went on to "complete the assessment" in any event. In this context she
      considered   the   appellant's   circumstances   in   light   of   the
      considerations set out in ss.117A-D of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
      and Asylum Act 2002. The judge also found that her daughter in the  UK
      would be able to afford care for the appellant if needed.


   8.  At [68] the judge concluded:


         "  ...I  have  taken  full  account  of  the  interruption  in  the
         appellant's established relationship with the sponsor including her
         grandchildren. I am satisfied  that  the  appellant's  relationship
         before September 2014  was  one  that  was  enjoyed  from  overseas
         through short periods of yearly visits. I  am  satisfied  that  the
         sponsor  and  her  spouse  will  preserve  their  children's   best
         interests. Hence, the appellant's removal would probably not  cause
         the sponsor and her family members  to  suffer  any  hardship  that
         would go far enough beyond the baseline as she would be returned to
         her birth country where she had lived the majority of her life  and
         continues to have  strong  personal  and  economic  connections  in
         Sierra Leone..."


        Grounds of appeal

   9.   The appellant's first ground of appeal is  that  the  judge  wrongly
      took irrelevant factors into consideration. She was said to have  done
      this (i) by concluding that the appellant's neighbour would  care  for
      the appellant just because he referred to himself as her son  and  was
      sending regular messages. It was stated that nowhere in  his  evidence
      had he said he would take care of the appellant and indeed he had said
      he had his own family and would not be available to care for her; (ii)
      by concluding she had sufficient funds when the evidence was that  she
      only had $400 per month; (iii) by drawing an  adverse  inference  from
      the decision of the appellant not to sell her property (when  she  had
      explained it was an ancestral property of her  husband's  family);  by
      drawing an  adverse  inference  as  to  whether  the  appellant  faced
      continued break-ins to her home  from  her  delay  in  making  a  visa
      application.


  10. The appellant's second ground was that the  judge  had  misquoted  and
      misapplied  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  and  wrongly  stated  that  this
      paragraph required the appellant to have lived in the UK for at  least
      20 years. This error was said to have affected the judge's  assessment
      of the appellant's human rights.


  11. The third ground was that in finding that  there  would  not  be  very
      significant obstacles to the  appellant's  reintegration  into  Sierra
      Leone the judge had failed to take into account  the  appellant's  age
      and lack of family members in Sierra Leone and the evidence  that  her
      property had been targeted  by  thieves  because  they  knew  she  had
      previously worked for UNICEF and thought she had money  and  thus  her
      situation was more risky compared to others living in the area.


  12. The fourth grounds of appeal was that the judge erred in finding  that
      the appellant did not have family life with her daughter and family in
      the UK, given that she was 68  and  dependent  on  her  daughter  both
      physically and financially.




   Analysis


  13. I am not persuaded the appellant's grounds disclose error  of  law  on
      the part of the judge.


  14. Dealing first with the second ground, I accept that at [33] the  judge
      appeared to consider wrongly that the appellant could only succeed  if
      able to show she had lived continuously for no less than 20  years  in
      the UK. Paragraph 276ADE(vi) clearly permits persons who have lived in
      the UK for less than 20  years  to  succeed  if  able  to  show  "very
      significant obstacles" to integration back in  the  country  to  which
      they will have to go if required to leave the UK. However, that  error
      was wholly academic because the judge at [33]-[35] proceeded to assess
      whether there were very significant obstacles and  concluded  at  [35]
      that the evidence did not establish any such obstacles.


  15. Reverting to normal order, I consider the first ground to amount to no
      more than a series of disagreements with the judge's findings of fact.
       It is clear from [26] that the judge took into account  the  evidence
      that the appellant's neighbour had his own family. In the  absence  of
      any  country  of  origin  information  evidence  to  show   that   the
      appellant's pension level  would  mean  that  she  could  not  support
      herself, it was open to the judge to consider that she had  sufficient
      income of her own. In any event, on the judge's findings the appellant
      could look to her UK daughter for financial help if needed: see  [25].
      As  regards  the  appellant's  property,  the  judge  paid  particular
      attention to the conflicting state of the evidence  regarding  whether
      or not the appellant  could  sell  it  given  that  it  was  her  late
      husband's ancestral land ([27]) and in the absence of any evidence  of
      any other surviving relatives on her  husband's  side  the  judge  was
      entitled to find that she could sell it if she wished.  Similarly,  it
      was within the range  of  reasonable  responses  for  the  judge  when
      assessing whether the  appellant  had  given  a  credible  account  of
      continued targeting from burglars and thieves, to  attach  significant
      weight to the apparent lack of urgency in applying for a visa to visit
      the UK ([25]).


  16. Turning to the third ground, this really does  no  more  than  contend
      that the judge should have attached more weight than she  did  to  the
      appellant's evidence that her previous work for UNICEF made  her  more
      of a target for break-ins than others living in the area. It is  clear
      that in finding that the appellant had failed to show that  there  was
      an ongoing problem of thefts and  break-ins  at  her  home  in  Sierra
      Leone, the judge took  into  account  all  the  evidence  and  reached
      entirely sustainable conclusions. Various paragraphs of  her  decision
      attest to the time and thought she put into deciding this issue on the
      basis of all the evidence before her: see e.g.  [25],  27],  [34]  and
      [67].


  17. As regards the fourth and final ground, this also amounts to  no  more
      than a disagreement with the judge's findings of fact. It is  entirely
      clear that the judge properly applied the  established  principles  of
      Article 8 jurisprudence regarding family life ties  between  a  parent
      and adult children and grandchildren; and the judge was quite entitled
      to weigh in the balance in deciding this matter that the appellant was
      in relatively good health and had been content  hitherto  to  restrict
      herself to  yearly  visits  to  see  her  daughter  without  making  a
      settlement application and had not shown any significant change in her
      circumstances in Sierra Leone since. It was also open to the judge  to
      find significant the sponsor's explanation for her current application
      being her desire to avoid costly visit visa  applications  and  flight
      tickets.


  18. The grounds do  not  articulate  a  clear  challenge  to  the  judge's
      conclusion that the appellant could not succeed under the  Immigration
      Rules, but it is simply not arguable that she  could  have  succeeded,
      not least because the grounds make no  challenge  to  the  refusal  on
      general grounds under para 322(1). As regards the  substantive  Rules,
      Mr Ume-Ezeoke sought in submissions before me to argue that the  judge
      had erred  in  failing  to  find  that  there  were  very  significant
      obstacles  to  the  appellant's  re-integration  into  Sierra   Leone.
      However, I consider the judge gave cogent reasons for concluding  that
      there were no such obstacles, highlighting, inter alia, her continuing
      close connections of language  and  culture  with  Sierra  Leone;  her
      continuing ability to live an independent life in  that  country;  her
      small but important network of neighbours and friends; the  fact  that
      for 5 years she had been content to pursue contact with  her  daughter
      and family in the UK through short  visits  without  there  being  any
      significant change in  her  circumstances.  On  the  totality  of  the
      evidence, and given the high threshold set both under the  Immigration
      Rules  (which  specify  very  significant  obstacles)  and  Article  8
      jurisprudence, which variously refers to insurmountable  obstacles  or
      serious hardships, in my judgment it would indeed have  been  perverse
      of the judge to have found the relevant thresholds were met.   To  the
      extent that the grounds challenge the  judge's  findings  on  some  of
      these matters, I have already given my reasons why challenges of  that
      order must fail.


  19.  I should also mention  that  Mr  Tufan  expressed  doubt  as  to  the
      propriety of the judge's basis for deciding  to  consider  the  appeal
      outside the Immigration Rules - he drew attention to the fact that the
      judge was not satisfied the appellant had  established  the  seemingly
      sweeping claim made at [38] that the Rules "do not adequately consider
      all of the appellant's circumstances in the UK".  Given  that  I  have
      found no errors in the judge's findings of fact or in  her  assessment
      of  the  appellant's  Article  8  circumstances   generally,   it   is
      unnecessary to address whether the judge was justified in  considering
      the appeal outside the Rules on the  basis  she  identified.  That  is
      because her reasons for dismissing the appeal both inside and  outside
      the Rules are free of legal error.  I would observe, however, that  to
      the extent that  Mr  Ume-Ezeoke  sought  to  argue  that  the  judge's
      assessment of the appellant's  Article  8  circumstances  outside  the
      Rules was flawed, he not only failed to identify any  legal  error  in
      that assessment; he also failed to address the evident problem for his
      argument in this context that the judge was bound to  apply  s.117B(5)
      and to find that "little  weight"  could  attach  to  the  appellant's
      private life by virtue of her  immigration  status  being  precarious.
      Given the judge's error-free finding that the appellant had not  shown
      she had a family life within the meaning of Article 8(1), private life
      was the only Article 8(1) right she was entitled  to  invoke.  In  any
      event, even if the judge had considered there was a family life within
      the  meaning  of  Article  8,  she  would  still  have  had  to  apply
      established case law treating as a factor adverse to an applicant that
      they have established or developed their family life ties  at  a  time
      when their immigration status was precarious: see Rajendran  (s117B  -
      family life) [2016] UKUT 138 (IAC)).


  20. For the above reasons I conclude that:


The First tier Tribunal judge  did  not  err  in  law  and  accordingly  her
decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal must stand.




Signed

[pic]


 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

