
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05437/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th February 2016                |On 1st March 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                           elizabeth dulnuan mateo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield, Counsel instructed by Bespoke
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The applicant, a citizen of the Philippines appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision made by the Secretary of  State  on  28th
    January 2015 to refuse her application for leave to remain in the UK on
    the basis of her private and family life.  First-tier Tribunal Judge  S
    Aziz dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and decided  that
    there was no need to consider Article 8  freestanding  outside  of  the
    Rules and therefore dismissed it under Article 8 also.   The  Appellant
    now appeals with permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that  the  Appellant  entered  the  UK
    unlawfully on 8th April 2004.  She applied for leave to remain on  22nd
    October 2009 and that was refused with no right  of  appeal.   On  20th
    April 2011 her representatives asked for reconsideration  of  her  case
    and that was refused.  On 15th December 2012 the  Appellant's  daughter
    was born in the UK.  She is a British citizen due to the fact that  the
    Appellant's husband has indefinite leave to remain in the UK.  On  19th
    July 2014 the Appellant married her partner and on 18th September  2014
    she made an application for leave  to  remain.   The  refusal  of  that
    application is the subject of this appeal.

 3. In the reasons for refusal letter the Secretary of State did not accept
    that the Appellant's marriage was valid due to a question  as  to  when
    the Appellant's former husband had died.  However at the hearing in the
    First-tier Tribunal the Presenting Officer accepted that the  Appellant
    and her current husband had entered into a valid marriage  ceremony  on
    the  basis  of  a  death  certificate  produced  in  relation  to   the
    Appellant's first husband.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  considered  Appendix  FM  and  Ex  1  of
    Appendix FM and concluded that it would be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    Appellant's child to leave the UK and that there were no insurmountable
    obstacles to the Appellant and her husband continuing  family  life  in
    the Philippines  as  they  are  both  Filipino  nationals.   The  judge
    considered paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules and decided
    that  there  would  be  no  significant  obstacles  to  the   Appellant
    reintegrating into the Philippines. The judge decided that there was no
    need to consider Article 8 outside of the Rules.

 5. The Appellant's grounds of appeal  of  appeal  contend  that  the  case
    should not have been considered under Ex 1 as the  Appellant  does  not
    meet Appendix FM as a parent and that the judge  erred  in  failing  to
    consider the appeal outside the Rules under  Article  8.   It  is  also
    contended that the judge erred in failing to consider the cases of Ruiz
    Zambrano  C-34/09 and Sanade and others (British children - Zambrano -
    Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC) and failing to recognise  that  removal
    would require the family to relocate the  child  outside  the  European
    Union.  It is also  contended  that  the  judge  erred  in  failing  to
    consider Section 117B (6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin sitting
    as a judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  who  considered  that  it  was
    arguable that the First-tier Tribunal judge erred in his  consideration
    of Ex 1 given his findings about the role of the Appellant in her  very
    young child's life and in particular  in  light  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's own guidance as to the reasonableness of  requiring  a  British
    child to leave the UK or separate the child from its parents.

 7. At the hearing before me Mr Walker clarified that there was no specific
    guidance in relation to the issue  of  British  children  and  that  he
    suggested that Upper Tribunal Judge Martin may have been  referring  to
    the concession made by the Secretary of State in the case of Sanade.

 8. At the hearing before me Ms Benfield relied on  her  skeleton  argument
    which she said clarified the Grounds of Appeal.  She contended that the
    judge was wrong to have considered Appendix FM under the  parent  route
    as the Appellant is excluded from Appendix FM under  the  parent  route
    because she is married to her  husband  who  has  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the UK.  She submitted that such  error  may  not  have  been
    material had the judge gone on to consider Article 8 on a  freestanding
    basis  outside  of  the  Rules.   She  submitted   that   the   judge's
    consideration of paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) was insufficient because  it
    did not take account of the child's nationality.   She  submitted  that
    the child's British nationality is a highly material part of this  case
    and that it is absent from consideration.  She relied on the case of JO
    & Others  (Section  55  duty)  Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT  00517  (IAC)  and
    submitted that the judge's decision is lacking in any  proper  analysis
    of the circumstances of the child.  She submitted that paragraph 62  of
    the judge's decision is not sufficient in circumstances where a British
    child would be forced to leave the UK and the European Union.

 9. Mr Walker accepted that there is force to Ms Benfield's submission that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  considering  the  appeal  under
    Appendix FM parent route. He accepted that  paragraph  62  which  deals
    with the Appellant's daughter is brief.

Error of law

10. I accept the submissions put forward in the skeleton argument that  the
    judge erred in his  consideration  of  Appendix  FM.   The  appropriate
    provisions applicable in this case are the partner route  and  not  the
    parent route.  I accept that this may not have been  material  had  the
    judge gone on to undertake  a  full  assessment  of  the  appeal  under
    freestanding Article 8. In any event I am satisfied that the First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  materially  erred  in  failing  to  undertake  a  full
    assessment as to whether the it is reasonable to expect the Appellant's
    British citizen child to be removed from the UK and the European  Union
    or to remain in the UK without her mother in light of the case law  set
    out above. I  therefore  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

11. In terms of remaking the decision Ms Benfield  submitted  that  further
    evidence is required in relation to the changes in the circumstances of
    the family since July 2015.  I accept that none of the findings can  be
    preserved as this requires further findings  and  reassessment  of  the
    case under the Immigration Rules and Article 8.

12. I am satisfied that in these circumstances the nature and extent of the
    judicial fact finding which is necessary in order for the  decision  to
    be remade is such that (having regard to the  overriding  objective  in
    Rule 2 of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008) it is appropriate to
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The judge made an error of law in relation to this appeal and  I  set  aside
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I remit the appeal to  the  First-
tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 24th February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 24th February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

