
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/05892/2014
                                                               IA/05896/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th April 2015                            |On 18th May 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE MCGOWAN
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                Adrian Narvas
                           Marnille Esmores Quinto
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms L Appiah, instructed by Vine Court Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, Adrian Narvas and Marnille Esmores Quinto, are citizens
    of the Philippines.  The first appellant is the partner of  the  second
    appellant.  Both appellants made applications for  residence  cards  as
    the extended family members of an EEA national (Ms  Brillantes-Reed,  a
    Spanish citizen, the second appellant's aunt).  Their applications were
    refused by the respondent on 13 February 2014.  The appellants appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Beach)  which,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 6 January 2015, dismissed the appeals.   The  appellants
    now appeal, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The applications for  residence  cards  fell  to  be  considered  under
    paragraph 8(2) of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  (Amendment)
    Regulations 2011:

    "Extended family member"


    8.-(1) In these Regulations "extended family member" means a person who
    is not a family member of an EEA national under regulation 7(1)(a), (b)
    or (c) and who satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3),  (4)  or
    (5).

        (2) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person
        is a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or  his  civil  partner
        and-

           (a) the person is residing in an EEA State in which the EEA
           national also resides and is dependent upon the EEA national or
           is a member of his household;

           (b) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a) and is
           accompanying the EEA national to the United Kingdom or wishes to
           join him there; or

           (c) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a), has
           joined the EEA national in the United Kingdom and continues to
           be dependent upon him or to be a member of his household.

 3. The operation of the scheme contained in paragraph  8(2)  is  helpfully
    summarised in the headnote of the Upper Tribunal decision  Dauhoo  (EEA
    Regulations - reg 8(2)) [2012] UKUT 79 (IAC):

         "Under the scheme set out in reg 8 (2) of the Immigration (European
         Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006,  a  person   can   succeed   in
         establishing that he or she is an "extended family member"  in  any
         one of four different  ways,  each  of  which  requires  proving  a
         relevant connection both prior to arrival in the UK and in the UK:

             i.   prior dependency and present dependency

             ii.  prior membership of a household and present membership of
             a household

             iii. prior dependency and present membership of a household;

             iv.  prior membership of a household and present dependency.

         11. It is not necessary,  therefore,  to  show  prior  and  present
         connection in the same capacity:  i.e.  dependency-  dependency  or
         household membership-household membership ((i) or  (ii)  above).  A
         person may also qualify if able to show (iii) or (iv)."

 4. Judge Beach at [35] - [42] considered "prior dependency"  and  "present
    membership of a household" both in the Philippines and  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  She concluded that the second appellant had not enjoyed prior
    membership of her aunt's household in the Philippines [35] nor had  she
    been dependent on her aunt in the Philippines prior to  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom [36].  She found that there was "insufficient  evidence"
    to prove that the second appellant is dependent upon her  aunt  in  the
    United Kingdom [41] although she did accept [42] that  both  appellants
    are members of the aunt's  household  in  the  United  Kingdom.   As  a
    consequence of these findings, Judge Beach dismissed the appeal.

 5. Ms Appiah, for the appellants, submitted that the judge  had  erred  in
    law by concluding that the second appellant had not been  a  member  of
    the household of her aunt in the Philippines.  In the  alternative,  Ms
    Appiah submitted that the judge  should  have  found  that  the  second
    appellant  had  been  dependent  on  the  aunt  whilst  living  in  the
    Philippines.  A positive finding in respect of those  issues,  together
    with the judge's finding that the appellants are currently  members  of
    the same household in the United Kingdom as the aunt, should  have  led
    the judge to allow the appeal.

 6. At [35], Judge Beach wrote:

         "The second appellant's account is that she lived with  her  great-
         aunt (her aunt's mother) in the Philippines and that this  was  the
         family home.  However, by the second appellant's own  account,  her
         aunt only came to  the  family  home  for  vacations.   The  second
         appellant had not lived with her aunt in the Philippines since  she
         was a young  girl  and  she,  her  siblings  and  her  parents  had
         subsequently moved out of the property before  she  moved  back  to
         care for the paternal  great-aunt.   The  second  appellant's  aunt
         moved to the UK in 2003 and has formed her life in the UK including
         founding a business.  I  find  that  the  second  appellant's  aunt
         cannot  be  considered  to  be  part  of  the  household   in   the
         Philippines.  I further find that the circumstances are  such  that
         the second appellant cannot be considered to be  a  member  of  the
         sponsor's household in  the  Philippines  because  the  sponsor  no
         longer has a household in the Philippines and has lived in  the  UK
         for seven years prior to the second appellant arriving in the UK."

 7. We consider that the judge has reached a finding on  "prior  membership
    of the sponsor's household" which was plainly available to her  on  the
    evidence.  It is clear that the household in the Philippines  in  which
    the second appellant lived was not that  of  her  aunt  (on  whose  EEA
    status her application for a residence card is based) but  rather  that
    of her great-aunt (her aunt's mother).  Significantly,  paragraph  8(2)
    requires an "extended family member" to have been a member of  the  EEA
    national's household; the provision does not extend to  applicants  who
    may, together with an EEA national,  have  both  been  members  of  the
    household of a non-EEA national.  Mr Avery, for the respondent,  relied
    on the Court of Appeal judgment in AA (Algeria) [2014] EWCA  Civ  1741,
    in particular at [32] - [33]:

         "Mr F Alem was born in 1983, so he left Algeria when he was 18 or
         19 years old. Prior to that, all four brothers had been living in
         Algeria with their father and mother. It is unnecessary to decide
         whether that household in Algeria was the father's or the mother's
         or both parents' household. What is clear is that it was not Mr F
         Alem's household.

         Regulation 8(2) requires the extended family member to have been
         dependent on the EEA national (or his spouse if we had accepted
         Miss Anifowoshe's submissions) or a member of his household.
         Similarly, Article 3.2 would refer to the Union citizen (or his
         spouse if we had accepted Miss Anifowoshe's submission)."

 8. There is nothing in the Regulations to indicate that an individual  may
    only have one household at one time but it is clear from the  facts  in
    the instant case that when the second appellant's aunt returns  to  the
    Philippines for holidays she does not live in  her  own  household  but
    that of her mother.  Judge Beach was, therefore, unarguably correct  to
    find that "the sponsor no longer has a household in  the  Philippines".
    More importantly, the aunt/sponsor did not  have  a  household  in  the
    Philippines at the time when the second appellant was  living  in  that
    country.  The aunt and the second appellant may have lived together  in
    the household of the great aunt but that is not sufficient  to  satisfy
    the requirements of paragraph 8(2).

 9. It was the second appellant's  evidence  that  her  aunt  had  provided
    financial support to her in the Philippines via the great-aunt and,  as
    Judge Beach noted, there were a number of "financial remittance  slips"
    covering the period 1 January 2004 to 5 November 2014.   The  transfers
    had been sent directly to the great-aunt.  The judge noted that,

         "... apart from  these  money  transfer  receipts  and  the  second
         appellant's oral evidence, there is no other  evidence  to  support
         her contention that these money remittances were for her use too or
         even that she was living at the great-aunt's address."

    The judge went on to record that she had "real concerns" regarding  the
    lack of evidence to support the second appellant's assertion  that  she
    had been dependent  upon  her  aunt  in  the  Philippines.   The  judge
    concluded at [37] that there was "insufficient evidence of  the  second
    appellant being dependent on her aunt  while  she  was  living  in  the
    Philippines".

10. Ms Appiah submitted that the judge had failed to indicate  the  weight,
    if any, she had attached to the second appellant's evidence and why she
    had regarded that evidence insufficient  to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof.  We reject that submission.  In  our  opinion,  it  is  entirely
    clear from the determination (in particular, the passage which we  have
    quoted above from [36]) that, whilst the  documentary  evidence  showed
    payments to the great-aunt, the judge found that the second appellant's
    own assertion that  the  money  had  been  paid  for  her  benefit  was
    inadequate to discharge the burden of proof. The  judge's  findings  at
    [36] should be read  in  the  light  of  the  concerns  which  she  had
    expressed at [33] - [34] that  the  second  appellant's  aunt  had  not
    attended the First-tier Tribunal hearing and had not even  submitted  a
    written statement in support of the  second  appellant's  appeal.   The
    judge noted that:

         "... the aunt failing to attend the hearing [has made it] difficult
         for me to assess her support of the appellants'  applications.   It
         also impacts potentially on the credibility of the  evidence  given
         that the sponsor in the application did not attend despite  knowing
         the reasons for the refusal."

    The appellants had not applied for an adjournment to enable the aunt to
    attend whilst the reasons given for her absence were, in the opinion of
    the judge, unsatisfactory [34].  Against this background,  we  consider
    that there was no reason for the judge to  state  explicitly  that  the
    second appellant's evidence was insufficient to discharge the burden of
    proof in these circumstances;  the  determination,  read  as  a  whole,
    provides adequate reasoning to support her findings.  We find that  the
    grounds of appeal challenging  the  determination  at  [36]  amount  to
    little more than a disagreement with findings which have been supported
    by adequate and clear reasoning.

11. We find that the judge did not  err  in  law  in  concluding  that  the
    appellants had failed to  prove  both  prior  dependency  upon  an  EEA
    national or prior membership of that EEA national's  household  in  the
    Philippines.  The judge was, as a consequence, right to find  that  the
    appellants did not meet the requirements of paragraph 8(2) of the  2006
    Regulations.

DECISION

12. These appeals are dismissed.



Signed   Date 5 May 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

