
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal numbers: IA/05203/2013
                                                               IA/05207/2013
                                                               IA/05210/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26 August 2015                    |On 28 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     hAK
                                     HK
                                     SK
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representatives
For the Appellants:    Mr Chhotu, instructed by Pro Bono Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Presenting Office


                          NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND
                   REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT

 1. I make an anonymity direction pursuant to Rule 14 of the Upper Tribunal
    (Tribunal Procedure) Rules 2008 - prohibiting disclosure or publication
    of documents or information which is likely  to  lead  members  of  the
    public to be able to identify the appellants.

 2. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan. Each of the  appellants  is  a
    minor.  They  appealed,  along  with   their   parents,   against   the
    Respondent's decision to refuse them EEA Residence  Cards.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal allowed the appeals of their parents to the  extent  that
    their applications remain outstanding to be lawfully considered by  the
    Respondent.  The  abovementioned   minor   appellants'   appeals   were
    dismissed. Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  thereafter
    given to the appellants.

 3. At the hearing Mr  Walker  indicated  that  the  Respondent  would  not
    undertake   further   consideration   of   the   appellants'   parents'
    applications  without  also  giving  further   consideration   to   the
    appellants' circumstances.

 4. As a consequence of this  indication  Mr  Chhotu,  after  having  taken
    instruction from his clients, sought to withdraw the appellants' cases.
    No objection was taken by Mr Walker to this course  and  I  accordingly
    gave my consent to such withdrawal.

 5. Thus with my consent  and  pursuant  to  rule  17(5)  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  the  appellants'  cases  are
    recorded as "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal". This is
    a Notice pursuant  to  rule  17(5)  to  inform  the  parties  that  the
    appellants' cases are withdrawn.

 6. The effect of the appellants' cases  being  withdrawn  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal  are  at  an
    end. There is no appeal  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision shall stand.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 27 August 2015
