
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05508/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 7th November 2013                          |On 11th November 2013        |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                               ANGELO SOLOMONS
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Dr Thorndike instructed by Arshed & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr McVeety - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Lloyd- Smith, promulgated on 3rd  July  2013,  in  which  she
        dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  the
        Secretary of State to vary his leave to permit him to remain in the
        United Kingdom as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  Migrant  under  the
        points -based system.


     2. The appellant, a citizen of South Africa,  was  born  on  25th  May
        1987.

     3. The decision, dated 5th February 2013, refused the  application  by
        reference to paragraph 245 ZX (ha)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  by
        reference to the fact that the  sponsor  with  whom  the  Appellant
        wished to study was not a Recognised Body.


     4. The refusal also contains a direction for the  Appellant's  removal
        from the United Kingdom pursuant  to  section  47  the  Immigration
        Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.



Discussion



     5. Dr Thorndike challenges  the  determination  by  reference  to  two
        issues, the first relating to the status of  the  institution.  The
        Appellant provided a Confirmation of Acceptance  of  Studies  (CAS)
        issued by Finance and Business Training Ltd who is a  licensed  and
        fully active sponsor. The fact the training  provider  is  licensed
        and is a genuine organisation is not disputed  and  indeed  in  the
        refusal notice the Appellant was awarded the 30 points  he  claimed
        in respect of the CAS.


     6. In the grounds seeking permission to  appeal  Dr  Thorndike  states
        that the training provider is a recognised institution  but  it  is
        important to consider carefully the actual language  of  the  Rules
        which state that it must be a 'Recognised Body' in a  situation  in
        which the  provisions  of  subparagraph  (ha)  are  applicable.   A
        provider can be a recognised institution without being a Recognised
        Body as the definition of a Recognised Body is an institution which
        has been granted degree awarding powers by Royal  Charter,  Act  of
        Parliament or the Privy Council.   All  UK  universities  and  some
        higher education colleges are recognised bodies.  Full  details  of
        those institutions  can  be  found  in  The  Education  (Recognised
        Bodies) (England) Order 2010.


     7. A letter from Finance Business Training has  been  provided,  dated
        16th September 2013,  which  confirms  the  organisation  has  been
        licensed by UKBA to sponsor students  under  Tier  4  as  a  Highly
        Trusted Sponsor. That may be the case but this is not  confirmation
        that it has degree awarding powers.


     8. The requirement for Finance and Business Training to  satisfy  this
        additional status issue  arises  from  the  Appellants  immigration
        history.  In paragraph 10 of the  determination  Judge  Lloyd-Smith
        sets out the history as follows:


          1st March 2004                     Appellant arrives in the United
   Kingdom                                       as a visitor.


          9th October  2004                    Appellant  granted  leave  to
   remain as a                                         student  valid  until
   31st December 2005.


          8th September 2005 - August 2006   Appellant studied for  Bachelor
   of Business                                        Administration.


          8th September  2005  -  September  2008     Bachelor  of  Business
   Administration


          25th February 2008 - May 2009  Bachelor of Business Administration


          13th July 2007-31st January 2010    MBA  top-up  in  International
   Management


     9. 245 ZX (ha) contains the following initial paragraph:


              " If the course is at degree level  or  above,  the  grant  of
   leave to remain the              applicant is seeking must  not  lead  to
   the applicant having spent more than          five years in the UK  as  a
   Tier 4 (General) Migrant,  or  as  a  Student,                   studying
   courses at degree level or above unless :


              ..............


    10. One of the conditions relates to the status of  the  sponsor  as  a
        Recognised Body.


    11. The course for which the Appellant seeks the additional leave is an
        ACCA at NVQ level 7 which it was accepted is  at  degree  level  or
        above.


    12. Dr Thorndike argued that the Appellant did not have leave to remain
        for a period of five years as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant,  but  the
        rule specifically states that it is either as a Tier 4 (Migrant) or
        Student.  He argued in the alternative that any period of study was
        not continuous but the Rules do not require continuity of study for
        the five-year period. His final argument was that if one takes  the
        periods of actual study the Appellant  has  only  been  undertaking
        educational courses for about three years seven months at the  date
        of decision and not for a period of five years.


    13. The three-year seven-month period was not accurately quantified but
        even if it was accepted as being accurate the Appellant will  still
        fail. The reason for this is that the course in relation  to  which
        he seeks the variation is, according to the  CAS,  a  course  which
        started on 11th June 2012 and is due to  finish  on  10th  December
        2014, and is therefore of some two and a half years  duration.  The
        wording of  the  rule  is  very  important  because  it  is  not  a
        requirement that five years must have been completed by the date of
        application but that any period of  previous  study  added  to  the
        period of study if granted  leave  to  remain  must  not  mean  the
        Appellant spending more than five years in the UK as either a  Tier
        4 (General) Migrant or Student.  Simple mathematics  show  that  if
        the additional leave was granted this requirement will be breached.




    14. It is therefore incumbent upon the  Appellant  to  prove  that  the
        course provider is a  Recognised  Body  or  in  receipt  of  public
        funding. This has not been proved and I therefore find  that  Judge
        Lloyd-Smith made no legal error when dismissing  the  appeal  under
        the Immigration Rules for this reason.


    15. Judge Lloyd-Smith also considered Article 8 and found the  decision
        to be proportionate for the reasons set out in paragraph 12 of  the
        determination. Dr Thorndike indicated at the hearing that he wished
        to raise Article 8 but this has not been challenged in the  grounds
        seeking permission to appeal and he did not have permission  to  do
        so granted by the First-tier Tribunal.  In any event, the  findings
        in relation to Article 8 are within the range of  those  the  Judge
        was entitled to make on the  evidence  and  no  'Robinson  obvious'
        point arises. There is no legal  error  in  the  dismissal  of  the
        appeal under Article 8 ECHR for the reasons given.


    16. I do however find that Judge Lloyd-Smith has  made  a  legal  error
        such  that  the  determination  must  be  set  aside  although  the
        dismissal of the appeal under the Immigration Rules and  Article  8
        ECHR shall be preserved findings.  The error arises out of the fact
        that the decision contains a combined rejection of the  substantive
        application and a removal direction pursuant  to  section  47.  The
        date of decision is 5th February 2013. Section 51 of the Crime  and
        Courts Act 2013 substitutes a new sections 47 (1) and (1A) into the
        Nationality and Immigration Act 2006 from 8  May  2013  (Crime  and
        Courts Act 2013 (Commencement no  1)  Order  (SI  2013/1042).   The
        amendment to s.47 is not retrospective and only  applies  from  8th
        May 2013 after which a removal decisions made under  s.47  will  be
        lawful even  if  made  before  the  applicant  has  notice  of  the
        variation decision.  This means that notice of  the  two  decisions
        can be given in the same document.  The  Judge  should  have  found
        that the decision to remove was 'not in accordance with the law'  -
        Adamally  and  Jaferi  (section  47  removal  decisions:   Tribunal
        Procedures) [2012] UKUT 00414 (IAC) refers.


    17. I allow the appeal to the limited extent  it  is  remitted  to  the
        Secretary of State for a lawful removal decision to  be  made.  The
        remaining findings of the Judge are to stand.


Decision

    18. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed  to  the  limited  extent  set  out
        above.


   Anonymity.


    19. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no such order.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 8th November 2013









