








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05949/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decisions and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On: 13 January 2015                  |On: 23 January 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                              Ms Harvinder Kaur
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, counsel (instructed by Louis Kennedy
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on  5  September  1975.
    She appealed against the decision of the respondent  dated  16  January
    2014 refusing her application for further leave to remain in the UK  as
    a Tier 4 (General) student.

 2. The respondent contended that she had failed to meet  the  requirements
    of paragraphs 245ZX(a) as she was refused  under  one  of  the  general
    grounds for refusal set out in paragraph, namely, paragraph  322(3)  of
    the Immigration Rules.

 3. She was last granted leave on 13 March 2012  for  leave  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student to study with the College of  Advanced  Studies.  She
    provided evidence that she had in fact studied at  South  Quay  College
    from 9 April 2012 to 27 May 2013 and had thus  not  complied  with  the
    conditions attached to her leave and failed to meet the requirements of
    paragraph 322(3) of the rules. The respondent deemed her refusal to  be
    appropriate and was not prepared to exercise discretion in her favour.

 4. The appeal was determined on the papers by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lester on 23 September 2014. She dismissed the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 9 October 2014.

 5. She set out the requirements under paragraph 245ZY(c) in full. Leave to
    remain will be granted subject to specified conditions.  One  of  those
    conditions, set out in (iv), provides "no study except: 1. Study at the
    institution that the CAS checking  service  records  as  the  migrant's
    sponsor; or.......3. Supplementary study."

 6. The Judge noted that the rules  do  permit  supplementary  study.   The
    evidence in the respondent's bundle only included an offer letter  from
    the College of Advanced Studies dated 6 March 2012 but no  evidence  to
    show that the appellant studied there or received a  diploma.  Evidence
    of study and the diploma that was produced was in fact from South  Quay
    College and appears to have consisted of a full time course  ending  27
    May 2013 "leaving little time for any additional full time course study
    during the same period."

 7. The Judge noted that although the appellant's  solicitors  requested  a
    decision on the papers they provided no additional evidence by way of a
    statement prepared by the appellant or  by  way  of  letters  from  her
    places of study to support the appeal and to give an explanation.

 8.  In  the  event,  Judge  Lester  found  that  the  appellant  had   not
    demonstrated that she studied at the College  of  Advanced  Studies  in
    accordance with the conditions of her grant.  Refusal  of  leave  under
    paragraph 322(3) although not mandatory, was subject to  the  secretary
    of state's discretion. However, the  appellant  had  not  provided  any
    basis upon which to exercise the discretion in her favour.

 9. On 23 November 2014, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.  He stated that the appellant  accepted
    that she studied at South Quay College  but  contended  that  this  was
    "supplemental to her studies at College of Advanced  Studies"  and  was
    thus permitted.

10. The grounds in support of her application to appeal asserted that on 29
    September 2014 (the day when the appeal was listed), the appellant sent
    to the Tribunal a faxed letter from South Quay College stating that her
    studies there were ".....extra studies parallel to College of  Advanced
    Studies." A fax transmission report dated 10.59 on  23  September  2014
    was produced. It appears however that no such letter was placed  before
    the Judge when she made her decision.

11. In granting permission, Judge Brunnen stated that it was arguable  that
    the fact that the letter was not considered  constitutes  a  procedural
    error causing unfairness. He noted that the letter provides "only  weak
    evidence" that the appellant studied at the College of Advanced Studies
    or  that  any  studies  there  could  properly  be  considered  to   be
    "supplementary to her studies at South Quay College." However,  it  was
    not "inconceivable" that it would not have led the Judge to a different
    decision.

12. At the hearing on 13 January 2015, Mr Khan referred to the letter  from
    South Quay College dated 10 October 2013. That is the letter  that  was
    produced on the morning of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

13. The letter states that it is a "completion letter" in  respect  of  the
    appellant. It confirms that she completed  her  course  at  South  Quay
    College. The course was for a Diploma in Strategic Management at  Level
    7. The course commencement was on 9 April 2012. The completion  was  13
    months later, namely on 27 May 2013. The total study hours were 18  per
    week. It is accordingly accepted that this was a full time course.

14. The letter states in the final paragraph that the appellant  was  doing
    an extra study parallel to the College of Advanced  Studies.  "We  have
    not issued any CAS letter on the name of Harvinder Kaur (sic)".

15. Mr Khan properly drew my attention to the letter from  the  College  of
    Advanced Studies dated 6 March 2012 where the appellant was  offered  a
    place on the course. The course was exactly the same as  that  provided
    by South Quay College, namely  for  a  Level  7  Diploma  in  Strategic
    Management. The course at  the  College  of  Advanced  Studies  was  to
    commence on 19 March 2012 and was a one year course. The mode of  study
    was stated to be "full time".

16. After completion of her course at South  Quay  College,  the  appellant
    applied in July 2013 to study for an extended  diploma  in  Information
    Technology at the European College for Higher Education, London. It was
    from the information included with that application that the respondent
    noted that the appellant had previously studied at South Quay  College,
    where she obtained the diploma.

17. Mr Khan submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  should  have  had  the
    opportunity  of  considering  the  letter  from  South  Quay.  That  is
    particularly so because it stated that  the  appellant  was  doing  'an
    extra study parallel to the College of Advanced Studies'.

18. Mr Khan accepted however that she attended a full time course at  South
    Quay College which was the exact same course for the exact same  period
    offered to her originally by the College of Advanced Studies.

19. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Bramble referred to the Upper  Tribunal
    decision in Bhimani  (Student:  Switching  institutions:  Requirements)
    [2014] UKUT 00516 (IAC).  The  Tribunal  found  that  where  a  student
    chooses to study at another institution  holding  a  different  sponsor
    licence number from that of the institution where  he/she  was  granted
    leave  to  remain  to  study,  he/she  is  required  to  make  a  fresh
    application for leave to remain.

20. He submitted that even if there was an error of law - in that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge did not have regard to the letter from South Quay -
    there was nothing in the documents in any event that revealed that  the
    course was supplemental. There had accordingly been a change of college
    in breach of the conditions.

21. Judge Lester did have regard to the  fact  that  the  refusal  was  not
    mandatory but subject to  the  respondent's  discretion.  However,  the
    appellant had not provided  any  basis  upon  which  to  exercise  that
    discretion in her favour. He further submitted that discretion  was  in
    fact exercised in this case.

    Assessment

22. Although Mr Khan submitted that the course at South  Quay  College  was
    merely "supplemental" to that at the College of Advanced Studies, it is
    quite clear that the appellant  was  awarded  a  Diploma  in  Strategic
    Management following a year's full time course at South  Quay  College.
    That was the exact same course which she wished to take at the  College
    of Advanced Studies.

23. The letter from South Quay College also states that the  appellant  was
    doing "an extra studies parallel to the College of  Advanced  Studies".
    However, there were  no  extra  studies  parallel  to  the  College  of
    Advanced Studies. This was for the exact same full time course that was
    offered by the College  of  Advanced  Studies.  Nor  was  any  evidence
    provided that the appellant did any studies at the College of  Advanced
    Studies.

24. I accordingly find that the only evidence of study  was  for  the  full
    time course ending on 27 May 2013  that  the  appellant  received  from
    South Quay College.

25. The respondent  did  consider  exercising  discretion  but  deemed  the
    refusal appropriate and was not prepared to exercise discretion in  the
    appellant's favour.

26. There is no ground of appeal relied on  by  the  appellant  before  the
    Upper Tribunal relating to the exercise of discretion.  No  submissions
    were addressed by Mr Khan relating to the discretion. Nor was there any
    evidence advanced to demonstrate that in the circumstances,  discretion
    should have been exercised in the appellant's favour.

27. Having regard to the circumstances as a whole, I find that the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  a  material
    error of law and shall stand.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed.

    No anonymity direction is made.






    Signed        Date 2/1/2015
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
