

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers:  IA/05648/2015
                                                               IA/05646/2015
                                                               IA/05645/2015
                                                               IA/05647/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Promulgated on               |
|26 January 2016                               |18 April 2016                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MD ABDUL MUHITH AND OTHERS

                                                              Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Reza, instructed by MQ Hassan Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham, who for reasons given  in
    her decision dated 11 May 2015 allowed the appeals by  the  Respondents
    against the decisions dated 21 January 2015 refusing  the  applications
    by the Respondents for further leave to remain.  They are nationals  of
    Bangladesh and as indicated in paragraph [1] of  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the Tribunal), the first  and  second  Respondents
    are the parents of the third and fourth Respondents.

 2. As to their immigration history, the first Respondent  had  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom in September 2001 as a student. His wife arrived  in
    March 2003 with the elder child,  the  third  Respondent.   The  fourth
    Respondent was  born  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  August  2004.   The
    decisions under appeal were in response to applications the Respondents
    had made on human rights grounds for further leave to remain.

 3.  It  appears  that  following  the  refusal  of   those   applications,
    reconsideration was sought based  on  the  imminent  completion  of  10
    years' residence in the United Kingdom by  the  fourth  Respondent  and
    that child's eligibility to register as a British Citizen.  By the time
    the matter reached the Tribunal, a certificate of registration had been
    issued.

 4. It was submitted by the Respondents' representative at the hearing that
    the  first  and  second  Respondents  had,  as  a  consequence  of  the
    circumstances of the fourth Respondent, a "... derivative right to stay
    in the United Kingdom under the Zambrano concession".  The Tribunal was
    invited to remit the matter to the Secretary of State "... for  further
    consideration as paragraph E-LTRPT. 2.3 of appendix  FM  and  that  the
    case of Zambrano needs to be considered".

 5. The Tribunal determined the appeal by concluding thus:

        "(11)     The Home Office Presenting Officer was in agreement  with
              this course of action.

          12) I am satisfied that the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
              was not in accordance with  the  law.   It  suffered  from  a
              defect in procedure.  The effect of this decision in relation
              to this element of  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  is
              accordingly that the  decision  is  quashed  and  that  these
              applications remain outstanding awaiting a lawful decision.

          13) The Appeals are allowed to the extent they  are  returned  to
              the Respondent for a lawful decision."

 6. The Secretary of State's challenge to the decision led to the grant  of
    permission by First-tier Tribunal Judge Coates in these terms:

         "(1) The Appellants, who are citizens of Bangladesh  are  a  family
              consisting of husband, wife and their two children.

           2) The first Appellant entered the United Kingdom  in  September
              2001 with valid leave as a student. He was joined by his wife
              and elder child in March 2003.  The fourth Appellant was born
              in the UK in August 2004.  All four  Appellants  applied  for
              further leave to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds.   Their
              applications were refused by the  Respondent  on  21  January
              2005 but appeals against that refusal were allowed  by  Judge
              of the First-tier Tribunal Graham on the 3  June  2015.   The
              appeals were allowed to the limited extent that the decisions
              were not in accordance with the law and remained  outstanding
              with the Respondent for lawful decisions to be made.

           3) Grounds  submitted  by  the  Respondent's  representative  in
              support of an application for permission to appeal argue that
              the First-tier Judge made a  material  misdirection  in  law.
              The grounds refer to paragraph 10 of the determination  which
              indicates that there has been a change in circumstances since
              the date of decision.  It is contended that when the decision
              was made it was lawful and correct.  No application has  been
              made under the EEA Regulations  for  a  derivative  right  of
              residence in the UK.  The Respondent's representative  argues
              that it is not clear why the First-tier Judge sought to remit
              the matter to the Respondent rather than consider the  change
              of circumstances in the course of the appeal.

           4) I am satisfied that the grounds are arguable."

 7. We were provided at the hearing with  a  copy  of  a  letter  from  the
    Secretary of State to the Respondents' solicitors dated 28 October 2015
    which states:

         "I am in receipt of your letter dated 13 July 2015  and  apologise
        for the delay in replying.

     The application for permission to appeal has been  granted  and  there
        are arguable errors in law in the determination.

     The fact of any concession made by  the  Presenting  Officer  will  be
        considered by the Upper Tribunal, however if  such  concession  was
        made, and I do not here accept that one was made,  it  was  wrongly
        made and then it is formally withdrawn."

 8. Mr Toufan sought to rely on this "withdrawal" of this  "concession"  in
    support of his challenge.  We are not persuaded that the recorded  (and
    unchallenged) agreement by the Home Office  Presenting  Officer  was  a
    concession either as to fact or law: it instead, constituted consent to
    the disposal of the proceedings between the parties that  was  properly
    open to the Secretary of State at any stage in the appeal.  Rule 39  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 provides for such an
    eventuality and it was open to the Tribunal  in  this  appeal  to  give
    effect to the matters agreed. Even if we were persuaded that  agreement
    was a concession, its purported withdrawal in the letter of 28  October
    2015 arose after the Tribunal reached its decision and  does  not  have
    any material bearing on the task before  us  to  consider  whether  the
    Tribunal had erred in law. The  Presenting  Officer  had  authority  to
    agree with the course of action that led to the disposal  of  the  case
    irrespective of the questionable merit of the new factor that had  been
    advanced  by  the  Respondents.  Accordingly  the  applications  remain
    pending before the Secretary of State for a  decision.  Her  appeal  is
    dismissed.


Signed                                  Date:  14 April 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


