
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05739/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 August 2015                    |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MRS ELIZABETH MODUPE CLARK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Grewal, instructed by Afro Asian Advisory
Service


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State in  relation  to  a
    determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet that was  handed  down
    on 17 March 2015.  The  appeal  is  brought  pursuant  to  a  grant  of
    permission by First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle dated 7 May 2015.

2.   The grounds of appeal can be very shortly stated. The preponderance  of
    the determination indicates a lack of acceptance of  the  substance  of
    the evidence put forward by the appellant (as she was before the Judge)
    in that what she said was  deemed  not  to  be  credible  and  to  lack
    plausibility in a number of ways.  In particular the Judge took a  very
    negative view of the fact that she had exaggerated the  level  of  care
    which she gave to her husband and  in  addition  both  exaggerated  and
    directly  contradicted  the  minister  about  the  level  of  help   or
    assistance which she afforded to her church.  Furthermore,  indications
    were given in the course of  the  determination  that  the  immigration
    status of the  children  were  questionable,  the  Judge  remarking  at
    paragraph 39: "I have considerable doubts as to ... their status in the
    United Kingdom".  The judge quite properly took into account  the  fact
    that little weight should be accorded to  the  time  during  which  her
    private life was being established on the basis that at that stage  her
    leave  to  be  in  the  United  Kingdom  could  only  be  described  as
    precarious.

3.   What is properly and fairly recognised by Ms Grewal for the  respondent
    is that the determination appears to be going in one direction for  the
    majority of its length and  then  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  takes  a
    turnabout in paragraph 43 and comes to the opposite conclusion to  that
    which appears to be have been built up by the foundations laid  earlier
    in that determination.  In particular the Judge indicates:

         "I accept that there would be difficulties in her and  her  husband
         and in the other family members returning to Nigeria where she says
         that she only has a two bedroom bungalow where her  elderly  mother
         lives.  On the balance of probabilities I conclude that  there  are
         insurmountable obstacles to her returning to  Nigeria  to  continue
         her family life in that country."

    Reference is  made  to  the  statutory  definition  of  'insurmountable
    obstacles' which means:

         "The very significant difficulties which  would  be  faced  by  the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the United Kingdom which could not  be  overcome  or  which
         would entail very serious  hardship  for  the  appellant  or  their
         partner."

4.   Regrettably, there is nothing in  paragraph  43  of  the  determination
    giving any indication of the factors which were considered by the Judge
    to amount to such insurmountable obstacles.  There is no more  than  an
    assertion, and one which is not undergirded by any previous findings of
    fact which, as I have already indicated, seem to point in entirely  the
    opposite direction.

5.   I was initially inclined, having regard to  the  evidence  recorded  in
    the determination, to re-make the decision myself on the basis that  no
    further material is likely to be available.  On reflection, and perhaps
    through an abundance of caution, I am narrowly persuaded that it  would
    be appropriate in this instance to remit the  matter  to  a  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh determination.  My primary reason for doing so  is
    the clear dissonance in the determination between the findings of  fact
    as indicated in the bulk of the determination  and  the  conclusion  in
    paragraph 43.  It is unclear to the informed reader why  such  a  volte
    face has taken place in the course of the determination on  a  judicial
    assessment of credibility and plausibility by a  Judge  who  has  heard
    evidence and assessed that evidence. It would be an unsafe basis for me
    to reach a different conclusion when I had not heard that evidence  and
    when not been in a position to assess the credibility of those who gave
    it.

6.   It has also been indicated to me by the Presenting  Officer  on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State that there may be other  material  which  the
    Secretary of State may wish to put before the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    that is a further reason why remitting the matter would be appropriate.

7.   So in all the circumstances I allow this appeal and I  order  that  the
    matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined  afresh.



Directions

 1. Remit to Hatton Cross.

 2. Not before Judge Sweet.

 3. No interpreter required.

 4. Times estimate: 2 hours.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date 4 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

