
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/05449/2013
     IA/05450/2013
     IA/05451/2013
     IA/05452/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th September  2013                         |On 26th September 2013     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                           Mr SALIM MUSLIM VEETTIL
                              MRS SULAIKA SALIM
                            MISS SHABIYANA SALIM
                              MISS SAFNA SALIM
                         (Anonymity Order not Made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Salim Muslim Veetil in person
For the Respondent:  Mr N Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellants against a determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Tootell) promulgated on 29th  May  2013  by  which  she  dismissed  the
    Appellants' appeals against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse
    them leave to remain on Article 8 grounds.

 2. The circumstances of this case are that the first Appellant came to the
    United Kingdom in 2006 with leave to enter as a  domestic  worker.  His
    wife and two daughters joined him in October 2010 as his dependants. On
    4th August 2011 the first Appellant was encountered by UKBA  during  an
    enforcement visit working at a petrol service station. The Secretary of
    State says that the first Appellant admitted he was working as  a  sole
    employee and he was thus served with an enforcement notice as a  person
    liable to removal. That was not an immigration decision  and  therefore
    not appealable. In August 2011 the Appellants' representatives wrote to
    UKBA asking that they be permitted to remain on Article 8 grounds.  The
    Secretary of State indicated that such an application needed to be made
    formally. Following JR proceedings the Secretary  of  State  eventually
    made a decision refusing the application  on  1st  February  2013.  The
    Appellants' appeal against that decision  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 21st May 2013.

 3. On that occasion the Appellants were represented by counsel. The First-
    tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal both under the Immigration Rules and
    under the ECHR.

 4. The Appellants' representatives drafted an application  for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which  was  initially  refused  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal but then granted by a Judge of the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 25th July 2013. The Upper Tribunal Judge found it arguable that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in indicating that service of the  IS151A
    was an immigration decision that the Appellants had  not  appealed  and
    that this adversely impacted on the assessment of the Article 8  claim.
    Upper Tribunal Judge  Keki?  also  noted  however  that  this  did  not
    necessarily mean that the result would be different.

 5. In the letter sent by the representatives requesting leave to remain on
    Article 8 grounds  the  representatives  stated  that  on  the  day  in
    question in August 2011 the first Appellant had been asked to go to the
    petrol  station  by  his  employer  because  his  daughter   was   ill.
    Accompanying that letter was a statement signed by the first  Appellant
    stating that he had spent five years in the UK as a domestic worker and
    had always worked in that category. He said that he had never  breached
    the conditions of his  leave  to  remain  as  a  domestic  worker.  His
    employer had called him  to  go  to  the  petrol  station  because  his
    daughter was sick. He had only worked for his employer as  a  chef  and
    domestic worker.

 6. In the Letter of Refusal however the Secretary of State notes that when
    the Appellant was encountered at the petrol station he admitted working
    there as the sole employee.





 7. Before the First-tier Tribunal the first Appellant repeated  his  claim
    that he had been asked to go to the petrol station by his employer  but
    at the hearing told the Judge that there were other  staff  members  at
    the petrol station and that it was his job to supervise  children  from
    the school opposite the petrol station when they came into the shop  at
    school opening and closing times. He stayed only  30  minutes  on  each
    occasion going in at 8am and again between 3pm and 4pm.   He  told  the
    Judge that he had attended the petrol station for that purpose on  four
    occasions in total.

 8. At paragraph 61 of the determination Judge says:-

         "I also state  here  that  I  do  not  find  her  (the  Appellants'
         representative) submissions in respect of the Respondent's decision
         of 4th August 2011 persuasive. I find that this was an  immigration
         decision which does not appear to  been  challenged  at  the  time.
         Furthermore, I find that I am not  satisfied  by  the  explanations
         which were put forward by the first Appellant in this regard  which
         I find to be lacking in credibility."

 9. The Judge erred in finding that the decision of 4th August 2011 was  an
    immigration decision. It was not. It did not carry a  right  of  appeal
    and therefore there was no opportunity for the Appellants to  challenge
    it. In that finding therefore the judge erred.  The Judge also rejected
    the explanations given by  the  first  Appellant  in  relation  to  the
    incident when he was encountered at the petrol station but has given no
    reasons for doing so. She says they are lacking in credibility but  not
    why. A finding as to whether or not the Appellant was in breach of  his
    leave is crucial to this appeal. If the Appellant was in truth  not  an
    employee at the service station and was not in breach of his leave then
    the family would have continued to be entitled to leave as  a  domestic
    worker and his dependants. That would have a considerable impact on the
    Article 8 decision.

10. For that reason I am satisfied  that  the  error  of  law  renders  the
    determination unsafe such that it is to be set aside.

11. The first Appellant appeared  before  me  unrepresented.  However,  the
    grounds were drafted by his representatives and they only came off  the
    record on the morning of the hearing.  Those  representatives  remained
    instructed at the time  permission  was  granted  and  directions  were
    given. Directions were given that if it  was  proposed  to  adduce  any
    fresh evidence before the Upper Tribunal  the  appropriate  application
    should be  made  and  the  evidence  filed.  There  has  been  no  such
    application or additional evidence.

12. I therefore proceeded to redecide  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal. The  first  Appellant
    told me that since  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  his  wife  and
    daughters have returned to India and he is the only Appellant still  in
    the UK. Thus in accordance with s104(4)  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 the appeals of the second, third and fourth  Appellants
    are abandoned.  That leaves only the first  Appellant  with  an  extant
    appeal.

13. With regard to the encounter at the petrol station in August  2011  the
    only evidence from the Secretary of  State  is  the  reference  in  the
    Letter  of  Refusal   indicating  that  the  Appellant  at  that   time
    acknowledged that he was working there as the sole employee. No  record
    of interview in relation to that has been provided by the Secretary  of
    State. In such cases the burden of proof rests with  the  Secretary  of
    State. It is for the Secretary of State to establish a prima facie case
    that the Appellant was  in  breach  of  his  leave.  Being  encountered
    working at a petrol station when his leave was  as  a  domestic  worker
    meets that requirement. It is then for the Appellant to  show  that  he
    was not in fact in breach of his  leave.  The  Appellant's  version  of
    events has been inconsistent. From the position of accepting he was the
    sole employee on the day in question he then said in  the  letter  from
    his solicitors and in his statement that this was  a  one-off  occasion
    when he was at the petrol  station  at  the  request  of  his  employer
    because his daughter was ill. The explanation then changed again and is
    now that he was asked to work there a total of four times to  supervise
    children entering the petrol station at the beginning and  end  of  the
    school day and he had done that four times and was not the only  member
    of staff there. I notice that there has never  been  any  corroborative
    evidence from his employer. That would have been easily  obtainable  if
    what the Appellant says is true. Given  the  inconsistent  explanations
    and lack of  corroborative  evidence  I  find  that  the  Appellant  is
    incredible in his explanation and the  truth  of  the  matter  is  that
    despite having leave as a domestic worker he was actually working as  a
    petrol station attendant.

14. The First Appellant cannot meet the Immigration Rules  in  relation  to
    his family or private life.

15. That leaves the ECHR. Having found as I have in relation to the  petrol
    station the Article 8  assessment  relates  to  an  Appellant  who  has
    deliberately breached the terms of his leave. All of the other  aspects
    of the Article 8 claim as to his daughters ability to study, his wife's
    health and difficulties with his  daughters  being  expected  to  marry
    early in India are swept away by the fact that they have returned there
    voluntarily.  As the first Appellant's family is in India it is  not  a
    breach of his family life  for  him  to  be  returned  there.   He  has
    inevitably established a private life in the UK. However he has done so
    while breaching the terms of his leave as a domestic  worker.   He  has
    adduced no evidence that he has ever worked as a domestic  worker.   He
    can continue a private life in India the country  of  his  nationality,
    culture, heritage, language and where he lived for 50 years  and  where
    his family are living.

16. For the above reasons the first Appellant falls a  long  way  short  of
    establishing  that   the   Secretary   of   State's   decision   is   a
    disproportionate interference with his right to a  private  and  family
    life.

17. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge containing an  error
    of law I have set it aside.  I redecide the appeal and dismiss it under
    the Immigration Rules and under the ECHR.

18. The first Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is  dismissed.  The
    second, third and fourth Appellants' appeals are abandoned by operation
    of law.








Signed                              Date 26th September 2013





Upper Tribunal Judge Martin



