
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: IA/05909/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21 June 2016                |On 9 August 2016                  |
|Prepared on 23 June 2016       |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between
                                    F. A.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms McCrae, Counsel, instructed by Hunter Stone Law
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom  using  his  own
           Bangladeshi passport with the benefit of entry clearance  as
           a work permit holder in September 2004. His leave expired on
           28 July 2005, whereupon he became an overstayer.
        2. In  October  2014  the  Appellant  was  encountered  working
           illegally in a restaurant, and  he  was  duly  served  on  5
           December 2014 with a decision to remove him from the  UK  by
           reference to s10 of the 1999 Act. He  subsequently  accepted
           that he had given false details about himself to immigration
           officers, and that he  had  not  claimed  asylum  either  in
           October or December 2014.
        3. The Appellant appealed to the Tribunal, but he did not raise
           any ground of appeal that asserted a claim to asylum. Indeed
           it only became apparent that  he  wished  to  argue  such  a
           ground of appeal upon service of the bundle of papers  filed
           for the first listing of his appeal  on  9  June  2015.  The
           hearing of the appeal on 9 June 2015 was adjourned on 8 June
           2016 at the Respondent's request  once  the  Respondent  had
           identified that this was his intention, because  the  appeal
           was no longer suited for the "float" list in which  it  then
           appeared, and, because inadequate time had been allocated to
           the hearing.
        4. The appeal was relisted for 2 September 2015,  to  suit  the
           convenience of the Appellant's representatives.
        5. The appeal was duly heard on 2 September 2015,  and  it  was
           dismissed by a decision of Judge Fisher  promulgated  on  18
           September 2015. The  Appellant's  representatives  chose  to
           absent themselves from that hearing.
        6. The Appellant's application to the First Tier  Tribunal  for
           permission to appeal which asserted that the  Appellant  had
           been deprived of a fair hearing of his appeal was refused by
           Judge  Andrew  on  18  February  2016,  since  she  was  not
           satisfied that it was arguable that the decision  to  refuse
           to adjourn had deprived him of a fair hearing of his appeal.
        7. The Appellant duly renewed  his  application  to  the  Upper
           Tribunal on the same grounds, and permission was granted  by
           Judge Reeds on 14 March 2016. Although the decision does not
           set this out in terms, it is to be deduced from the  grounds
           that she considered it was arguable that the  Appellant  had
           been deprived of a fair hearing of the  appeal  because  the
           refusal to adjourn the hearing prevented him  from  adducing
           evidence  to  rebut  the  Respondent's   evidence   of   her
           investigations into the documents that  he  relied  upon  as
           corroboration of his account of events  in  Bangladesh,  and
           which he claimed were true copies of genuine FIRs issued  in
           relation to him.
        8. The Respondent filed a  Rule  24  Notice  on  4  April  2016
           pointing out that it was the Appellant  who  had  introduced
           these documents into evidence, and  who  had  asserted  that
           they were genuine and could be relied upon,  notwithstanding
           an obvious reliability issue arising from the content of one
           of them, namely the reference to the Appellant's involvement
           in an incident in Bangladesh in 2009, when of course it  was
           the Appellant's case that he had been in the UK continuously
           since September 2004.
        9. Thus the matter comes before me.






      Grounds of appeal
       10. The grounds refer to an application for an adjournment  made
           to the Tribunal in writing on 28 August 2016, and a  renewed
           application he made on 1 September  2016,  and  again  on  2
           September 2016. Ms McCrae was placed in some  difficulty  by
           the failure of those instructing her  to  provide  her  with
           copies of all of these applications, and the decisions  made
           upon them, but she was content to proceed on  the  basis  of
           the excerpts that I read to her from the Tribunal file.
       11. The grounds complain that the Respondent  served  and  filed
           evidence on 26 August 2016, consisting of the  report  of  a
           Field Liaison Officer dated 25 August  2016.  The  Appellant
           requested an adjournment on 28 August 2016 in order to rebut
           the content of the officer's report. The Tribunal's  refusal
           of that request, and the renewed requests that followed, was
           said to have denied the Appellant a fair  hearing,  and  the
           guidance to be found in the decision of Nwaigwe (adjournment
           fairness) [2014] UKUT 418 was referred to.


      History of the adjournment requests
       12. By fax of 1449hours on 26 August 2016 the Respondent  served
           upon the Appellant's representatives a report by  the  Field
           Liaison Officer Dhaka dated 25 August 2016. The officer  had
           been requested to take such steps as were available  to  him
           to verify two documents that the Appellant had produced  for
           the first time in the bundle  of  documents  filed  for  the
           hearing of his appeal in June 2015. First, a  document  that
           purported to be a genuine FIR (number 105 of  6  June  2009)
           issued  by  the  Kotowali  Police  Station,  and,  second  a
           document that purported to relate to a case at the  Kotowali
           Police Station (number 20(6)2001 dated 17 June 2001).
       13. The officer reported that he had travelled to, and met with,
           the police office in charge of the Kotowali Police  Station.
           He reported that he had been told that the  Kotowali  Police
           Station held no records older than ten years, so that it was
           not possible to  verify  the  document   that  purported  to
           relate to a case at  the  Kotowali  Police  Station  (number
           20(6)2001 dated 17 June 2001), or verify that there had ever
           been such a  case.  The  Police  Station  did  however  hold
           records for 2009, and it had been confirmed to him that  the
           document that purported to be a genuine FIR (number 105 of 6
           June 2009) issued by the Kotowali Police Station, was not  a
           genuine document, since  no  such  document  had  ever  been
           created.
       14. These two documents were both documents that  the  Appellant
           had first produced to the Respondent in a bundle served  and
           filed on 4 June 2015, in anticipation of the hearing of  his
           appeal listed on 9 June 2016.
       15. The service of  this  bundle  of  documents  was  the  first
           occasion upon which the  Appellant  had  intimated  that  he
           wished to make a protection claim. An application for  leave
           to remain made on  12  May  2010  with  the  help  of  Abdin
           Associates had simply relied  upon  his  Article  8  private
           life. Moreover the grounds of appeal lodged by  his  current
           solicitors only relied upon  his  Article  8  private  life.
           (Indeed I can discern  from  the  Tribunal  file  no  formal
           application to amend those grounds of appeal to raise either
           asylum or Article 3 as a ground of appeal.)
       16. The hearing of the appeal was adjourned on 8  June  2016  at
           the Respondent's request once she had  identified  that  the
           appeal was no longer suited for the "float" list in which it
           then appeared because  of  the  protection  claim  that  the
           Appellant had now advanced. (The time initially allocated to
           the hearing would also have been inadequate given the issues
           now raised.) The appeal was relisted for 2  September  2015,
           to suit the convenience of the Appellant's representatives.
       17. I note that there  appear  in  a  number  of  documents  the
           assertion  made  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant   that   the
           Tribunal's decision to adjourn the hearing of the appeal  on
           8 June  2016  was  the  result  of  an  application  by  the
           Respondent in order that she might verify documents produced
           by the Appellant. There is nothing on the Tribunal  file  to
           suggest that this was the case,  and  on  the  contrary  the
           documents that do appear upon the Tribunal file record  that
           this was not the case. Ms  McCrae  accepted  that  this  may
           simply have been an assumption  made  by  those  instructing
           her.
       18. By fax of 27 August 2016 the  Respondent  served  and  filed
           witness statements from immigration officers who  had  dealt
           with the Appellant between October 2014  and  July  2015  to
           confirm that at no stage had he intimated to them  any  fear
           of harm in the event of return to Bangladesh, and to  record
           that  on  23  July  2015  the  Appellant  had  attended  the
           Bangladesh High Commission in London to participate  in  the
           process of issuing to him a travel document.  Nothing  turns
           upon the fairness of the hearing resulting from the  service
           of this evidence at this late stage for two reasons;
                 a) it  was  evidence  that  was  not  disputed  by  the
           Appellant at the hearing, and,
                 b) no complaint is made about this late service in  the
           application for permission to appeal.
       19. By fax of Friday 28 August 2016 at 1107hours the Appellant's
           representatives applied for an adjournment of the hearing on
           2 September 2016 in order to  obtain  the  further  evidence
           that the Appellant had instructed  them  existed  and  which
           would rebut the Field Liaison Officer's report. The  nature,
           and source, of this evidence  was  not  identified,  but  an
           adjournment of six weeks was requested to obtain  and  serve
           it. That application was refused with reasons by fax  of  28
           August 2016;
                 "The application may be renewed at the hearing  but  at
                 present it is difficult to see why the  dispute  cannot
                 be resolved on the  basis  of  the  evidence  currently
                 available. The "proof" that the Appellant refers to  is
                 highly unlikely to be  conclusive  and  the  report  is
                 perfectly clear in its terms."
       20.  By  fax  of  Monday  1  September  2016  at  122hours   the
           Appellant's representatives renewed the application, but did
           no more than repeat the content of the original application.
           The nature, and source, of the rebuttal evidence that it was
           said already existed was not  identified.  That  application
           was refused with reasons by fax of 1 September 2016;
                 "Leave has been granted to renew the application at the
                 hearing. That remains the case."
       21. By fax of Tuesday 2 September 2016 at 0840hours (the day  of
           the hearing) the  Appellant's  representatives  renewed  the
           application once again, and informed the  Tribunal  that  if
           their  application   was   refused   they   would   withdraw
           representation. They  would  not  attend  the  hearing,  and
           Counsel who had been booked to do so, would not now  do  so.
           Instead,  if  necessary,  the  Appellant  would  renew   the
           application in person if required. This  letter  offered  no
           new information in support  of  the  application.  Thus  the
           nature, and source, of the rebuttal evidence that  was  said
           to exist remained unidentified.
       22. The Appellant duly attended  the  hearing  and  renewed  the
           application in person. It is plain that at no stage  did  he
           suggest that he was unable  to  represent  himself,  and  he
           could not of course complain  that  he  had  been  taken  by
           surprise by the failure of his representatives to attend the
           hearing, since it was he who had made the decision that they
           should not do so.
       23. The decision records [2] that  the  Judge  enquired  of  the
           Appellant what evidence he believed that he would be able to
           obtain  if  the  adjournment  were  to   be   granted.   The
           Appellant's response was that he could obtain a report  from
           the police in Bangladesh to confirm that the documents  were
           genuine.
       24. I note that despite the passage of time no such evidence has
           subsequently been produced. I also note that  the  Appellant
           did not claim  to  the  Judge  that  there  already  existed
           evidence that would rebut the content of the  Field  Liaison
           Officer's report.
       25. The Judge refused the renewed  application  because  he  was
           satisfied that he could reach a view upon  the  weight  that
           could properly be attached to the documents relied  upon  by
           the Appellant, after hearing the Appellant's oral  evidence,
           and after looking at the evidence in the round [3].


      Error of Law?
       26. Ms McCrae adopted the grounds of the application in order to
           argue that  in  all  the  circumstances  of  this  case  the
           Appellant had been deprived of a fair hearing of his appeal.
           Ms McCrae accepted that the Appellant had not been  entitled
           to an adjournment of the hearing of his appeal  simply  upon
           demand, and that the burden now fell upon the  Appellant  to
           demonstrate that the Judge had made a material error of  law
           in refusing the application by denying the Appellant a  fair
           hearing. It was not  suggested  that  the  Judge  had  acted
           irrationally, had failed to  apply  the  correct  test,  had
           failed to take into account any material  consideration,  or
           had taken into account any immaterial consideration; Nwaigwe
           @ [7]. Accordingly, with the appeal so framed, the true test
           was not whether the Tribunal acted reasonably,  but  whether
           the Appellant was deprived of a fair hearing. Fairness,  and
           not reasonableness, being the supreme criterion.
       27. Ms McCrae accepted that despite the passage of time since  2
           September 2015 the Appellant had not been able to obtain any
           evidence from the  Police  in  Bangladesh  (whether  from  a
           senior officer at the Kotowali Police Station,  or,  from  a
           senior officer at either a national or regional level). Thus
           the Appellant has never been able to  produce  the  evidence
           which he identified to the Judge as being available  to  him
           in the event of an adjournment to provide a rebuttal to  the
           information given to the Field Officer on 25 August 2015  by
           the police officer in charge of Kotowali Police Station.
       28. Although Ms McCrae made no reference to it in the course  of
           her submissions, I note the letter of 20 September 2015 from
           Md Azim Uddin that is contained in  a  bundle  of  documents
           filed with a Rule 15(2A) application on 21 April 2016.  This
           is the only material that has ever been produced  subsequent
           to the hearing on 2 September 2015 that could be said to  be
           relevant to the issue of the reliability  of  the  documents
           that the Field  Liaison  Office  sought  to  verify  at  the
           Kotowali Police Station. I also note that some  nine  months
           have now elapsed since the hearing below [ApB2.p23].
       29. The letter of 20 September 2015 is on  any  view  a  curious
           document.  The  author  represents   himself   to   be   the
           Appellant's retained lawyer in Sylhet.  As  such  one  might
           expect the author to be fully aware of the  details  of  any
           charges  or  complaints  to  the  police  made  against  the
           Appellant in the past.  The  author  claims  however  to  be
           unsure which police station he should approach for  evidence
           to rebut the Field Liaison  Officer's  report,  despite  the
           repeated references therein to the Kotowali Police  Station.
           The author does not claim  to  have  approached  any  police
           station that could  be  described  as  the  Kotowali  Police
           Station. Nor does he  claim  to  have  taken  any  steps  to
           identify whether there was more than one police station that
           would fit that  description,  or,  to  list  them.  He  does
           however claim to have approached a different police station,
           which he does not identify, and he claims to have spoken  to
           a police officer,  who  he  does  not  name,  apparently  be
           telephone. There is  no  obvious  explanation  for  such  an
           approach, and the author does not in my judgement offer one.
       30. Not surprisingly given the circumstances  of  the  enquiries
           that he says he has made, the author is able to  state  that
           the unnamed individual with whom he has spoken has no record
           of any investigation by the Respondent on 25 August 2015. It
           is extremely difficult to  see  how  any  Tribunal  properly
           directing itself could place  any  significant  weight  upon
           this claim. Although the author offers the opinion  that  it
           is likely that  inaccurate  information  was  given  to  the
           Respondent no other basis is given for that opinion  in  the
           letter, save for the author's own unsupported  opinion  that
           the police  in  Bangladesh  are  content  to  provide  false
           information regarding political opponents. The  author  goes
           on to confirm that the cases filed against the Appellant are
           genuine and real, although no other basis for  that  opinion
           is provided.
       31. Having reviewed the Judge's findings  of  fact  set  out  in
           paragraphs 22-25, and 27-29 of the decision,  it  is  in  my
           judgement clear that they would all have been made,  whether
           or not the Judge had the  benefit  at  the  hearing  of  the
           letter of 20 September 2015 from Md Azim Uddin. They did not
           relate to,  and  they  were  entirely  independent  of,  the
           Appellant's claim that charges/complaints were made  against
           him to the police in Bangladesh  in  2001  and  2009.  These
           findings of fact related to;
                 a)  the  false  information  the  Appellant  had  given
                 immigration officers on 16 October 2014,
                 b) his failure to  intimate  any  claim  to  protection
                 prior to service of the bundle of documents on  4  June
                 2015,
                 c) his inconsistent oral evidence about his experiences
                 in Bangladesh,
                 d) the weight that could be attached to  his  claim  to
                 have been a member of a regional committee of  the  BNP
                 in the UK during 2011, and,
                 e) the weight that could be attached to his failure  to
                 claim protection until the date that he did.
           In my judgement the Judge would inevitably have reached  the
           same conclusion about the reliability of the Appellant as  a
           witness of fact, and his propensity to lie as  and  when  he
           perceived an advantage in doing so, whether or  not  he  had
           the benefit of the letter of 20 September 2015 from Md  Azim
           Uddin.
       32. The Judge's approach to the weight that could be attached to
           the documents produced by the Appellant as corroboration  of
           his account was entirely consistent with the guidance to  be
           found in Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] Imm AR 318. I accept as
           Ouseley J did in CJ (on the  application  of  R)  v  Cardiff
           County  Council  [2011]  EWHC  23,  the  importance  of  the
           approach referred to  therein.  Documentary  evidence  along
           with its provenance needs to be weighed by the  Tribunal  in
           the light of all  the  evidence  in  the  case.  Documentary
           evidence  does  not  carry  with   it   a   presumption   of
           authenticity, which specific  evidence  must  disprove,  and
           failing which its content must be  accepted.  Nor  does  the
           oral evidence from a witness called in support of an  appeal
           carry with it such a presumption. It is not  enough  for  an
           Appellant to argue that the Respondent  has  not  sought  to
           adduce specific evidence to  prove  that  a  document  is  a
           forgery, or that her evidence is untrue. What is required of
           the Tribunal is an appraisal of the weight that can be given
           to the different elements of the evidence  relied  upon,  in
           the light of its content, provenance, timing, the background
           evidence and in the light of all the other evidence  in  the
           case.
       33. That is also precisely the approach that the  Judge  adopted
           with a document that was said to  be  a  full  list  of  the
           members of the regional committee of the BNP for  Darlington
           and Teesside in 2011. He concluded, for the reasons that  he
           gave, and about which  no  criticism  is  raised,  that  the
           Appellant's name had been added to the end of this  document
           at some unknown date by an unknown person.
       34. It follows in  my  judgement  that  there  is  no  realistic
           prospect of the Tribunal  reaching  a  different  conclusion
           upon the weight that could be attached to the documents that
           were relied upon by the Appellant as  corroboration  of  his
           claim that complaints to the police were made against him in
           2001 and 2009 as a result of  his  political  activities  in
           Bangladesh. The Tribunal would be bound to place significant
           weight upon the  content  of  the  Field  Liaison  Officer's
           report of 25 August  2015,  and  would  be  bound  to  reach
           exactly  the  same   conclusions   about   the   Appellant's
           propensity to lie as and when it suited him to do so.


      Conclusion
       35. I am not satisfied that  the  Appellant  has  made  out  his
           complaint that the Judge failed to apply the  dominant  test
           of fairness when considering the renewed application for  an
           adjournment on 2 September 2015.
       36. Even if the Judge had erred by failing to do so, it is plain
           in my judgement,  that  such  an  error  was  not  material.
           Despite the time that has  now  elapsed  the  Appellant  has
           singularly failed to produce any  cogent  reliable  evidence
           that casts any significant doubt upon the  accuracy  of  the
           content of the Field Liaison Officer's report of  25  August
           2015. Nor  has  he  produced  any  evidence  that  could  be
           assessed as reliable, and as  casting  any  doubt  upon  the
           information that was given to the Field Liaison  Officer  on
           25 August 2015 by  the  police  officer  in  charge  of  the
           Kotowali Police Station.
       37. There is  therefore  no  error  of  law  that  requires  the
           decision to be set aside and remade.













   DECISION


      The decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
      18 September 2015 contains no error of  law  in  the  decision  to
      dismiss the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to  be
      set aside and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.





   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 23 June 2016




Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise the Appellant  is
      granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of these
      proceedings shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  them.  This
      direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
      Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  proceedings
      being brought for contempt of court.

   Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 23 June 2016
