
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05109/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Determination Promulgated       |
|On 29 October 2014              |On 21 November 2014             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                     ahmad walla bassel mohamad abuanzeh
                       (ANONYMITTY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Asanovic, Counsel for VC Legal UK
For the Respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Jordan  born  on  11  August  1981.   He
    appealed the respondent's decision of  19  January  2014  refusing  his
    application for a residence card for the UK  as  a  spouse  of  an  EEA
    national under Regulation 8(5) of the EEA Regulations 2006.  His appeal
    was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Khan  on  18  July  2014.
    The appeal was dismissed in a  determination  promulgated  on  30  July
    2014.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Shimmin on 18 August  2014.
    However, permission was granted by Judge of the Upper Tribunal Reeds on
    19 September 2014.  She found that it is arguable that  the  judge  may
    have  reached  his  findings  on  durability  of  the  relationship  by
    misunderstanding part of the evidence and by failing  to  consider  the
    evidence of Mr Halawa which was discounted on the  basis  of  what  was
    perceived to be  a  discrepancy  and  for  failing  to  consider  other
    evidence in the appellant's bundle.  The permission  states  that  when
    the judge found that the appellant's partner  was  not  exercising  her
    Treaty rights it is arguable that he did not consider all the  evidence
    provided, in particular the original documents as there  were  original
    documents apart from the evidence of national  insurance  contributions
    being paid.

 3. The Rule 24 response from the respondent states  that  the  judge  made
    various adverse findings relating to the lack  of  evidence  about  the
    durability of the appellant's relationship with his EEA spouse and that
    the grounds have no merit.  It states that the judge's  conclusion  was
    open to him based on the evidence, under the Rules and on  the  balance
    of probabilities.

The Hearing

 4. The appellant's representative submitted that the  judge's  conclusions
    are in paragraphs 30-37 of his determination.  The durable relationship
    question is dealt with at paragraphs 32 and 33.

 5. She submitted that the  judge  states  that  the  appellant's  and  his
    partner's evidence was vague and evasive but he has not  specified  why
    he found this.  He has set out their evidence at  paragraphs  19-28  of
    the determination.  He found inconsistencies relating  to  the  address
    25A Grand Parade and  whether  it  was  a  residential  or  a  business
    address. He found that  Mr Halawa's evidence about the appellant's  and
    his partner's relationship does not assist the  court  when  their  own
    evidence about their cohabitation is  inconsistent  and  contradictory.
    He found that the appellant and  his  partner  are  not  in  a  durable
    relationship.   Counsel  submitted  that  the  determination   contains
    general  assertions  and  the  issue  of  the  business  address.   She
    submitted that Mr Halawa's evidence was important and was not  properly
    considered.  This man used to share a house with the appellant and they
    both moved into 2 separate flats to live with their partners.

 6. Counsel referred me to the grounds of application  and  submitted  that
    the judge misunderstood the appellant's partner's  evidence  about  her
    business address.  The judge states that she contradicted herself as to
    whether she was living at 25A Grand Parade or  that  was  her  business
    address and because of this misunderstanding the judge found  that  the
    couple had not lived together from August/September 2012.   She  quoted
    the record of  proceedings  submitting  that  the  appellant's  partner
    appears to have said that 25A Grand Parade was her business address and
    she was living there.

 7. The appellant's partner  also  said  that  she  was  renting  rooms  at
    Charterhouse for her beauty therapy job and Counsel submitted that this
    was not a defect in her evidence, this was something that the judge had
    misunderstood.

 8. She submitted that  there  is  a  lot  of  evidence  showing  that  the
    appellant and his partner are planning  to  marry,  being  photographs,
    letters and other correspondence, all sent  to  the  couple's  address.
    She submitted that there are no joint  bills  and  there  is  no  joint
    tenancy agreement but there is a lot of other evidence which shows that
    they stay  together.   She  submitted  that  durability  has  not  been
    properly dealt with by the judge.

 9. With regard to the appellant's partner exercising her Treaty rights,  I
    was referred to paragraphs 34 and 35  of  the  determination.   Counsel
    submitted that the judge's objection was that there  were  no  original
    letters about the appellant's partner paying national insurance.  I was
    referred to the printouts  of  tax  return  forms  by  the  appellant's
    partner and Counsel submitted that it has been accepted  that  the  tax
    returns are genuine so the fact that there are no letters from national
    insurance does  not  matter  as  the  tax  returns  have  the  national
    insurance number on them.  Page 53  of  the  appellant's  first  bundle
    refers to an overpayment of tax and Counsel  submitted  that  the  fact
    that the appellant's partner is only earning a moderate  sum  from  her
    self employment does not mean that she is  not  exercising  her  Treaty
    rights.  Evidence was given of her business with  explanations  of  why
    her earnings were low.

10. Counsel submitted that the judge stated that only small sums were  paid
    in and out of the appellant's bank  account  and  that  this  does  not
    support her evidence of being self employed.   Counsel  submitted  that
    there are only small sums because of her very low income.  I was  asked
    to consider the bank statements and note that the  appellant's  partner
    uses PayPal and often gets paid in cash.

11. Counsel referred to the documents about the appellant's partner's  work
    in Hungary. These documents were not translated.   She  submitted  that
    the appellant's partner explained what these documents were  about  and
    this supports the other evidence of the EEA national's business.

12. Counsel submitted that  the  judge  has  made  a  fundamentally  flawed
    decision.  He has not assessed the evidence in the round and has  given
    no weight to documents which have not  been  disputed.   She  submitted
    that this appeal should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal.

13. I asked Counsel about the HMRC documents and  pointed  out  that  these
    consist of tax returns sent in to HMRC by the appellant  but  there  is
    nothing official from HMRC apart from reminder letters advising her  to
    complete a 2011 tax return and general letters about her application to
    set  up  her  business.   Counsel  referred  to  documents  which   the
    appellant's partner had sent to HMRC and asked me to note that  the  NI
    number on these documents is the same as the  NI  number  on  the  copy
    letters which were before the judge.  I pointed out that  the  copy  NI
    letters, as they were presented to me, have  post  office  receipts  on
    them which cover the address.  The HMRC  letters  and  NI  letters  are
    unsatisfactory as a means of assessing whether the appellant's  partner
    is exercising her Treaty rights.  It is clear that the judge found them
    to be unsatisfactory.  This is reflected in him giving little weight to
    the copy national insurance letters.

14. The Presenting Officer submitted that he is  relying  on  the  Rule  24
    response.  He submitted that the  judge  was  entitled  to  assess  the
    evidence before him and it is not an error  to  refer  to  evidence  as
    vague and evasive. He had the advantage of hearing the appellant's, his
    partner's and Mr Halawa's evidence in person and the judge has assessed
    the evidence and has explained his reasons for dismissing  the  appeal.
    With regard to the  supposed  misunderstanding  about  the  appellant's
    partner's  residential  address,  I   was   asked   to   consider   the
    determination at  paragraph  32.   It  is  clear  from  this  that  the
    appellant's partner said that at the date of the  application,  6  June
    2013, she was living at 25A  Grand  Parade  but  did  not  operate  her
    business from there.  She then contradicted herself  in  re-examination
    stating that she did not live there  but  kept  that  as  her  business
    address.  I  have  noted  the  grounds  of  application  in  which  the
    appellant's partner seems to have stated that 25A Grand  Parade  was  a
    business address and a residential address but based on her evidence in
    court the judge was right to find that the couple had not  been  living
    together from August/September 2012 as stated.  It  is  clear  why  the
    judge came to this conclusion.  I do not find that this was  the  judge
    misunderstanding the evidence.

15. The Presenting Officer submitted that with regard to the durability  of
    the relationship  the  judge  assessed  the  relationship  on  all  the
    evidence  that  was  before  him.   He  does  not  require   to   refer
    specifically to every part of  the  evidence,  all  he  has  to  do  is
    consider it all.

16. He submitted that the judge correctly found that there was  nothing  in
    joint names of the appellant and his partner, although he was told that
    the relationship had been going on for 2 years.  There  were  no  joint
    bills, no joint bank account and no joint tenancy agreement.

17. I directed him to the tenancy agreement.  This states that that address
    is only suitable for one person.  The evidence is that the  appellant's
    partner is staying with him there and  also  that  his  parents  stayed
    there when they visited him.   This  is  mentioned  by  the  judge  and
    clearly is a credibility issue.

18. The Presenting Officer submitted that relating to durability, based  on
    the evidence it was open to the judge to make the findings he did.

19. With regard to  the  appellant's  partner  not  exercising  her  Treaty
    rights, he submitted that the judge's refusal is based on the  lack  of
    necessary  documents.   There  are  no  original   national   insurance
    documents.  The appellant's partner must have these  if  she  is  in  a
    legitimate business.   On the copy documents the address is covered  by
    credit card receipts for payments supposedly made  by  the  appellant's
    partner.  There are no credit card statements.  Although there are  tax
    returns on file, these are not sufficient to show that the  appellant's
    partner is self employed or is exercising her Treaty rights.

20. He submitted that the appellant is a parasite on the EEA  sponsor.   He
    pointed out that  the  sponsor,  who  is  supposedly  running  her  own
    business in the United Kingdom, appears  not  to  have  applied  for  a
    residence card herself.  He submitted that the evidence  in  2011  from
    HMRC relates to a period before the appellant's relationship  with  his
    partner began.

21. The Presenting Officer asked me to find that there is no error  of  law
    in the judge's determination.  The judge reached his  decision  because
    of the lack of appropriate evidence.  He submitted that with regard  to
    Mr Halawa's evidence, as the judge found the appellant and his  partner
    not to be credible he found he could give little weight to Mr  Halawa's
    evidence.  The Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  it  is  a  logical
    progression that if an appellant is not credible, no witness  can  make
    his application right.

22. I was asked to uphold the judge's decision.

23. Counsel for the appellant referred me to the HMRC letter at page 77 and
    the  completed  tax  return  which  is  supported  by  the  appellant's
    partner's accountant's letter.  She submitted that the  judge  did  not
    query the tax documents, so on the face of it he accepted these and  if
    that is the case no original documents should be required.

24. I asked Counsel if what she is saying is that the judge  accepted  that
    the appellant was paying tax because he did not actually dispute it  in
    the determination.  She said that is correct,  the  judge  should  have
    questioned the HMRC documents  if  he  was  not  satisfied  with  them.
    Instead he made unspecified  allegations  and  made  no  comment  about
    whether he finds the appellant's partner has paid tax or is not telling
    the truth about this.  She submitted that as this is not  contested  it
    is not in dispute.  Counsel submitted that the appellant's partner does
    not require to submit another tax return until  January  2015  and  her
    last tax return is on file.

25. With regard to the bank  statement  Counsel  submitted  that  there  is
    sufficient evidence to show that the appellant's  partner  is  working.
    We have copies of her bookings and her correspondence with clients  but
    the judge has not given these weight.  I asked if  there  are  any  tax
    payments out of her bank account but  was  told  that  the  appellant's
    partner always paid by card.  She submitted that that is clear from the
    HMRC documents on file.  She submitted that  the  tax  authorities  now
    deal with their  customers  on  line  and  there  is  evidence  of  the
    appellant's partner instructing her accountant.  She pointed  out  that
    the letters to HMRC are all from the same address, apart from the first
    2011 tax return.  I was asked to consider the payment slips.

26. Counsel submitted that the Presenting Officer states that it  was  open
    to the judge to find as he  did  but  determinations  where  no  proper
    reasons are given have been severely criticised by the  higher  courts.
    She submitted that the judge  has  not  given  proper  reasons  in  his
    determination.  She submitted that the address 25A Grand Parade  is  on
    very  few  documents.   The  documents  with  this  address  are   from
    2011/2012.

27. With regard  to  Mr  Halawa's  evidence,  Counsel  submitted  that  his
    evidence must be assessed.   The  judge  was  wrong  to  say  that  his
    evidence does not assist just because  he found the appellant  and  his
    partner not credible.

28. The Presenting Officer submitted that if the refusal  letter  does  not
    challenge evidence, this  does  not  mean  that  it  is  accepted.   He
    submitted that the refusal letter makes it clear that the Secretary  of
    State does not accept that the appellant's partner  is  exercising  her
    Treaty rights and as the appellant is a  parasite  on  her,  his  claim
    cannot succeed.

29. Counsel submitted that if matters are not raised in  the  determination
    the judge must be seen as accepting these matters.  She submitted  that
    there is no requirement for the appellant's partner to have a residence
    card.

Determination

30. I am first  of  all  considering  the  durability  of  the  appellant's
    relationship with his partner.  At paragraph 32 the judge refers to the
    oral evidence from the appellant  and  his  partner.   He  finds  their
    evidence not to be credible.  The judge was face to face with  both  of
    these parties.  He found they were vague and evasive  throughout  their
    oral  testimony.   He  refers  to  inconsistencies  in  the   evidence,
    confusion about the addresses, in particular 25A Grand Parade and  when
    I consider this paragraph along with the record of  proceedings  all  I
    can say is that the appellant's partner's evidence was confusing.

31. The judge has noted that there is no joint tenancy agreement and  there
    are no joint bills.  He does not accept the explanations for this.   He
    has noted the tenancy agreement states  that  the  property  which  the
    appellant is living in is for one party only and yet he and his partner
    are both supposedly living there.  There is no consent to this from the
    landlord.  There are credibility issues because of  this,  particularly
    as when the appellant's parents visited him they  stayed  there  during
    the visit.

32. With regard to Mr Hawala's evidence, it is clear from the determination
    that the  judge  did  consider  his  evidence.   He  refers  to  it  at
    paragraphs 27 and 33.  He  finds  the  appellant's  and  his  partner's
    evidence to lack credibility as it is inconsistent.  Mr  Halawa,  is  a
    friend of the appellant so his  evidence  may  well  not  be  unbiased.
    There is no error in the judge  stating  that  his  evidence  does  not
    assist the court.

33. The judge has made his decision on the balance of  probabilities.   His
    reasons for finding there is no durable relationship are not  based  on
    one inconsistency.  They are mainly based on the lack  of  evidence  of
    them residing together.  This is dealt with at paragraph  16.   He  has
    noted that there is no permission letter  from  the  landlord  for  the
    appellant's partner to reside there.  He has  noted  that  the  tenancy
    ends in July 2013 and is now on a monthly basis.  The judge has clearly
    considered the photographs and he has noted that the  appellant  states
    that his parents stayed with him when they visited in  May  2013.   The
    judge has also referred in paragraph 21, to the fact that the appellant
    appears to know little about his partner's business or her income.   He
    has noted the appellant's partner's evidence  about  her  home  address
    and her business address at paragraph 23 and at paragraph 25  he  deals
    with her evidence about the address  at  25A  Grand  Parade  and  gives
    reasons for finding there is an inconsistency.

34. There is no error of law in the judge's determination relating  to  the
    durability of the relationship.  There is a lack of  evidence  and  the
    evidence on file has been found not to be satisfactory.

35. With regard to the appellant's partner exercising  Treaty  rights,  the
    judge found there was not  sufficient  evidence  about  this.   He  has
    considered all of the evidence before him.  It is clear to me that  the
    HMRC documents on file are not sufficient to show  that  Treaty  rights
    are being exercised by the appellant's partner.  There  is  a  national
    insurance number on each of the tax documents but these  are  documents
    the appellant prepared herself or her accountant prepared, based on the
    evidence she gave him.   At  paragraph  34  the  judge  refers  to  her
    providing a lot of documents but he states that these documents do  not
    show she has been engaged  in  any  economic  activity  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The  copy  documents  relating  to  national  insurance  have
    conveniently got photocopied receipts over her address. This must go to
    credibility.  She does not pay her tax through her bank  account.   The
    judge has carefully considered the bank statements and has  found  that
    these do not show her claimed earnings.  Based on the  evidence  before
    him the judge finds that the appellant's partner has not shown  on  the
    balance of probabilities that she is self employed as  claimed.   I  do
    not  accept  Counsel's  submissions  that  if  the   judge   does   not
    specifically refer to evidence which  was  before  him,  he  must  have
    accepted that evidence.  He does not have to mention all  the  evidence
    before him and at paragraph 30 he states that he has taken all  of  the
    evidence into consideration before  arriving  at  his  decision.   With
    regard to the appellant's work for ACA the judge  could  not  take  the
    evidence into account as it was in Hungarian with no translation.   The
    letter relating to this employment which he was able to consider has no
    details of salary or payment arrangements thereon.

36. The evidence before the judge was not sufficient to show that there  is
    a durable relationship or that the EEA national  is  exercising  Treaty
    rights.  The judge  was  correct  to  find  that  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 8 had not been satisfied  and  that  the  appellant  is  not
    entitled to a residence card.

37. I can give no weight to the submission that the appellant's partner has
    not applied for a residence card.


                                  DECISION

38. There is no material error of law in the judge's determination and  his
    determination, promulgated on 30 July 2014 must stand.



Signed        Date 21 November 2014

Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




