
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05239/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th March 2016                             |On 6th April 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                       Mrs Naomi Nativita Van Lancker
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Ikeh, Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant,  a  citizen  of  Belgium,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of  State  to  remove  her
    from the UK on the grounds that her removal is justified on the grounds
    of abuse of her EEA right to reside  in  the  UK  by  entering  into  a
    marriage of convenience under regulation 21B  (2)  of  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006  (the  EEA  Regulations).   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bradshaw dismissed the Appellant's appeal along with that of  her
    husband under the EEA Regulations and  on  human  rights  grounds.  The
    Appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant's husband's application  for  permission  to  appeal  was
    refused.  Permission to appeal was granted in relation to the Appellant
    only in relation to the Article 8 decision on  the  basis  that  it  is
    arguable that the judge erred in failing to give any  consideration  to
    the Appellant's child who was born and lives in the UK and  in  failing
    to consider the best interests of the child.

Error of Law

 3. Judge Ford, who granted permission to appeal, decided that the  grounds
    seeking to challenge the judge's decision under  EEA  Regulations  were
    not arguable. I agree that there is no merit in those  grounds  as  the
    judge gave full and  sustainable  reasons  for  his  finding  that  the
    Appellant's marriage was one of convenience.

 4. In relation to Article 8 Mr Kotas submitted that the judge did not make
    a material error.  He accepted that the judge was aware of the child as
    noted in paragraph 12 but submitted that no submissions had  been  made
    in relation to this issue and the judge could  not  be  criticised  for
    dealing with what really matters which was the EEA issue.  He submitted
    that  the  child  was  not  a  qualifying  child.   He  submitted  that
    credibility had to be considered.

 5. At paragraph 10 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge  reminded
    herself of the need to take into account, inter alia, Section 55 of the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 which relates to the best
    interests of the child.  At paragraph  12  the  judge  noted  that  the
    Appellant has a son who was born on 19th July 2012 and that the child's
    father pays child support and sees his son every week.

 6. However, at paragraph 25, in considering the  Appellant's  private  and
    family life, the judge states: "The Appellants cannot  succeed  in  any
    argument as to family life under Article  8."  The  judge  went  on  to
    consider the Appellant's husband's private life  but  gave  no  further
    consideration to the Appellant's family life with her son.   The  judge
    gave no consideration to the child's nationality  or  his  relationship
    with  his  father  nor  did  he  give  any  consideration  as  to   the
    consequences of the child's  removal.   In  these  circumstances  I  am
    satisfied that the judge made a material error of law.

 7. Due to the error in relation to Article 8 I set aside that part of  the
    decision only.

 8. I indicated to the parties that I would proceed to remake the Article 8
    decision.  I noted that the Appellant had  not  submitted  any  further
    evidence in accordance with the directions and the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   Mr  Ikeh  confirmed  that  no  further
    documentary evidence was to be filed.  Mr Ikeh made no application  for
    adjournment and indicated that he was content to proceed on  the  basis
    of the evidence before me.



Remaking

 9. The Appellant attended the hearing with a man said to be  her  husband.
    The Appellant is said to be pregnant  with  her  husband's  child.  The
    Appellant gave oral evidence and  Mr  Ikeh  relied  on  the  bundle  of
    documents submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

10. In her oral evidence the Appellant said that the father  of  her  child
    lives ten minutes from her house.  She said  that  the  child  and  his
    father have a very good relationship, they are very close,  the  father
    sees the child three or four times a week, he picks  him  up  from  the
    childminder and the child stays with his father from time to time.  She
    said that the father would not be happy if the child was removed.   She
    said that the child's father also has a stepdaughter who is part of his
    family and that she and the Appellant's  child  are  like  brother  and
    sister.  She said that the child attends a childminder from  Monday  to
    Thursday and that she has applied for him to attend  a  primary  school
    and will find out about that next week.   She  said  that  the  child's
    father does everything a normal father would do, for  example  he  buys
    the child clothes.

11. In cross-examination the Appellant said that the child's father is also
    Belgian and that he lives in the UK and has established  a  life  here.
    She accepted that her child also calls her husband 'daddy' and that  he
    therefore has two daddies.  She said the child is in good health and so
    is she.

12. In response to questions I  asked  her  the  Appellant  said  that  the
    child's father works as a security guard in Acton.  She said  that  she
    is a student nurse and that she currently works in Great Ormond  Street
    Hospital 36 to 40 hours a week as part of her course.   She  said  that
    the father of  the  child  pays  child  support.   She  said  that  the
    stepdaughter she referred to in the examination-in-chief is  the  child
    of the father of her child from a previous relationship.  He  does  not
    live with the mother of that child.

13. In response to further questions from Mr Ikeh the Appellant  said  that
    the father of her child came to the UK in  2005.   She  said  that  her
    course as a student nurse ends in June 2017.

14. In his submissions Mr Kotas said that the starting point  is  that  the
    child does not come within the Immigration Rules as he is not a British
    citizen.  He submitted that, despite two appeal hearings  and  the  way
    the case was put, the father of the child was not present and there  is
    nothing to say that separation would have a serious adverse  impact  on
    the child.  He submitted that the child has been put in  this  position
    by the Appellant entering into a sham marriage.  There is no reason why
    the father of the child cannot relocate  to  Belgium  or  maintain  the
    relationship from the UK.  He accepted that a  primary  factor  is  the
    best interests but submitted that that is not a paramount  factor.   It
    is a matter of choice of the parties so they can relocate to Belgium.

15. Mr Ikeh submitted that the oral evidence was sufficient to  demonstrate
    the relationship between the Appellant's son and  his  father  and  the
    bond between them and the relationship between  the  Appellant's  child
    and his stepsister.  He submitted that, as an EEA national  child,  the
    Appellant's son has  a  right  to  remain  in  the  UK  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.  He submitted  that  oral  evidence  that  the  father  is
    exercising treaty rights in the UK is  sufficient  in  the  absence  of
    documentary evidence.  He submitted that the child's father has been in
    the UK for over eleven years,  is  working  and  is  exercising  treaty
    rights in the UK, therefore his son has a right to reside in the UK.

16. Mr Ikeh referred to the case of  Abdul  (section  55  -  Article  24(3)
    Charter) [2016] UKUT 00106  (IAC).  He  submitted  that  there  was  no
    dispute that the Appellant is Belgian, no dispute in  relation  to  the
    birth of the child and that the child is a Belgian  citizen  also,  the
    same nationality as his mother and father.  He submitted that the  best
    interests of the child are to remain in the UK where he has family life
    with his father and stepsister and where he is going  to  be  going  to
    school.  The Appellant  is  a  student  nurse  who  will  complete  her
    programme of training in June 2017.

17. In considering Article 8 I firstly consider the Immigration Rules.   No
    case was made to me that the Appellant meets the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules in relation to family life or private life  developed
    in the UK and there is nothing before me to suggest that she  can  meet
    the provisions of the Rules.

18. I therefore go ahead to consider the appeal under Article  8.   I  note
    the guidance in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  and  I  follow
    the five stage approach set out therein.  The first  issue  is  whether
    the Appellant has established that she has a family life in the UK.  It
    was not challenged by the Respondent and I accept  that  the  Appellant
    has a family life in the UK with her son. I accept that her removal may
    interfere with that family life if her son remains in the UK.  However,
    there is no evidence that this would be the case.  Even if  there  were
    to be an interference with the Appellant's family life in the UK I note
    that such interference is in accordance with the  EEA  Regulations  and
    therefore in accordance with the law.

19. I must consider the best interests of the child. However I am  hampered
    by a lack of evidence. The only evidence before me as to the child  and
    his claimed relationship  with  his  father  is  the  Appellant's  oral
    evidence.  However  the  Appellant's  credibility   was   fundamentally
    undermined by the findings of the First-tier Tribunal. I  further  note
    that the Appellant's oral evidence contradicts her witness statement of
    23 July 2015 where she said that her ex was not there when  she  needed
    him most after her son was born  (paragraph  7)  and  that  her  spouse
    assumed the role of father to her  son  (paragraph  11).  There  is  no
    mention in her witness statement about the role of her child's  father.
    In these circumstances I cannot  rely  on  her  oral  evidence  without
    further supporting evidence.

20. The Appellant's claimed spouse has no basis of stay in the UK following
    the dismissal of his appeal. The Appellant did  not  say  in  her  oral
    evidence how the child's claimed relationship with her husband would be
    affected by his removal from the UK.

21. The Appellant's son is three years old. He is  said  to  be  a  Belgian
    national, but there is no evidence before me as to his nationality.

22. There is insufficient evidence before me to establish that the  child's
    father is in the UK or that the  child  has  a  relationship  with  his
    father. There is insufficient evidence as to the nature and  extent  of
    the claimed relationship between  the  child  and  his  father  or  his
    claimed step/half sister. There is no documentary evidence  as  to  the
    father's claimed employment. There is nothing from  the  father  as  to
    what would happen if his  son  relocates  to  Belgium  along  with  his
    mother. I cannot therefore be satisfied that the child has any  ongoing
    relationship with his father or that his father is in the UK.

23. In the absence of evidence to the contrary I assume that it is  in  the
    child's best interests to be with his mother.  In  these  circumstances
    the Appellant has not shown that there would be  an  interference  with
    her family life if she were to be  removed  to  Belgium.  She  has  not
    provided evidence as to the nature and extent of any  private  life  in
    the UK. There is nothing to support her oral evidence  that  she  is  a
    student nurse. However, I consider the proportionality of the  decision
    to remove on the basis that the Appellant has shown that there will  be
    an interference with her private and family life.

24. In considering proportionality I consider the Appellant's  decision  to
    breach the EEA Regulations by entering into a marriage of  convenience.
    I consider the fact that her claimed husband has no right to remain  in
    the UK. I consider the fact that  there  is  insufficient  evidence  to
    establish the Appellant's child's claimed relationship with his father.



25. I consider the factors set out in  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The Appellant gave evidence in English
    so I accept that she speaks English.  The  Appellant  claims  to  be  a
    student nurse but there is no  evidence  to  demonstrate  that  she  is
    financially independent. There  is  insufficient  evidence  as  to  her
    immigration status so I cannot be satisfied that the Appellant  has  at
    all times been in the UK lawfully or  that  her  status  has  not  been
    precarious. The Appellant's  child  is  not  a  'qualifying  child'  as
    defined in section 117D. There is insufficient evidence to show that it
    would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.

26. In these circumstances I am satisfied that the decision to  remove  the
    Appellant does not breach Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
    Rights.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  an  error  of  law  in
relation to Article 8 only. I set aside the decision in relation to  Article
8 and preserve the decision under the EEA Regulations.

I remake the decision in relation to Article 8 by  dismissing  it  on  human
rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date: 23rd March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date: 23rd March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

