
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05011/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                NOEL MAKINDE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy. Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Haywood (Counsel) instructed by Paragon Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane, promulgated  on  25  June  2015
which allowed the Appellant's appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 30  December  1989  and  is  a  national  of
Nigeria.

4.    On 21 January 2014 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for further leave to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Keane  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision on article 8 ECHR grounds only.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 22 September  2015  Judge  Andrew
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "2.    Although the judge recites at paragraph 6 of the  decision  that
    it was intrinsic to the respondent's decision that the appellant  could
    not meet the requirements of paragraph S-LTR of appendix FM he makes no
    findings in relation to this.

    3.     It is also an arguable error of  law  that  the  Judge  did  not
    consider the guidance in  Farquharson  (removal  -  proof  of  conduct)
    [2013] UKUT 00146 when coming to his conclusion as to the  respondent's
    evidence in relation to the appellant's past criminality

    4.     It is further an arguable  error  of  law  that  the  judge  has
    approached the assessment of article 8 incorrectly and with  particular
    reference to the applicability of sections 117B and C."

7     (a)   Mr Duffy, for the respondent, moved the grounds  of  appeal.  He
took me to the first ground of appeal and argued that the Judge had  made  a
material error of law because he failed to make findings in relation to  the
suitability & character provisions of appendix FM (section S-LTR).  He  told
me that the appellant's character & his history of criminality  are  central
to this case, yet the Judge has not considered  the  appellant's  appeal  in
terms of the immigration rules. He argued that even if it  is  conceded  the
appellant cannot fulfil the requirements of the immigration rules,  findings
in relation to section S-LTR, and a  specific  finding  that  the  appellant
cannot fulfil the requirements of that part of appendix  FM,  are  necessary
because that is one of the factors which should be taken into account  in  a
full balancing exercise when assessing proportionality.

  (b) Mr Duffy argued that the Judge had misdirected himself  in  law  when
assessing the evidence of DC Harvey. He relied on the  case  of  Farquharson
(removal - proof of conduct) [2013] UKUT 00146, and argued  that  the  Judge
had  not  follow  the  guidance  provided  in  that  case  and,  that   when
considering  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  previous  convictions  and
evidence from the crime  reporting  information  system  (CRIS),  the  Judge
placed too high a standard of proof on the  respondent.  Mr  Duffy  told  me
that the standard of proof is the balance  of  probabilities  and  that  the
Judge's rejection of the evidence  from  DC  Harvey  and  the  CRIS  reports
amounted to a material error of law.

  (c) Mr Duffy did not address me specifically  on  either  the  article  8
assessment or on the Judge's approach to section 117C  and  B  of  the  2002
Act, but adopted the grounds of appeal. He urged  me  to  set  the  decision
aside and to remit this case to the first-tier tribunal to determine of new

8     (a)   For the appellant,  Mr  Haywood  told  me  that  the  Judge  has
written a very detailed decision containing an accurate summary  of  all  of
the relevant evidence and submissions. He told me that the  Judge  has  made
findings in fact which are beyond  challenge  and  has  reached  sustainable
conclusions. He told me that the decision does not contain  errors  of  law,
whether material or otherwise. He argued that the grounds of  appeal  amount
to an expression of dissatisfaction with  a  decision  that  the  respondent
does not like. He drew my attention to the  grounds  of  appeal  and  argued
that the grounds of appeal fail to either challenge the Judge's findings  of
fact or identify an error of law or even a misdirection in law

  (b) Mr Haywood told me that, at first instance, it was common ground that
the immigration rules could not be met, and it is for that reason  that  the
decision is written in the way it is written. He addressed the  evidence  of
DC Harvey & the manner in which the Judge treated that evidence, and  argued
that even taking DC Harvey's evidence at its  highest  she  could  not  give
evidence of the appellant's history of  criminality  and  lifestyle  nor  of
prosecuted allegations made against  the  appellant.  Mr  Haywood  submitted
that DC Harvey could do little more than identify the CRIS reports &  police
records. He told me that the substantial amount of documentary evidence  was
made up of police intelligence reports which were not within  the  knowledge
of DC Harvey. He argued that the Judge had  followed  the  guidance  in  the
case of Farquharson, and that the Judge's  conclusion  that  the  respondent
had failed to discharge the burden of proof was a conclusion which was  well
within the range of reasonable conclusions open to the Judge.

  (c) Mr Haywood addressed the evidence presented in relation to the impact
removal would have on the appellant's British  citizen's  wife  and  British
citizen children, and told me that the Judge made  findings  in  fact  which
were reasonably open to him before reaching an unassailable  conclusion.  He
told me that the Judge's proportionality assessment was  flawless  and  took
full account of the provisions of section 117B and C of  the  2002  Act.  He
relied on the cases of Treebhawon & others  (section  117B(6))  [2015]  UKUT
00674 (IAC) & Clarke (S.117C- limited  to  deportation)  [2015]  UKUT  00628
(IAC). He urged me to dismiss the  appeal  and  to  allow  the  decision  to
stand.

Analysis

9.    The second ground of appeal is a challenge to the manner in which  the
Judge dealt with police evidence and evidence of  conduct  and  criminality.
In Farquharson (removal - proof of conduct) [2013] UKUT 00146  it  was  held
that

      (1)   Where  the  respondent  relies  on  allegations  of  conduct  in
      proceedings for removal, the same principles  apply  as  to  proof  of
      conduct and the assessment of risk to the public,  as  in  deportation
      cases: Bah [2012] UKUT 196 (IAC) etc applicable.

      (2)   A criminal charge that has not resulted in a conviction is not a
      criminal  record;  but  the  acts  that  led  to  the  charge  may  be
      established as conduct.

      (3)   If the respondent seeks to establish the conduct by reference to
      the contents of police CRIS reports, the relevant documents should  be
      produced, rather than a bare witness statement referring to them.

      (4)   The material relied on must be supplied to the appellant in good
      time to prepare for the appeal.

      (5)   The judge has a duty to ensure a fair  hearing  is  obtained  by
      affording the appellant sufficient time to  study  the  documents  and
      respond.

      (6)   Where  the  appellant  is  in  detention  and  faces  a  serious
      allegation of conduct, it is in the interests of  justice  that  legal
      aid is made available.

10.   The respondent argues that the Judge did not follow  the  guidance  in
Farquharson, and that the judge applied the wrong  standard  of  proof  when
addressing criminality or conduct.

11.   The Judge starts his findings of fact at [42] after carefully  setting
out the background to the case and the  submissions  of  the  appellant  and
respondent. At [7] the Judge correctly directs  himself  and  sets  out  the
standard of  proof.  At  [43]  the  Judge  clearly  identifies  the  correct
standard of proof when  considering  the  evidence  of  DC  Harvey  and  the
supporting CRIS reports. The Judge then goes on  to  discuss  that  evidence
and explain why he rejects that  evidence.  At  [49]  the  Judge  repeatedly
gives a correct self-direction, reminding himself each time he  considers  a
specific  offence  that  the  standard  of   proof   is   the   balance   of
probabilities.

12.   The respondent does not like the conclusion that  the  Judge  reaches,
but the Judge clearly analyses the evidence, reminding himself correctly  of
the standard of proof, before making findings in fact which draw him to  the
conclusion that the respondent fails to discharge the  burden  of  proof.  A
fair reading of the determination clearly indicates that the Judge  followed
the  guidance  given  in  Farquharson.  There  is  force  in  Mr   Haywood's
submission that the grounds of appeal do not identify an error in the  fact-
finding exercise, nor do they properly identify a material error of law.

13.   Although there are three other grounds of  appeal,  in  reality  those
three remaining grounds of appeal all amount to an  attack  on  the  Judge's
article 8 assessment.  The first ground of appeal argues  that  because  the
Judge did not carry out an assessment of paragraph S-LTR of appendix FM  his
overall proportionality assessment in terms of article 8 ECHR is  undermined
to the extent that a material error of law is created.

14.   It has always been common ground in this  appeal  that  the  appellant
cannot fulfil the requirements of S- LTR, but  the  Judge  has  not  ignored
that provision  of  the  immigration  rules.  He  records  at  [6]  that  is
"...intrinsic to the  respondent's  decision  that  the  appellant  did  not
satisfy those requirements of the immigration  rules  which  were  concerned
with the establishment  of  suitability  and  good  character  contained  in
section S LTR of appendix FM...". It is true that the Judge  does  not  then
revisit section S-LTR, but in a lengthy and detailed decision  it  is  clear
that  the  Judge  focuses  on  the  appellant's  lifestyle  and  history  of
offending.

15.   At [53] it is clear that the Judge took  account  of  the  appellant's
suitability and character even though  he  did  not  refer  specifically  to
section S-LTR in carrying out  his  proportionality  assessment.  The  Judge
records there that "the appellant had received a  total  of  11  convictions
for 20 offences. His is a lamentable criminal history". Those are  the  very
factors which prevent the appellant  from  satisfying  the  requirements  of
section S-LTR. They are clearly the factors which were at the  forefront  of
the Judge's mind in his proportionality assessment.

16.   Mr Duffy did not move the third grounds of appeal. The  third  grounds
of appeal amounts to an argument that the Judge should not  have  considered
article 8 out with the rules.  I  find  that  there  is  no  merit  in  that
argument.

17.   In R (on the application of Esther Ebun Oludoyi & Ors) v Secretary  of
State for the Home Department (Article 8  -  MM  (Lebanon)  and  Nagre)  IJR
[2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC) it was held that there is nothing  in  R  (Nagre)  v
SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), Gulshan (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) or Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate  aim)
[2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) that  suggests  that  a  threshold  test  was  being
suggested as opposed to making it clear that there was a  need  to  look  at
the evidence to see if  there  was  anything  which  has  not  already  been
adequately considered in the context of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  which
could lead to a successful Article 8 claim. These authorities  must  not  be
read as seeking to qualify or fetter the assessment of Article  8.  This  is
consistent with para 128 of R (MM & Others) v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985,
that there is no utility in  imposing  a  further  intermediate  test  as  a
preliminary to a consideration of an Article 8  claim  beyond  the  relevant
criterion-based Rule. As is held in R (Ganesabalan) v SSHD [2014] EWHC  2712
(Admin), there is no prior threshold which dictates whether the exercise  of
discretion should be considered; rather the nature  of  the  assessment  and
the  reasoning  which   are   called   for   are   informed   by   threshold
considerations.

18.   In SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ  387  Lord  Justice  Richards
said at paragraph 33 "In our judgment, even though a test of  exceptionality
does not apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of  special
contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances  would  need  to
be identified to support a claim for grant of LTR outside the new  Rules  in
Appendix FM. In our view, that is a formulation which is not as strict as  a
test of exceptionality or a requirement of  "very  compelling  reasons"  (as
referred to in MF (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to
foreign criminals), but  which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
consideration  of  public  interest  factors  as  finds  expression  in  the
Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  It  also
reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which has been  tested  and
has survived scrutiny in this court: see, e.g.,  Haleemudeen  at  [44],  per
Beatson LJ".

19.   In Khan (2015) CSIH 29 the Inner  House  (of  the  Court  of  Session)
found in favour of immigrant spouses who challenged refusals to grant  leave
to remain. The Court ruled that there was  no  human  rights  rule  that  an
immigrant, who married a UK  national  at  a  time  when  their  immigration
status was uncertain,  must  establish  "exceptional  circumstances"  before
removal could amount to a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

20.   In any event a fair reading of the decision  indicates  that  at  [57]
the Judge found that the interests of the appellant's wife and two  children
create the compelling circumstances referred to in SS Congo.

21.   The final ground of appeal argues that the  Judge  took  an  incorrect
approach to sections 117B and C of the 2002 Act. At [51] the  Judge  embarks
on an article 8 assessment reminding himself of the five stage test set  out
in Razgar.  At [53] to [55] and at [59] the  Judge  reminds  himself  to  be
mindful of the provisions of  section  117B  and  D  of  the  2002  Act.  An
holistic reading of [51] to [60] makes it manifestly clear  that  the  Judge
is mindful of Section 117 of the 2002 Act as  a  factor  to  be  taken  into
account in  determining  proportionality.  It  is  clear  that  the  Judge's
approach acknowledges that Section 117A(2) obliged him  to  have  regard  to
the considerations listed in Sections 117B and 117C.    He  demonstrates  an
awareness that Section 117A(3) imposes a duty of carrying  out  a  balancing
exercise.

22.   In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the  Tribunal  held  that
the statutory duty to consider the matters set out in s 117B  of  the  2002
Act is satisfied if the Tribunal's decision shows that it has had regard to
such parts of it as are relevant.

23.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (inter alia) the Upper Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

24.   In this case the Judge has reached a  decision  which  the  respondent
does not like. The Judge's decision might even have come as  a  surprise  to
the respondent, but the decision does not contain a material error  of  law.
The respondent's criticisms of the fact-finding process are  not  made  out.
Careful analysis of the police evidence is contained  within  the  decision,
the correct burden and standard of proof have  been  applied  and  that  the
Judge directed himself correctly in law. The  Judge  quite  clearly  weighed
all  factors  in  carrying  out  a  full  and   careful   article   8   ECHR
proportionality assessment. Overall  the  fact-finding  exercise  cannot  be
criticised, the decision does not contain a misdirection in law.

25.   I find that the Judge's decision, when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning.

CONCLUSION

26.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

27.   The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 23 December 2015
