
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05767/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 December 2015                  | On 7 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Respondent:    Mr Solomon, Counsel
For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Gambia. She applied in July  2014  for  a
    residence card as confirmation of a right to reside in the UK under the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the Regulations"). The application
    was refused on 26 January 2015.  The appellant appealed to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and her appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge M
    Symes ("the FTTJ") in a decision promulgated on 14 July 2015.

 2. Notwithstanding it is the Secretary of State who pursues this appeal  I
    refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Given my references to the appellant's child, an anonymity direction is
    appropriate.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal.  This was granted by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Foudy on 12 October 2015 in the following terms:

         "2.  The grounds argue that the Judge  erred  in  his  approach  to
         Article 8 and his assessment of whether  it  was  unduly  harsh  to
         expect the Appellant's Dutch child to live in the Netherlands.  The
         grounds also argue that the Judge misapplied the law concerning EEA
         children.

         3.   The Judge allowed the appeal on "ZAMBRANO principles".  It  is
         not clear what factors weighed in the Judge's mind when he  decided
         that that case applied to the Dutch child in this appeal such as to
         justify allowing the appeal. This lack of reasoning is an  arguable
         error of law.

         4.   It is arguable that the Judge misdirected himself  as  to  the
         law."

 5. Thus the appeal came before me.

Submissions

 6. Mr Duffy, for the respondent, submitted that there was a clear error of
    law. He relied on the grounds of appeal to the effect  that  Regulation
    15, noted at paragraph 14 of the decision, incorporated the  principles
    in Zambrano and  specifically  dealt  with  British  children  and  the
    retained rights of their primary carers.  The FTTJ had  overlooked  the
    fact the child was a Dutch citizen.  There  had  been  no  evidence  to
    indicate the child would not be entitled to reside in Holland with  his
    mother and there was therefore no compulsion, per regulation 15A(4A)(c)
    that the child leave the EU.  It was submitted that the child  and  her
    mother, the appellant, could reside in Holland within the principles in
    regulation 15, as derived from Zambrano.  Mr Duffy submitted  that  the
    only issue at large before the FTTJ was whether the appellant fulfilled
    the criteria in the Regulations; Article 8 was  not  at  issue  because
    there had been no removal decision. The FTTJ,  he  submitted,  had  not
    engaged with Article 8; he had tried to give direct effect to  Zambrano
    through the TFEU. He was wrong to do so because be had  not  considered
    the possibility of  the  child  relocating  within  the  EU.   It  also
    followed that, because there was no removal decision, the TFEU was  not
    engaged. There was no mechanism to bring it in: in this case  the  only
    decision was the refusal  of  a  residence  card,  i.e.  a  refusal  to
    recognise an asserted right.  Mr  Duffy  submitted  that  the  decision
    should be set aside.

 7. Mr Solomon, for the appellant, accepted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    that, at the date of hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, the  appellant
    did not qualify under the regulations. He submitted that the sole issue
    before the FTTJ was the direct  application  of  Article  20  TFEU  and
    Article 8. He submitted that the FTTJ  had  correctly  cited  the  law,
    namely Zambrano, regulation 15A, Sanneh v SSWP &  Or  [2013]  EWHC  793
    (Admin), and Ahmed (Amos; Zambrano; reg 15A(3)(c) 2006 EEA Regs) [2013]
    UKUT 00089 (IAC). He submitted that, although it was not explicit,  the
    FTTJ had not allowed the appeal under the Regulations because the child
    was not British.  He suggested that the FTTJ's  mistaken  reference  in
    paragraph 18 to the appellant being the  primary  carer  of  a  British
    citizen was not determinative; the FTTJ had correctly referred, in  the
    previous paragraph, to the child being Dutch.  He submitted that, given
    the guidance in Ahmed, a case with similar facts,  a  removal  decision
    was not necessary for a successful appeal applying Article 20 directly.
    The issue was whether the child would  be  required  to  leave  if  the
    mother has to do so.   He  submitted  that  the  FTTJ's  reasoning  was
    adequate.

Discussion

 8. I start with the decision of the  respondent.  This  was  to  refuse  a
    residence card to the appellant. Thus the respondent did not  recognise
    the claimed right of the appellant  to  reside  in  the  UK  under  the
    Regulations.  No removal decision was made and  it  was  noted  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter that if the appellant wished the  respondent
    to consider a claim on the basis of her family and private life in  the
    UK, she was invited to make an application, on  the  appropriate  form,
    under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the immigration Rules.

 9. The appellant pursued her appeal on the ground that the decision was in
    breach of the Regulations (a ground which is now conceded as unfounded)
    and on Article 8 grounds. The statement of additional grounds refers to
    the appellant's purported removal yet  no  removal  decision  had  been
    taken.

10. Whilst the FTTJ allowed the appeal  "against  refusal  of  a  residence
    card", it is not clear on what basis he did so. He has correctly  cited
    the provisions of Regulation 15A which  incorporates  the  guidance  in
    Zambrano and which refers to the requirement that the applicant must be
    the primary carer of a British citizen.  The appellant's child is Dutch
    and the appellant could not  therefore  fulfil  the  criteria  in  that
    Regulation (as has been conceded by Mr Solomon). It  is  implicit  from
    the FTTJ's decision that the FTTJ found  that  the  appellant  did  not
    fulfil the criteria in the EEA Regulations because he then went  on  to
    consider whether Articles 20 and 21 of the TFEU were engaged.  In  this
    respect he noted the guidance in Sanneh to  the  effect  that  "nothing
    less than ... compulsion will engage articles 20 and 21 of the TFEU. In
    particular, EU law will not be engaged where  the  EU  citizen  is  not
    compelled to leave the EU, even if the quality or standard of  life  of
    the EU citizen is diminished as a result of the  non-EU  national  upon
    whom he is dependent is (for example) removed or prevented from working
    ...".

11. In the present case the respondent has made no  removal  decision;  she
    has not served a s120 notice and she has invited the appellant to  make
    a human rights  claim  based  on  her  family  and  private  life  (and
    implicitly that of her child also).  The FTTJ  makes  no  reference  to
    this and I find therefore that he  did  not  take  this  into  account,
    despite their relevance to the issues before him.

12. At paragraph 15 the FTTJ notes that the child "has been  cared  for  by
    his mother [the  appellant]  and  has  had  minimal  contact  with  his
    father." However, at paragraph 8 he states that "since  they  separated
    they no longer had contact in order to ensure her son's  safety".  Thus
    the nature and degree of contact (if any) between father and son is not
    clear from the decision.  I do  not  consider  this  is  necessarily  a
    material error, without more, but, taken  with  the  reference  to  the
    child being British (paragraph 18)  it  does  call  into  question  the
    reliability of the findings.

13. More critically, it is wholly unclear on what basis the FTTJ found  the
    appellant's child would be forced to leave the EU as a  result  of  the
    refusal of a residence card to his mother.  As the  respondent  rightly
    says, the FTTJ has not addressed this issue at all.  Nor was there  any
    evidence on this before the FTTJ: the appellant makes no  reference  to
    it in her appeal statement and there is no suggestion in  the  decision
    of the FTTJ that it was raised in oral evidence.   Notwithstanding  the
    lack of evidence, the FTTJ  concludes  that,  if  the  appellant  "went
    abroad, [the child] would surely be forced to  depart  with  her  given
    that he is under five years of age.  There is no source of  alternative
    care suggested in the papers. There is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that
    there are other relatives who might be available. It is not  likely  on
    balance of probabilities that his father, who is described  by  damning
    reports from social services as an unsuitable parent, would be  willing
    to take up the care of a child that he has long effectively abandoned".
     These findings are focussed entirely and wrongly  on  the  appellant's
    purported departure from the UK, rather than the issue of  whether  her
    child  would  be  compelled  to  leave  the  UK  as  a  result  of  the
    respondent's decision to refuse his mother a residence card. It is also
    relevant, in this respect that the respondent had invited the appellant
    to make a human rights claim on the basis of  her  family  and  private
    life, a matter which the FTTJ has  ignored.   Thus  the  FTTJ  has  not
    considered at all the principal issue of whether the appellant and  her
    son could relocate to the Netherlands, where the child has the right of
    residence, being a citizen of  that  country.   Nor  did  he  have  any
    evidence on the issue.  It is a material error of law for the  FTTJ  to
    have made a finding which is not  sustainable  on  the  evidence.   The
    error is further compounded by the concerns  I  have  identified  above
    with regard to the child's  circumstances  and  nationality  (paragraph
    18).

14. Given that this error is a fundamental flaw  in  the  decision  of  the
    FTTJ, and given also my concerns about the apparent inconsistencies  in
    the fact finding,  the  FTTJ's  decision  must  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety.

15. There is insufficient evidence before me on the issue of whether or not
    the child would be compelled to leave the EU as a result of the refusal
    of a residence card, no further evidence having been  adduced  on  that
    issue.  I was also told by Mr Solomon that, since  the  decision  under
    appeal was made and since the appeal in the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    child's circumstances have changed. Mr Duffy indicated in response that
    the appropriate course was for the appellant, through  her  solicitors,
    to update the  respondent  as  to  her  own  and  her  child's  current
    circumstances: the respondent would then review the matter.

16. Given that situation, I consider that the matter should be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to  be  made.   This  will
    enable the First-tier Tribunal to take into account the child's current
    circumstances and the anticipated guidance of the Court  of  Appeal  on
    the application of Article 8 in EEA appeals where  no  s120  notice  or
    removal decision has been taken (Amirteymour and Others  (EEA  Appeals:
    Human Rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC)).

Decision

17. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of a material error on a point of  law.   The  decision  is  set
    aside.

18. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with
    afresh, pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunal  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v),  before  any  judge
    aside from FTTJ M Symes.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge     Dated:



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (UT)
Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge     Dated:



                                 DIRECTIONS

 1. Any further documentary evidence relied upon by either party is  to  be
    filed with the Tribunal and served upon the other  party  by  no  later
    than 14 days before the date of the hearing in the First Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appeal is listed at Taylor House with  a  time  estimate  of  three
    hours to be heard at 10.00 am on ............................

 3. An interpreter is not required.

 4. Time estimate 2 hours.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge     Dated:
