
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/05549/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th June 2013                               |On 4th July 2013           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                          musammat noyan tara begum
                        (NO ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Bangladesh born on 4th March 1974.
     On 31st October 2012 she applied for a residence card as  confirmation
    of her right to reside in the UK.  She applied on the  basis  that  she
    was the spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in  the  UK.
    That application was refused for the reasons given in a Refusal  Letter
    dated 12th February 2013.  The Appellant appealed, and her  appeal  was
    decided without a hearing by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M  Davies
    (the Judge) on 15th April 2013.  He decided to allow the appeal for the
    reasons  given  in  his  Determination  dated  23rd  April  2013.   The
    Respondent applied for leave to appeal that decision, and on  10th  May
    2013 such permission was granted.

 2. At the hearing before me there was no appearance by or on behalf of the
    Appellant.  I decided to hear the appeal in her absence  in  accordance
    with the provisions  of  Rule  38  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.  It was apparent from the Appellant's  letter  to
    the Tribunal dated 28th May 2013 that she had received  the  notice  of
    hearing and was happy for the appeal to be determined in her absence.

Error of Law

 3. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 4. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application for a residence card
    under the provisions of  Regulation  6  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  This was because the  Respondent  was
    not satisfied that the Appellant's spouse  at  the  relevant  time  was
    exercising treaty rights in  the  UK  by  being  in  employment.   This
    decision was made on the basis that when a telephone call was  made  to
    the Bombay Balti House an employee stated that there  was  no  employee
    there of the name of Faruque Ahmed, the name of the Appellant's spouse.

 5. The Judge  allowed  the  appeal  because  he  was  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant's spouse was employed at the Bombay Balti House  as  claimed.
    The Judge decided to attach more weight to the documentary evidence  of
    Faruque  Ahmed's  employment  than  the   contents   of   a   telephone
    conversation.

 6. At the hearing, Ms Everett was content to rely upon the grounds seeking
    leave which she considered did not need amplification.   Those  grounds
    are that in paragraph 10 of the Determination the Judge made  an  error
    when referring to the Appellant's employment instead of the  employment
    of the Appellant's  husband.   Further,  the  Judge  gave  insufficient
    reasons for his finding that  at  the  relevant  time  the  Appellant's
    husband was in employment, referring to additional evidence  which  was
    not specified.

 7. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge.  His reference  to
    the Appellant's employment and not the employment  of  her  husband  is
    immaterial as it is clear from the  Determination,  and  as  the  Judge
    later stated, that it was the employment  of  the  Appellant's  husband
    upon which he made a finding.

 8. It may be the case that the  Judge  has  not  explained  in  sufficient
    detail upon what evidence he came  to  his  conclusion  concerning  the
    employment of the Appellant's husband.  However, again this  is  not  a
    material error of law  because  it  is  evident  from  the  documentary
    evidence submitted by the Appellant prior to  the  hearing  before  the
    Judge that her husband was in employment at  the  relevant  time.   For
    example, there is a P60 form, a wage slip, and  a  confirmatory  letter
    from the Bombay Balti House dated 29th October 2012.  This evidence  is
    preferable to that contained in a telephone conversation with a  person
    who had no responsibility for the workings of the Bombay Balti House.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The first-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005  and  I  see  no
reason to make one now.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

