
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/05307/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                   |
|On 17 August 2015                             | On 6 October 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Mr M H N
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Unrepresented

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the respondent but
     nonetheless for the purposes of this decision I  shall  refer  to  the
    parties as they were described before the First-tier Tribunal, that  is
    Mr MHN as the appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Tunisia born on 4 November  1974  and  he
    appealed against the respondent's decision of 12 January 2014 to refuse
    to issue him with a derivative residence card under Regulation  15A  of
    the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  EEA
    Regulations) (as amended) and following the  case  of  Zambrano  [2011]
    EUECJ C-34/090.

 3. The Secretary of State's decision refused the appellant's appeal  under
    Regulation 15A and 18A of the EEA  Regulations.   In  her  reasons  for
    refusal letter, The Secretary of State set out that the  appellant  was
    not considered to be a family member and there ruling in  Zambrano  did
    not state that a third country national would have a right to reside as
    such.

 4. He was applying on the basis that he was the primary carer of ANHN, AHN
    and MHN who are British citizen children. The appellant submitted a  UK
    marriage certificate and he stated  that  he  was  in  fact  the  joint
    primary carer of the children with LNC, a British citizen, who  resided
    in the family home with him.  It was noted he had provided no  official
    documentation to support the claim that the children lived with him.

 5. As LNC, his partner was a British citizen the appellant did  not  share
    equally in the responsibility for the children with  one  other  person
    who was not an exempt person.

 6. Under Regulation 15A(4A)(c) he needed to demonstrate that the  relevant
    British citizen, in this case the children, would be unable  to  reside
    in the United Kingdom or  in another EEA state if he  was  required  to
    leave.

 7. There was no reason why the children could not continue  to  live  with
    the mother if he were  required  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    unwillingness to assume the care and responsibility was not  in  itself
    sufficient for the claimed primary carer to assert that he was such and
    that the British citizen was unable  to  care  for  the  children.  The
    refusal stated "It was your wife's choice to undertake any  commitments
    as regards his employment."  The burden  of  proof  remained  with  the
    appellant and  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not  consider  that  the
    requirements of the derivative right of residence had been  fulfilled.

 8. Consideration was given to his application with regard to  Appendix  FM
    and paragraph 276ADE but it was the Secretary of State's position  that
    the appellant needed to make a separate charged application  using  the
    appropriate specified application form.

 9. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal C M Philips allowed the appeal on  the
    basis as this the decision was not in  accordance  with  the  law.   He
    stated at paragraph 19  that  the  application  took  over  a  year  to
    consider but the respondent did not seek further information about  the
    appellant's children or consider Article 8,  and  whilst  referring  to
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009,  no
    evidence was taken from the appellant or his wife at the appeal of  the
    appellant's circumstances and no challenge  was  made  to  any  of  the
    evidence presented by the  appellant.   The  judge  recorded  that  the
    appellant had three children which were affected by  the  decision  and
    his interests therefore in terms of the Section 55 must  be  paramount.
    The judge recorded  at  paragraph  21  that  it  was  the  respondent's
    established position that in order to consider Section 55 of  the  2009
    Borders Act the route was under the Immigration Rules Appendix FM.

10. The judge at paragraph 23 noted Dereci & Others [2011]  EUECJ  C-256/11
    which stated at 72:

         "If  the  referring  court  considers,  in   the   light   of   the
         circumstances of the disputes in the  main  proceedings,  that  the
         situation of the applicants in the main proceedings is  covered  by
         European Union law, it must examine whether  the refusal  of  their
         right of residence undermines the right to respect for private  and
         family life provided for in Article 7 of the Charter.  On the other
         hand, if it takes the view that that situation is  not  covered  by
         European Union law, it must undertake that examination in the light
         of Article 8(1) of the ECHR."

11. In essence the judge found that inline with JO and Others  (section  55
    duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517, there was an error of law in that  the
    respondent failed to duly perform the duties under Section 55.

12. There was an application for permission to appeal by the  Secretary  of
    State who contended that the appellant did not dispute  that  he  could
    not succeed under Zambrano grounds but argued on the basis of Article 8
    of the ECHR.  The judge indicated the application to remain before  the
    Secretary of State awaiting a lawful decision.

13. It was contended that the judge had misdirected  himself in law because
    there was no removal decision before him and hence no proposal that the
    appellant be separated from his children.  The only decision  taken  by
    the Secretary of State and therefore the only issue for  the  judge  to
    resolve was whether or not the children would be required to leave  the
    UK if the appellant were required to leave.  It seems to be  undisputed
    that they would not be so the judge can only have dismissed the  appeal
    that was before him.

14. It was contended that when the decision was taken it did not alter  the
    situation of the children in  any  way  and  there  was  no  reason  to
    consider that the children were at risk of harm.  The  decision  letter
    stated very clearly that the decision to refuse to grant residence card
    did not require the appellant to leave the UK and that if he wished  to
    have his claimed right to reside on the basis of his family and private
    life considered then he should make the appropriate  application  under
    the Immigration Rules.  It also explained that if he  did  not  make  a
    further application or voluntarily depart then enforced  removal  would
    be considered, at which point he would be entitled to raise  Article  8
    arguments.

15. The judge was wrong in law to find that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    bound to consider the consequences of removal of  the  welfare  of  the
    children when no such removal was yet envisaged.  To  the  extent  that
    the judge took support for his approach from  the  recent  Presidential
    decision  in  JO  it  was  contended  that  the  decision  was  readily
    distinguishable as in JO a removal decision had already been made.

16. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin  who
    stated that it was arguable as asserted in the grounds that  the  judge
    erred in going beyond the issues under appeal which were simply whether
    the appellant was entitled to a derivative right of residence.

17. At the hearing before me the appellant attended and stated that he  had
    three children, the eldest of whom  was born on 16 May 2009 and that he
    looked after those children all he time.

Conclusions

18. The Immigration history of the appellant is that  he  sought  leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules in 2002  having  claimed  to  have
    entered in 2001 and then again in 2002.  On 10th June  2003  he  sought
    leave to remain as the spouse of  a  settled  person  and  was  granted
    discretionary leave until 13 July 2008.  He sought leave to  remain  on
    5th July 2008 which was rejected, and on 24th July 2008 he sought leave
    again, this time outside the rules.  His appeals on this  were  finally
    rejected on 12th December 2008 when he was refused a High Court Review.
    The appellant married his current wife, who is a  British  citizen,  on
    6th June 2011 and they have three children (all British citizens)  born
    on 16th May 2009 and 20th November 2011 (twins).

19. An application was made under the EEA Regulations on 13th December 2012
    but refused on 12th  January  2014.  The  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    rejected his application for a derivative  right  of  residence  as  he
    lived with his British citizen wife and  stated  inter  alia  that  the
    appellant  should  make  a  separate  charged  application  under   the
    Immigration  Rules   which  now  included   separate   provisions   for
    applicants wishing to remain in the United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of
    private or family life.  The appellant had made no  formal  application
    and merely set out his family/human rights application by  letter  12th
    January 2014. It was pointed out in the Secretary  of  State's  refusal
    that as the appellant had not made a valid application his human rights
    and his family life application was not considered under Article 8.

20. The appellant did not dispute that he was not the primary carer of  the
    children. He shared equally the responsibility for his children's  care
    with one other person who is wife and a British citizen (and  therefore
    not an exempt person under the  Regulations).   He  cannot  fulfil  the
    requirements under Regulation 15A.  The judge did not  appear  to  make
    findings in relation to the EEA decision and this is an error.

21. In his application of Section 55  and  remittal  to  the  Secretary  of
    State, the judge enlisted the decisions of JO and Dereci. JO refers  to
    a removal decision and is discursive on the interaction between section
    55 and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  Dereci is
    also proposition for the application of Article 8  where  European  Law
    does not apply. Those are not the circumstances in this case.

22. ZH(Tanzania) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 207  established that consideration
    of the best interests of the child is an integral part of the Article 8
    balancing exercise (and not something apart  from  it),  but  it  is  a
    matter which has to be addressed first and as a distinct stage  of  the
    inquiry.  The decision maker has first to make a decision to what is in
    the overall best interests of the child and only then to assess whether
    those interests are outweighed by countervailing factors such as  those
    concerned with the rights and freedoms of others.  The  best  interests
    are not the paramount consideration.

23. Section 55 states as follows



    Duty regarding the welfare of children
    (1)
    The Secretary of State must make arrangements for ensuring that-
    (a) the functions mentioned in subsection (2) are discharged having
    regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children who
    are in the United Kingdom, and
    (b) any services provided by another person pursuant to arrangements
    which are made by the Secretary of State and relate to the discharge of
    a function mentioned in subsection (2) are provided having regard to
    that need.
    (2)
    The functions referred to in subsection (1) are-
    (a)any function of the Secretary of State in relation to immigration,
    asylum or nationality;
    (b)any function conferred by or by virtue of the Immigration Acts on an
    immigration officer;
    (c)any general customs function of the Secretary of State;
    (d)any customs function conferred on a designated customs official.
    (3)A person exercising any of those functions must, in exercising the
    function, have regard to any guidance given to the person by the
    Secretary of State for the purpose of subsection (1).

24. I have noted Granovski [2015] EWHC 1478 (Admin), which confirms that

    'there  is  no  category  of  immigration  decision-making   to   which
    consideration of section 55 or the duty under section  6  Human  Rights
    Act 1998 does not apply'.

25. I can accept that Section 55 may have an application to  EEA  decisions
    made by the Secretary of State  but  there  is  no  evidence  that  the
    Secretary of State in  making  her  decision,  which  did  not  involve
    removal, failed in exercising the statutory function to have regard  to
    the needs of the children in these circumstances  and  this  particular
    context where  there  was  to  be  no  removal  the  consideration  was
    appropriate.  The refusal letter referred to the  children,  and  noted
    that there was little evidence relating to the children but that  their
    mother lived with them.  MK (section  55  -  Tribunal  options)  Sierra
    Leone [2015] UKUT 00223 (IAC) confirms that judges are to be guided  by
    the reality of the litigation and states at [39] that

    'Where either the FtT or the Upper Tribunal decides that there has been
    a breach by the Secretary of State of either of the duties  imposed  by
    section 55 of the 2009 Act, both  Tribunals  are  empowered,  in  their
    final determination of the appeal, to assess the best interests of  any
    affected child and determine the appeal accordingly. This exercise will
    be appropriate in cases where the evidence is sufficient to enable  the
    Tribunal to conduct a properly informed assessment of the child's  best
    interests'.

26. Further the appellant made his application under  the  EEA  Regulations
    and not as in Granovski under the  Immigration  Rules  where  a  formal
    application was made.

27. The fact is that the only effective application made was in relation to
    the EEA documentation.  No formal charged application was made  by  the
    appellant on the basis of his family life.  There was  no  decision  to
    remove the appellant who was the father of the children.  The  decision
    made by the Secretary of State was purely  on  the  basis  of  the  EEA
    Regulations in  relation  to  a  declaration  of  his  status  and  the
    appellant was invited to make a charged application under Appendix  FM.



28. As stated in Amirteymour and others (EEA appeals; human rights)  [2015]
    UKUT 00466 (IAC)

    'As the consideration of an application for a residence document and an
    assessment  of  whether  an  applicant  enjoys  article  8  rights  are
    inherently different, an appellant cannot raise article 8 ECHR  matters
    within the scope of his appeal'.

29. Amirteymour  also confirms that

    'Where no notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act has been served  and
    where no EEA decision to remove has  been  made,  an  appellant  cannot
    bring a Human Rights challenge to removal in an appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations. Neither  the  factual  matrix  nor  the  reasoning  in  JM
    (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 has any application to appeals  of  this
    nature.

30. As explained, a right of  residence  under  EU  law  which  includes  a
    derivative right is a different legal specie from the  grant  of  leave
    and the exercise of the former does not require an act to be  taken  by
    the Secretary of State and is merely declaratory. This is not a removal
    decision.  There is no requirement to obtain a residence  document  and
    no penalties for not doing so.  When the Secretary of State had  chosen
    not to serve a Section 120 notice an appellant  is  restricted  to  the
    scope of his original application.

31. The appellant did not make a valid application and secondly  there  was
    no Section 120 notice was served; thus consideration of Section  55  in
    relation to human rights was not applicable.

32. Paragraph 72 of Amirteymour makes clear of

    'While we note the submission that a requirement to make an application
    and pay a fee is  disproportionate,  this  is  without  substance.  The
    Secretary of State is unarguably entitled to  charge  for  applications
    for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules, and if an applicant is
    destitute, he can apply for a  fee  waiver.  There  is  no  element  of
    discrimination in such a case, as what is being asserted is not a right
    under EU law, but under domestic law; no submission was made to us that
    there is any relevant "social advantage" in play such  that  Regulation
    492/2011 is engaged'.

33. It is clear from the decision of Judge Butler that there was no  actual
    decision with regard the EEA Regulations and the judge merely proceeded
    to make an analysis under Section 55 primarily in relation to Article 8
    grounds.  On the evidence of the appellant  himself  he  did  not  have
    primary responsibility for his children further to  Regulation  15A  of
    the EEA  Regulations  and  cannot  succeed  on  that  basis.  The  best
    interests of his children are that they remain with both parents in the
    United Kingdom, the decision by the Secretary of State does not  affect
    that and the status quo is maintained.  The appellant has yet to make a
    valid application on the basis of his family life and it is open to him
    to do so.

34. The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and the  decision  is  set
    aside.  I remake the decision and for the  reasons  given  dismiss  the
    appeal.

35. Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.  The
direction is made as minors are involved.




Signed                                             Date 6th October 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                             Date  6th October 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


