
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06327/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford UT                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13th November 2017                      |On 30 November 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                               ms Kim Dinh le
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Johnrose, Solicitor, Fusco Browne Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a citizen of Vietnam (born 8th April 1989)  appeals  with
    permission  against  the  decision  of  a  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Gillespie) dismissing her appeal against the Respondent's  decision  of
    4th February 2015 refusing to vary her leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and giving directions for her removal.   The  Appellant  has  a
    protracted immigration history which is set out below.



Background

 2. The Appellant arrived in the UK on 27th June 2014 in  possession  of  a
    visit visa valid until 29th November 2014.

 3. On 27th November 2014 she applied for variation of that  leave  on  the
    basis that she had given birth to a child in the UK. The  child's  date
    of birth is registered as 22nd November 2014.  Because  of  the  recent
    birth of her child, she requested an extension of time in order to make
    arrangements to leave the UK and return to Vietnam.

 4. Suffice to say the Appellant did not leave the UK and on  4th  February
    2015 the Respondent served a  decision  refusing  her  application  for
    leave to remain.  The Appellant appealed this decision and the  Grounds
    of Appeal, which were in standard form, said that it would be  contrary
    to the Appellant's  human  rights  and  those  of  her  child  for  the
    Appellant to be removed.  Articles 2, 3 and  8  were  quoted,  although
    there has never been any substantive evidence  put  forward  concerning
    Articles 2 and 3.

 5. The appeal hearing came before Judge Pedro  at  Hatton  Cross  on  12th
    February 2016.  The Appellant did not attend the hearing and the Judge,
    having satisfied himself that the Appellant had  been  properly  served
    with a notice of hearing, dealt with  the  appeal  in  the  Appellant's
    absence.  He dismissed the appeal.

 6. Permission to appeal Judge Pedro's decision was granted by consent,  on
    the basis that it was accepted that due to an administrative difficulty
    neither the Appellant nor her representatives were properly served with
    a notice of hearing.  Judge Pedro's decision was  therefore  set  aside
    with the matter being remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh
    hearing.

 7. The fresh hearing was set down for 31st March  2017  at  Hatton  Cross.
    The  Appellant  did  not  attend  at  the  renewed  hearing   but   her
    representative did.  Application was  made  by  her  representative  to
    adjourn the proceedings.  This was on the basis  that  the  Appellant's
    child had been taken to hospital in the early hours of the  morning  of
    the date of the hearing.  Medical evidence was produced although it was
    noted that the child was discharged at 1.20am that morning.

 8. The FtTJ, having received this evidence, decided to hear the appeal  in
    the Appellant's absence.  A full decision outlining his reasons for not
    acceding to the adjournment request was given.  The  appeal  was  dealt
    with on its merits and dismissed.

 9. The Appellant appealed this decision on the basis that  she  wished  to
    give evidence on her own behalf and she had not had an  opportunity  to
    do so.  In addition, she claimed she wished to trace her child's father
    who is a British citizen.

10. Permission to appeal Judge Gillespie's decision was  refused  initially
    in the First-tier Tribunal but granted on a renewed application to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The relevant part of the grant of permission reads  as
    follows:

         "The grounds argue that the Judge was  wrong  not  to  adjourn  the
         hearing when the Appellant did not attend because she had to attend
         hospital in the early hours of that day with her child.  Whilst the
         Judge's concerns over the failure to  prepare  the  case  and  give
         instructions to the representatives are entirely understandable, it
         is arguable that the appellant could was not be (sic)  expected  to
         attend given the circumstances and so was not given the opportunity
         to give evidence.  Even though her claim may not  be  strong,  that
         was arguably unfair."

11. Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal contained such error of law that  it  must  be  set
    aside and remade.

Error of Law Hearing

12. Ms Johnrose appeared on behalf of the Appellant and  Mrs  Pettersen  on
    behalf of the Respondent.  The Appellant attended the hearing  together
    with her husband.  Statements in support of the Appellant's  case  were
    served both from the Appellant and from her husband.  Those  statements
    outline that the Appellant is no longer in a relationship with the  man
    whom she was seeking to trace as being the British father of her child.
     Events have now moved on in her life and she has now  reconciled  with
    her husband.  He is a Vietnamese national currently working in the  UK,
    lawfully.  He works  as  a  junior  doctor.   It  turns  out  from  DNA
    evidence, which was also submitted, that the Appellant's child  was  in
    fact fathered by her husband and not by  the  man  with  whom  she  had
    entered into a relationship.

13. Nevertheless the issue before me is whether First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gillespie erred in proceeding with the hearing in the  absence  of  the
    Appellant.

14. Ms Johnrose took instructions on this  point.   I  was  told  that  the
    Appellant's child had attended hospital  in  the  early  hours  of  the
    morning of the date of the hearing.  The child  had  suffered  a  minor
    head injury and been sick.  The advice from the hospital was  that  the
    child should be kept at home and should not travel.  The Appellant  was
    living in the Sheffield area and the appeal hearing  was  set  down  at
    Hatton Cross.  It had been the Appellant's intention to bring her child
    with her to the hearing because there was no-one else to look after the
    child.  Ms  Johnrose  said  that   in   these   circumstances   it   is
    understandable that the Appellant  had  a  reasonable  excuse  for  not
    attending the hearing.

15. I find it is clear from the judge's decision to proceed  that  much  of
    this information was not put before him.  I am satisfied  however  that
    had this fuller explanation been put before him the  adjournment  would
    have been granted.  In these circumstances  therefore  I  am  satisfied
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error of  law
    and that the appropriate course is for the decision to be set aside and
    for the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing.

16. Mrs Pettersen did not seek to  persuade  me  otherwise.  She  helpfully
    indicated that as events had moved on and the  Appellant's  husband  is
    now in the UK with lawful authority, she would make  enquiries  in  the
    interim period to  ascertain  precisely  what  status  the  Appellant's
    husband has.  This may well have a bearing on any future hearing.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  for  error.   The
    appeal shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  that  Tribunal
    to remake the decision (not Judge Gillespie or Judge Pedro).

18. No anonymity direction is made.




Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     29 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts








