
IAC-FH-CK
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06649/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 May 2015                       |8 June 2015                          |
|Prepared 15 May 2015                 |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                         ms Lataben Jethalal Murabia
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan, Counsel instructed by S Z Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a  National  of  India,  date  of  birth  20  May  1959,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 17 January  2014,  to
    refuse  to  issue  a  permanent  residence  card  with   reference   to
    Regulations 15 and  2  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations).  It is to be  noted  that  the
    Respondent's Notice of  Immigration  Decision  does  not  indicate  any
    removal being intended.  It is also clear that at the  hearing  of  the
    appeal the issue of Article 8 of the ECHR was not  pursued  and  indeed
    the Respondent's position was that such matters would have to be  dealt
    with separately at a later date.

2.    The  appeal  against  the  adverse  decision  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge I Howard (the Judge), who on or about  14  October  2014
    dismissed the appeal under the 2006 Regulations.  Permission to  appeal
    was sought and refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lambert  on  3
    December 2014.  On 18 March 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman  granted
    permission in these terms: "The Respondent's decision is based in  part
    on the Appellant not  falling  within  transitional  provisions."   The
    Appellant's grounds of appeal to the FtT take issue with that.

3.   Both sides were represented at the hearing.  The judge's  determination
    does not mention the issue of the transitional provisions.  It was  not
    in the application for permission made to the FtT.  But it  was  raised
    in the renewed application grounds.  It is far from clear that it is  a
    good point.  Paragraph 22 of the grounds seems to assume that the  time
    when an  appeal  could  be  brought  goes  on  indefinitely,  which  is
    doubtful.  However, there is the possibility that the judge  overlooked
    the issue which should have been resolved in the determination.

4.   The Secretary of State in a Rule  24  response,  dated  1  April  2015,
    supported First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard's decision.

5.   At the hearing I  provided  the  parties  with  sight  of  the  judge's
    manuscript Record of Proceedings and both parties accept that it  makes
    reference to Regulation 15(1)(b) of the 2006  Regulations.   The  judge
    has not recorded any submissions, nor did the papers before  him,  with
    reference to whether or not the Appellant fell within the translational
    arrangements put in place to come into effect on 16 July  2012.   These
    had, amongst other things, the effect of precluding  the  spouse  of  a
    British and EEA dual national benefiting from free movement rights.

6.   In the circumstances I have nevertheless heard argument on  whether  or
    not the Appellant should have succeeded both  under  Regulation  15  of
    itself or under the transitional provisions.  The Appellant entered the
    United Kingdom with leave and obtained rights  of  residence  for  five
    years by reference to her  husband,  a  Portuguese  National,  being  a
    qualified person under the 2006 Regulations.  However, prior to  or  on
    the expiry of her residence card on 20 October 2011 her application for
    permanent residence was made but it was incomplete and the  application
    was returned with an indication of  the  necessary  documentation  that
    would be required to establish the fact  that  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements to obtain permanent residence.

7.   For reasons that no-one now knows no application in a revised form  was
    made, which plainly would have been the appropriate course to take.

8.   Thereafter in July  2012  the  EEA  Regulations  were  amended  and  it
    excluded an EEA National who was also a British National being able  to
    bring his/her partner in to the UK as the partner of an EEA National.

9.   The next intervening event was that the  Appellant's  husband  acquired
    British nationality in 2013.  After  the  transitional  provisions  had
    come into effect the Appellant at the end of 2013 applied for permanent
    residence again.  She was therefore  inevitably  excluded  because  her
    husband had by that stage got dual nationality as  a  British  National
    and as a Portuguese National.

10.  It therefore followed that the Appellant's status under the  provisions
    of the EEA Regulations was that the residence card which  she  had  had
    expired but under  the  provisions  of  the  Regulations  she  was  not
    entitled to another card.

11.  I am satisfied that as at 20 October 2011 the  Appellant  was  entitled
    to remain in the United Kingdom but was not able under the  regulations
    to apply for a permanent residence card given the change in  status  to
    dual nationality of her husband.

12.  I am therefore  satisfied  that  under  the  provisions  of  Regulation
    15(1)(b) of the 2006 Regulations the Appellant was not in a position to
    succeed with the application.  Further I am satisfied, having regard to
    the  transitional  provisions,  which  the  parties  are   agreed   are
    accurately set out in the Respondent's Reasons for Refusal Letter, that
    first at the material time to which the transition provisions apply the
    Appellant did not hold a valid registration  certificate  or  residence
    card issued under the 2006 Regulations.  That point  does  not  gainsay
    the lawful nature of her continued  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom
    which, as I understand it the  parties  are  agreed,  still  runs  even
    today.

13.   Secondly  the  Appellant  did  not  fall  within   the   translational
    provisions (b)  in  that  there  was  no  application  under  the  2006
    Regulations which had not been determined at the material time being 16
    July 2012.

14.  Thirdly the Appellant had not made  an  application  before  July  2012
    which had been refused but in respect  of  which  an  appeal  could  be
    brought or was pending.

15.  Finally under Regulation 15 subparagraphs (c)(i) and (ii) it  is  plain
    that the Appellant was not  applying  for  an  EEA  family  permit  and
    therefore those provisions did not assist the Appellant.  It is also  I
    think properly agreed by the parties that Regulation 9 does  not  apply
    either.  Therefore the position is  the  Appellant  is  unhappily  left
    without being able to obtain the permanent residence card.   Ultimately
    the consequences of  that  may  or  may  not  be  of  significance  but
    certainly she is entitled to remain in the  United  Kingdom  under  the
    provisions of the Regulations.  It is not asserted that the  change  in
    status of the Appellant's husband to become a dual National  has  taken
    away that continued right of residence.  It seems to me, and it is  not
    argued,  that  the  Appellant  would  succeed  under  276ADE   of   the
    Immigration Rules but the issue has not been  argued  and  nor  was  it
    dealt with by the judge and nor was any Article 8  family/private  life
    rights issues resolved by the  judge  and  nor  did  they  fall  to  be
    considered by him.

16.  In conclusion, I am satisfied that in all probability the issue of  the
    translational provisions was not raised before the judge and  therefore
    it was no error of law in him failing to deal with it but  even  if  it
    had been drawn to his attention it makes no difference to  the  outcome
    of the appeal because the appeal could not succeed on that basis.  I am
    further satisfied that the judge made no error of law with reference to
    Regulation 15(1)  or  with  reference  to  Regulation  2  of  the  2006
    Regulations because of the factual circumstances before him.

17.  It may seem harsh that the Appellant has been caught out  inadvertently
    through no fault of her own by the events and changes in the  law  that
    took place after the application was returned in November 2011  and  no
    further application was then made.  The outcome of this appeal is  not,
    I emphasise, any consequence of the  Appellant's  conduct  so  much  as
    those matters I have adverted to above.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity order was previously made  nor  does  one  seem  to  me  to  be
appropriate.



Signed   Date 3 June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


