
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06907/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House              |                               Decision &   |
|                                  |Reasons Promulgated                         |
|On 19th November 2015             |                               On 18th      |
|                                  |January 2016                                |
|                                  |                                        |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    R F F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on  1st  November  1982.   She
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 5th February 2015
    refusing her application for an extension  of  discretionary  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  Her appeal was heard  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal R Handley on 9th June 2015.  The appeal was allowed
    under the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of ECHR.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grimmett on 28th  September
    2015.  The permission states that it is arguable that the  judge  erred
    in failing to consider  the  requirements  of  paragraph  S-LTR.1.7  of
    Appendix FM.  There is no reference to this paragraph in  the  decision
    and so the judge failed to make a finding on a  material  matter.   The
    grounds go on to state that the judge made a material  misdirection  of
    law by allowing the appeal under Article 8 of ECHR stating that he  did
    not consider the fourth and fifth questions in the case of Razgar  2004
    UKHL 27.  The grounds state  that  the  judge  simply  found  that  the
    existence of a family life was sufficient to render the decision of the
    Respondent unlawful.

The Hearing

 4. The Appellant was at the hearing centre with her husband.  They arrived
    together.

 5. The Appellant stated that she did not receive the letter from the  Home
    Office requesting additional documents and he then received the  letter
    refusing the application on the basis that more evidence was  required.
    She said she had always stayed at the same address.  She said that when
    she got the refusal she did not know what documents were missing and by
    then it was too late for her to do anything.  Her husband had brought a
    lot of documents to the hearing centre.  I  allowed  him  to  speak  on
    behalf of his wife as his wife's English was not good and there was  no
    interpreter.   The  appellant  and  her  husband  have  four   children
    together.

 6. I asked why a paper hearing had been requested and  he  said  that  his
    wife has to look after the children and he works full-time  in  medical
    research and it is difficult for him to get time off.  The children are
    aged 2, 5, 8 and 16.  He said his wife has to take them to  school  and
    pick them up and look after the baby.

 7. The Presenting Officer  asked  to  see  the  evidence  the  Appellant's
    husband had brought with her to the hearing.  There  were  two  letters
    from her dentist, one to the Appellant and one  to  her  husband,  both
    sent to the same address.

 8. The Presenting Officer questioned the Appellant and asked her where her
    husband works.  She said in halting English that he  works  in  Horsham
    and she has been to his work three times.  He asked her who her husband
    banks with and she said Lloyds TSB.  He asked what they had for  dinner
    the previous day and she said rice and she was  asked  who  is  looking
    after the children and she  said  that  they  are  at  school  and  the
    youngest one is with a friend.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that most of the documents  which  the
    Secretary of State had said she was looking for  were  already  in  the
    possession of the Respondent.  He submitted that based on the documents
    now produced by the  Appellant  and  her  husband  he  finds  that  the
    relationship is genuine and is satisfied  with  all  the  documentation
    provided. The Presenting Officer submitted that he accepts that this is
    a genuine relationship and accepts that the Appellant did  not  receive
    the letter from the Home Office  requesting  additional  documents  and
    that is why they were not supplied.

Decision and Reasons

10. I have considered the Appellant's and her husband's oral evidence and I
    have noted that there  was  a  deadline  given  to  her  for  producing
    documents and because of this the Respondent found  that  paragraph  S-
    LTR.1.7 of Appendix FM applies as these documents were not produced.

11. I found that the Appellant and her  husband  were  credible  witnesses.
    There is evidence that they live at the same address.  They  have  four
    children.  I accept that they have family life together and I find that
    all the terms of paragraph S-LTR.1.7 have been satisfied as  I  believe
    that the Appellant did not receive the letter requesting the additional
    documents.  These have now been provided.

12. The Appellant and her husband came  together  to  the  hearing  centre.
    From the answers given to the questions asked by the Presenting Officer
    it is clear that they are living together  with  their  children.   The
    Presenting  Officer  has  stated  that  he  is   satisfied   that   the
    relationship is genuine.

13.  As I found the Appellant and her husband  to  be  credible  and  having
    noted the   additional evidence now produced, I find that there  is  an
    error of law in the First  Tier  Judge's  decision  as  documents  were
    requested but not produced but I find that  this  was  not  a  material
    error of law.

Notice of Decision

14.  The First-tier Judge allowed this appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules
    and I am    upholding that decision.

15.    Anonymity has been directed.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I have considered making a fee award  and  have
decided to make no fee award for the following reason.
The error of law hearing was required for a fair decision to be  reached  as
documents were not provided originally when requested by the Home Office.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray
