
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06604/2014
                                                             & IA/06614/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th November 2014                           |On 28th November 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                E F O & O F O
                          (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Heybrook, Counsel instructed by Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria and are both  minors.  As  these
    proceedings impact upon the welfare of children, I  make  an  anonymity
    direction.

 2. Though this is an appeal by the respondent, I have for the purposes  of
    the present decision maintained the designation of the parties as  they
    appeared in the original determination.

 3. This is an appeal by the respondent against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Miles promulgated on  23  July  2014,  whereby  the
    judge allowed the appellants' appeals  against  the  decisions  of  the
    respondent dated the 18 January 2014 to remove the appellants from  the
    United Kingdom. The judge allowed the  appeals  on  Article  8  grounds
    only.

 4. By decision made on 9th October 2014 permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. The case appeared before me to determine  in  the
    first instance whether or not there was a material error of law in  the
    original determination.

 5. The appellants are aged 14 and 13  and  are  siblings.  The  appellants
    entered the United Kingdom on 15 April 2005 on visit  visas.  They  had
    been brought to this country  by  their  mother.  The  appellants  have
    stayed in the United Kingdom living with a lady that claims to be their
    aunt. As noted by the judge on page 7 of the determination, third  full
    paragraph, the parents  of  these  appellants  effectively  dumped  the
    appellants on the lady that is claimed to be their aunt.

 6. In dealing  with  the  Immigration  Rules  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellants did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM. Their  parents
    were alive in Nigeria and the relationship of  the  appellants  to  the
    aunt was open to question as there was no documentary  proof  of  such.
    There  were  no  circumstances  advanced,  which  would   justify   the
    appellants remaining in the United Kingdom under the rules,  when  they
    have parents and family members in Nigeria. There  were  no  compelling
    compassionate reasons, whether medical  or  otherwise.  There  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles to their  return  to  Nigeria.  There  was  no
    reason to suppose that the appellants could not be cared for in Nigeria
    by their parents.

 7. Within the letter of refusal the respondent  had  raised  a  number  of
    issues relating to  why  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  to  the
    appellants to return to Nigeria and leave the United Kingdom. The judge
    on the first paragraph on page 6  had  set  out  that  the  appellants'
    representatives had not dealt with any of the  issues  raised.  In  the
    light of that the judge found that the appellants failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276 ADE.

 8. The judge had therefore found that the appellants could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 9. The judge went on to consider the issues with regard to  Article  8  of
    the ECHR. The judge ultimately allowed the appeal on article 8 grounds.
    The judge referred to the fact this was not the case of the appellants'
    parents seeking to piggyback and seek status through their children  in
    the United Kingdom.

10. There is a problem with the approach taken by the judge with regard  to
    Article 8 and the best interests of the children. The best interests of
    the children would in the normal course of events lie with  being  with
    their parents. The fact that the parents have abrogated  responsibility
    by leaving the children with an aunt in the UK does not appear to me to
    be a good reason for not to recognise  the  importance  of  being  with
    their natural parents.

11. With regard to children in general there are safeguards to ensure  that
    children are not being trafficked or being exploited. There  are  local
    authority  child  care  services  which   have   to   investigate   the
    circumstances in  which  children  are  living,  especially  where  the
    children are not living with their parents. Before a Court or  Tribunal
    gives approval to an arrangement whereby children are  brought  to  the
    United Kingdom and are allowed  to  remain  here  with  a  relative  in
    unspecified circumstances proper checks need to be carried out  by  the
    appropriate child care authorities  to  ensure  that  the  welfare  and
    interests of the child are properly protected.

12. The Tribunal cannot without involvement of the appropriate  authorities
    give  sanction  to  such  an  informal  arrangement.  To  do  so  could
    conceivably be sanctioning an exploitative relationship without  proper
    investigation.

13. Equally careful consideration has to be given as to what  would  happen
    to the children if they were to be returned to  Nigeria.  The  Tribunal
    should be reluctant to sanction arrangements, which permit  parents  to
    abrogate responsibility for children by bringing them into  the  United
    Kingdom and leaving them here.

14. Whilst the judge has made a finding that  the  best  interests  of  the
    children are to remain in education in the United Kingdom,  that  seems
    to ignore that the best interests of children generally are  to  remain
    with their parents and that before children are placed in the  care  of
    persons other than their parents proper assessment of  the  suitability
    of the individual to care for the children needs to  be  made  and  the
    suitability of the arrangements in which the children will  live.  That
    is a minimum that would be undertaken with regard to  any  adoption  or
    fostering arrangement. The Tribunal cannot be seen  to  be  sanctioning
    such arrangements  without  proper  childcare  safeguards  having  been
    undertaken.

15. Accordingly without a proper investigation of the circumstances of  the
    children within the  United  Kingdom  by  the  appropriate  child  care
    authorities, the assessment of Article 8 is legally flawed.

16. For the reasons set out, there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    original determination. I find that the appropriate course is to  remit
    the appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal. Those acting on  behalf  of
    the appellants  will  need  to  obtain  reports  from  the  appropriate
    authorities to substantiate that  these  children  are  being  properly
    looked after in the United Kingdom in any event  and  that  the  person
    looking after them is suitable to undertake such responsibility.

17. There is a material error of law in the determination.   I  remit  this
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh on all issues.



Signed        Date 28th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
