
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06730/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th October 2013                            |On 24th October 2013       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                idah zhakata
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Ahmed of Bankfield Heath Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Spence, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Kempton
    made following a hearing at North Shields on 12th June 2013.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 2nd February 1931.   She
    arrived in the UK on a visit visa on 29th March 2012, issued  following
    a successful appeal, to stay with her daughter,  Patience  Wright.  She
    applied for indefinite leave to remain as her dependant  on  19th  June
    2012.

 3. The application was refused on 13th February 2013.  The Respondent  was
    not satisfied that the Appellant was wholly or  mainly  dependent  upon
    her relative present and settled in the UK nor that she  did  not  have
    close relatives in her own country  to  whom  she  could  turn  to  for
    support.

 4. Patience Wright had given evidence on the appeal against the refusal to
    grant the Appellant a visit visa.  She said on that occasion  that  her
    brother Washington was the main carer  of  the  Appellant  who  had  no
    intention of staying in the UK since she needed to be near  the  burial
    place of her late husband.  Washington was  a  meteorologist,  advising
    the government on climate change, and his income was  quite  sufficient
    to maintain  the  Appellant.   He  was  an  academic  attached  to  the
    University  of  Zimbabwe  and  a  Task  Force  Bureau  Member  of   the
    Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.

 5. The Appellant's case was that  Washington  was  no  longer  working  in
    Zimbabwe and was a student in Cape Town with no income.   It  was  also
    said that he was working part-time and studying part-time and his  work
    takes him to other countries.

 6. The judge recorded the evidence and said that it  was  clear  that  the
    Appellant wanted the court to believe one set of facts for the  purpose
    of obtaining a visit visa to the UK and was now prepared to put forward
    an entirely different set of facts to ensure that she had  her  current
    application granted.  She dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on a number of grounds.

 8.  Firstly  there  was  a  paucity  of  findings  about  the  Appellant's
    circumstances in Zimbabwe.  It was argued that the judge had failed  to
    make findings about her financial dependency  upon  individuals  there.
    The Appellant's evidence was that her son Jericho was said not to be in
    Zimbabwe and no findings had been made upon whether he was or was  not.
    Nor were there any findings about whether the Appellant was  wholly  or
    mainly dependent upon her daughter Ivy or indeed Washington.

 9. Secondly, the judge had failed to direct herself properly to  the  case
    of Devaseelan and take Judge Grimshaw's (the judge who heard the  visit
    appeal) findings as her starting point.  She had found the  Sponsor  to
    be entirely credible.  The judge suggested that the  Sponsor  had  been
    landed in the position by her brother  Washington  but  had  failed  to
    grapple with  the  issue  as  to  whether  she  was  wholly  or  mainly
    financially dependent upon her.

10. Thirdly, the judge had not properly asked herself whether the Appellant
    was without close relatives to turn to for financial support.  She  had
    found that Washington had been the "public master"  but  had  not  make
    clear findings about whether he was still in Zimbabwe or not.  Nor  had
    she made a finding as to whether there was a  problematic  relationship
    between the Appellant and her daughter-in-law.

11. Fourthly, the judge had made negative findings in respect of the change
    of circumstances but had failed to support them with adequate  reasons.



12. Finally the judge had failed to properly assess the issue with  respect
    to Article 8.

13. Permission to appeal was initially refused by  Judge  Chambers  on  5th
    July 2013 but, upon renewal to the Upper  Tribunal,  granted  by  Judge
    Kebede who said that it was arguable that the judge had not made  clear
    and proper findings as to what she had accepted and what  she  had  not
    accepted.

14. On 14th August  2013  the  Respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

15. Mr Ahmed relied on his grounds and submitted that the judge had  failed
    to make proper  findings  on  the  central  issue  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant's son was still in Zimbabwe.  The judge  had  suggested  that
    she accepted the evidence  that  the  Sponsor  had  been  landed  in  a
    "situation" but had failed to consider what the consequences  were  and
    should have made a clear finding as to whether she accepted  there  had
    been a change in the Appellant's circumstances.

16. Mr Spence submitted that this was a well-reasoned  determination.   The
    burden of proof lay with the Appellant and the judge  was  entitled  to
    find that it had not been discharged.

Findings and Conclusions

17. There is no error of law in this determination.

18.  With  respect  to  Ground  1  it  is  clear  that,  from  reading  the
    determination as a whole, that the judge did not accept that there  had
    been a change of circumstances.

19. She said "if I were to accept her evidence as credible it seems that at
    best she has been landed in this situation by  her  brother  Washington
    who in fact seems to have  orchestrated  the  whole  situation  to  the
    benefit of his mother".

20. I accept that the judge makes  no  finding  in  that  paragraph  as  to
    whether Washington had moved from Zimbabwe, but simply that he was  the
    person who was behind the application.

21. The judge then states at paragraph 22:

         "It is very convenient that Washington suddenly moves from Zimbabwe
         to Cape Town in South Africa and Germany  and  so  he  can  not  be
         classed as a relative in Zimbabwe any longer."

    which is at the least a strong expression of doubt about  the  veracity
    of the account. Unfortunately there is a  typographical  error  in  the
    next sentence as Mr Ahmed acknowledged. It should have read _

         "However, I do not accept that is the case.  It is not clear if his
         family are still in Zimbabwe.  His home is less than an  hour  from
         his and it may well be that his wife and children, the  Appellant's
         grandchildren, are still living nearby."

22. The judge did not express herself in particularly clear terms.  However
    from reading the determination as a whole it is quite apparent that she
    did not believe the account of a change of circumstances.  She recorded
    that at the time of the visit visa appeal in 2012 it  was  said  to  be
    Washington who paid for his mother's essential  requirements  and  that
    the Sponsor's brothers and sisters are in Zimbabwe and they all provide
    support and care for their mother.

23.  The  lack  of  clarity  of  expression  rendered  this   determination
    vulnerable to a challenge but, when read as a  whole,  I  am  satisfied
    that the judge did make the requisite factual findings  upon  which  to
    base her decision.

24. With respect to Ground 2, and  the  Devaseelan  point,  the  judge  was
    clearly entitled to depart from  Judge  Grimshaw's  assessment  of  the
    credibility of the Sponsor since the Sponsor was now putting forward  a
    story which was at odds with the evidence  put  forward  in  the  visit
    appeal.   The  judge  clearly  believed,  and  indeed  said,  that  the
    Appellant and her family had put forward one story for the  purpose  of
    obtaining the visit visa and another one to try  to  obtain  settlement
    and there was therefore good reason  to  treat  the  Sponsor's  present
    evidence with some scepticism.

25. The judge should have  been  specific  in  dealing  with  other  family
    members, namely the daughter and the son Jericho and a daughter who was
    retired but when read as a whole it is clear that  the  judge  was  not
    satisfied that there were no close relatives to whom she could turn  to
    in Zimbabwe.  Indeed she said:

         "I think it is very clear that this has been a well thought out and
         devious attempt to allow the Appellant to stay permanently  in  the
         UK."

26. With  respect  to  Ground  4,  adequate  reasons  were  given  in  this
    determination.  The findings in relation to Article 8  were  brief  but
    given that at the date of the application the Appellant had  only  been
    with her family in the UK for  some  three  months,  and  only  sixteen
    months at the date of hearing, it is not arguable that,  having  failed
    to meet the requirements of the Rules, any appeal under Article 8 could
    be successful.





Decision

27. The judge did not  err  in  law  and  her  decision  will  stand.   The
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

