

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/06525/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 1st August 2016                        |On: 2nd August 2016            |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     OL
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Isherwood,    Senior Home Office Presenting
                       Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O'Ceallaigh, Counsel instructed by ULaw Legal
                       Advice Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of the DRC born in 1989.








    Anonymity Order

 2. The Respondent is subject to a deportation order on  the  grounds  that
    his  deportation  is  conducive  to  the  public  good.  He  would  not
    ordinarily have his identity protected. This appeal  however  turns  in
    part on his relationship with his British daughter, and there is a risk
    that identification of the Respondent could lead to  identification  of
    that child.  Having had regard to Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of
    2013: Anonymity Orders I therefore consider it appropriate to  make  an
    order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    The Appeal

 3. On the 11th December 2015 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge John Jones QC)
    allowed the Respondent's  appeal  against  a  decision  to  deport  him
    pursuant  to  s3(5)(a)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971.  Although  the
    Respondent had not committed an index  offence  that  would  bring  him
    within the automatic deportation provisions, he had been  convicted  of
    Actual Bodily Harm and had received a sentence of 10 months in  prison.
    This, taken with earlier  offences,  led  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    conclude that his deportation would be conducive to  the  public  good.
    Judge Jones QC found that  the  Respondent  defeated  that  deportation
    action on two grounds. First, he had shown that his removal would  have
    an unduly harsh impact on his British daughter.  This  meant  that  the
    'exception' at paragraph  399(a)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  applied.
    Second, the  Tribunal  was  satisfied  that  the  Respondent  had  been
    lawfully resident in the UK  for  most  of  his  life,  was  culturally
    integrated and that there would be "very significant obstacles  to  his
    integration" in the DRC.  This meant that the 'exception' at  paragraph
    399A also applied.


 4. The Secretary of State  sought  permission  on  a  number  of  grounds.
    Permission was expressly refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Astle[1]
    in respect of all but two. It was considered arguable that Judge  Jones
    QC had failed to give adequate  reasons  for  his  conclusions  as  the
    findings on the exceptions at 399 and 399A.  I consider each ground  in
    turn.



    Ground 1: paragraph 399 (a) of the Immigration Rules

 5. The Tribunal heard live evidence from numerous witnesses.  In  addition
    to the Respondent  himself,  the  hearing  was  attended  by  both  his
    parents, by his brothers, by his sister-in-law, and by  the  mother  of
    his child.  Having heard their evidence the Tribunal concluded that the
    Respondent enjoyed a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  his
    daughter.  The grounds submit that the  evidence  pointed  towards  the
    relationship being "extremely limited in nature". That is not  correct.
    The accepted evidence was that the Respondent was a "hands  on"  father
    who is a "central figure" in his daughter's life [at 82], for  instance
    being the person responsible for taking her to and from school each day
    when her mother is working shifts as  a  nurse.   The  grounds  further
    submit that there was "no  independent  evidence"  in  respect  of  the
    nature of the relationship. It is difficult to know what the  Secretary
    of State means by this. The Tribunal heard the evidence of 7 witnesses,
    all of whom were tendered for  cross-  examination.  The  determination
    records that the HOPO on the day "did not seriously challenge"  any  of
    the evidence in respect of the close bonds that the  Respondent  shares
    with his daughter.  I find that the Tribunal  reached  a  balanced  and
    reasoned decision as to the question of whether there  was  a  'genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship'.


 6. There being no dispute that it would be unduly harsh for  this  British
    child to return to the DRC with  her  father,  the  matter  in  dispute
    before the Tribunal had been 399(a)(i)(b): whether it would  be  unduly
    harsh for the child to remain in the UK without the person who is to be
    deported.  In its consideration of that  question  the  Tribunal  noted
    conflicting jurisprudence from the Upper Tribunal  on  the  meaning  of
    "unduly harsh". The determination contrasts [at 85-87] the decision  in
    MAB (paragraph 399; unduly harsh) USA [2015] UKUT 435 (IAC)  with  that
    in KMO (section 117 -unduly harsh) Nigeria [2015] UKUT  543  (IAC)  and
    firmly plumps for the latter: "I consider that  these  public  interest
    considerations  require  consideration  when   deciding   whether   the
    appellant comes within paragraph 399". As Mr O'Ceallaigh rightly notes,
    the Judge here foreshadowed the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  MM
    (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450.  There was therefore no misdirection.

 7. Ms Isherwood submits that notwithstanding the legal framework that  the
    Tribunal purports to apply, it failed to  in  fact  apply  the  correct
    test, since no, or at least insufficient, weight has been given to  the
    public interest. She submits that the Tribunal has  done  nothing  more
    than point to the fact that the child will be upset; the  term  "harsh"
    indicates a high threshold, and the word "unduly"  sets  the  bar  even
    higher. I am not at all satisfied that this is what  the  Tribunal  has
    done. Having properly directed itself to the meaning of  the  term  the
    Tribunal then expressly weighs the  public  interest  in  the  balance,
    listing  at  [88]  five  distinct  matters  that  weigh   against   the
    Respondent.  The Tribunal considers the offending history at  [91]  and
    refers back to the summary of the sentencing remarks at [77]  when  the
    vicious nature of the assault is examined. The Tribunal does not ignore
    the public interest, nor has it shied  away  from  the  nature  of  the
    offending, which it itself concluded had caused "serious harm" so as to
    bring the Respondent with the definition of a "serious criminal".   The
    evidence about the child was not simply that she would  be  upset.  The
    evidence of all of the witnesses was that she was  extremely  close  to
    her father and that this was a relationship of particular  significance
    given the demanding nature of her  mother's  profession.  Paragraph  96
    makes express reference not only to the evidence of the child's mother,
    but to that of ZE, the  Appellant's  sister-in-law.  The  sum  of  this
    evidence  was  that  the  child  was  "extremely  distressed"  by   any
    separation from her father,  that  she  "cries,  screams  and  is  very
    difficult to settle" when her mother picks her  up  from  her  father's
    family home because she fears that it will be the last  time  she  sees
    him; her mother believes that she would be "traumatised" if he were  to
    be removed from her life.  Against this  substantial  interference  the
    Tribunal weighed the public interest, and  having  done  so  found  the
    consequences  for  the  child  to  be  severe  and  "inordinately   and
    excessively harsh" [at  97].  I  find  the  reasons  expressed  in  the
    determination to be perfectly rational and clear.




    Ground 2: paragraph 399A of the Immigration Rules

 8. The facts accepted by the Tribunal, and weighed into its  consideration
    of paragraph 399A, were as follows. The Respondent is now 26 years old.
    He has lived in the United Kingdom since he was three. He has not  left
    the country since he arrived here (he was granted Exceptional Leave  to
    Remain not long after his arrival and Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain  in
    2003) He has committed three offences as an adult; one resulted in  him
    being sent to prison.  He has no living relatives to whom he could turn
    for support in the DRC. The DRC is a country riven by conflict with  no
    social support for  the  bulk  of  the  population.  He  speaks  fluent
    English, "indeed as a native" and only basic Lingala.  He  is  "plainly
    socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  UK"  and  the  cumulative
    factors outlined do constitute significant obstacles to integration.


 9. The Secretary of State takes issue with these conclusions on the  basis
    that they are inadequately  reasoned.   I  am  unable  to  accept  that
    submission. I find the determination  to  be  very  well  reasoned;  it
    leaves the reader in no doubt about why the decision is as it  was.  In
    his Rule 24 response Mr O'Ceallaigh suggests  that  any  other  outcome
    would have been irrational. Whilst I need not go that far I  am  wholly
    satisfied that the Secretary of State understands why she has  lost  on
    this point.  To paraphrase, it is because this is a man who  walks  and
    talks like he is from London, he has no understanding or experience  of
    life in the DRC and has no connections there to guide or assist him  in
    re-establishing himself.   Add  to  that  the  fact  that  this  is  an
    unstable country where his grandmother  was  killed  [at  95]  and  his
    family were forced to flee  [100],  and  the  Tribunal's  rationale  is
    perfectly understandable. In her  submissions  Ms  Isherwood  suggested
    that the Tribunal had failed to take  a  material  fact  into  account,
    namely whether he could be supported by remittances from his family  in
    the UK. I need not fully address that matter since it falls outwith the
    terms of the grant of permission, but simply  note  that  there  is  no
    evidence that this point was put to the Judge  (Ms  Isherwood  did  not
    know) or that such remittances would be forthcoming, or  that  if  they
    were they would in any way  alleviate  the  daily  struggles  that  the
    Respondent would encounter trying to live in, for instance, Kinshasa.


      Decisions


10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.


11. There is an order for anonymity.








                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     1st
                                 August 2016
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 18th May 2016

