
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/06995/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Oral Determination         |
|On 1 November 2013                              |Promulgated                |
|                                                |On 14 November 2013        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                           yusuf olatunji mustapha
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 14 January  1975.
    He appeals against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Grimmett promulgated  on  24  May  2013  in  which  she  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal in relation to a decision made by the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse his application as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant.
    The decision was made on 20 February 2013.

 2. The history of the application is somewhat complicated.  The  appellant
    made an application on 29 February 2012 which was  in  the  form  of  a
    combined application for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the points-based system and  for
    a biometric residence permit.  The application  ran  into  difficulties
    because the college - the Lincoln College - had ceased to qualify as  a
    college  for  the  purposes  of   the   appellant's   student   status.
    Accordingly, a letter was written on  31  May  2012  to  the  appellant
    saying that a decision had been made on  23  May  2012  to  revoke  the
    licence of Lincoln College, London.  That decision was made just a week
    before the letter was written on 31 May 2012.  Accordingly, it did  not
    provide the appellant with sufficient time  to  make  arrangements  for
    further education at an alternative college.  Following the decision of
    the Tribunal in Patel and  Patel  v  SSHD  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  741,  the
    Secretary of State therefore gave the appellant 60  days  in  which  to
    submit a further application.  The letter said:

         "Before the final decision is made, and in line with our Rules  and
         guidance, we will suspend consideration of your application  for  a
         period of 60 days.  During this 60 day period it is open to you  to
         withdraw your application and  submit  a  fresh  application  in  a
         different category or to leave the United Kingdom.  If  you  decide
         to withdraw your application you  will  need  to  confirm  this  in
         writing at the address given at the top of this page.   However  if
         you wish to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 Student, it is
         open to you to obtain a new CAS for a course of study  at  a  fully
         licensed Tier 4 educational sponsor and then submit  a  application
         to vary the grounds of your original application."

    Then in bold type on the following page of  the  letter  the  following
    occurs:

         "Important - please note:

         You should take a copy of this letter along with the copy  of  your
         passport and the Sponsor's leaflet with you when you  approach  any
         potential new Tier 4 Sponsors.  If you obtain a new CAS,  then  you
         will need to submit a fresh and  up  to  date  document  with  your
         application to vary, for example, bank statements showing  you  are
         in possession of sufficient funds to cover your course fees and the
         maintenance requirement.  You will need to complete a fresh Tier  4
         (General) application form - the most up to date  version  of  this
         form is available on the UKBA website."

 3. In accordance with that direction it is the appellant's  case  that  he
    did indeed submit an application and that application was  made  on  17
    August 2012.  This related to a second college and  this  was  Shepherd
    College  where  he  was  intending  to  study  a  Diploma  in  Business
    Management.  The application that I have before me is incomplete but in
    any event I am told by Ms  Isherwood  who  appears  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that there were passages within it  which  does  not
    make it entirely clear whether the fee had been paid or whether it  was
    treated as a valid fresh application.  In any event the result was that
    a further check was made on Shepherd College in February 2013 when this
    second application was submitted and it was found that this college too
    had ceased to have the status required for it to provide the  appellant
    with further education.  The application was refused by a decision made
    on 20 February 2013.

 4. When this appeal was opened to me by Ms Isherwood it was on  the  basis
    that there had been an application made on 29 February 2012  which  was
    refused on 20 February 2013, nearly a year later, and in the course  of
    that year the appellant had  taken  no  appropriate  steps  to  find  a
    substitute college.

 5. The argument would have been in my judgment a successful one if what we
    were considering was a single application  made  on  29  February  2012
    which was held over, as it were, permitting the appellant  60  days  in
    which to find an alternative provider which he failed to do.  In  those
    circumstances it would be very easy to see what happened on 20 February
    2013 as being the logical conclusion of the offer which had  been  made
    on 31 May 2012 which had simply not been complied with.  However  there
    is at least an arguable case (and it may be  more  than  this)  that  a
    second application was made on 17 August 2012 which, if an  appropriate
    fee  had  been  paid,  would  have  then  been  the  application   that
    subsequently  required  consideration.   The   application   that   had
    previously been made on 29 February 2012  would  simply  have  been  no
    more.  The decision maker would have been  required  to  make  a  fresh
    decision on the fresh application made on 17 August 2012 following  the
    invitation advanced in the letter of 31 May 2012.

 6. It also seems to me to follow that if the appellant had  paid  a  fresh
    fee and had made a fresh application  then  he  should  have  stood  in
    exactly the same position as he stood at on 31 May 2012 and would  have
    been entitled to receive a letter which was  in  similar  form  to  the
    letter that he had received on 31 May 2012 and he would then have  been
    able to take that subsequent letter to a third college and  that  third
    college would have been in a position to provide him with a CAS letter.
     Without that letter written by the  Home  Office,  he  was  not  in  a
    position to do so.   Thus  it  all  seems  to  depend  on  whether  the
    application of 17 August 2012 was a second valid application  requiring
    the same treatment as any other valid application including  a  60  day
    reconsideration period in the event of the college ceasing  to  operate
    as he had been offered earlier on.

 7. Conversely, if all we  were  looking  at  was  a  continuation  of  the
    original application of 29 February 2012 in which he had been given  an
    opportunity by the letter of 31 May which he had failed to  make  good,
    then the decision that  was  subsequently  made  on  20  February  2013
    appears unimpeachable.

 8. It is not possible to say whether there was such  a  valid  application
    made on 17 August 2012 and consequently I cannot resolve that issue  by
    allowing the appeal outright.

 9. However, what is apparent  from  the  decision  that  was  made  on  20
    February 2013 was that no appropriate thought had  been  given  to  the
    subsequent application that had  been  made  on  17  August  2012.   It
    appears that it was taken into account in some  way  because  there  is
    reference to the Shepherd Business  School  as  being  the  appropriate
    college for consideration of the Tier 4 sponsorship.  Indeed it appears
    from the letter of 20 February 2013 that the  Secretary  of  State  was
    considering whether 30 points should have been awarded in relation to a
    valid Confirmation of  Acceptance  for  Studies  assigned  by  Shepherd
    College.  It cannot therefore be said that the Secretary of  State  was
    unaware of the new application that had been made.   If  therefore  the
    Secretary of  State  was  under  a  duty  to  treat  this  as  a  fresh
    application it also seems at least arguable that the Secretary of State
    was also required to adopt the same fairness principles in relation  to
    the discovery that the college was no longer on the list.  That is  not
    something which is  considered  in  the  letter  of  20  February  2013
    rendering the letter as Wednesbury unreasonable  because  it  fails  to
    take into account a significant part of  this  application.   In  those
    circumstances I allow the appeal to the limited extent of requiring the
    Secretary of State to make  a  fresh  decision  where  she  takes  into
    account the considerations that I have made above in  relation  to  the
    application that was made on 17 August 2012.

10. There is also an additional point and indeed this was  the  only  point
    upon which leave was expressly granted and that was that there  was  in
    this case a Section 47 removal decision that was made at the same  time
    as the decision on 20 February 2013.  It is now common ground that that
    decision was a wrong decision but it does not invalidate the  remainder
    of the decision nor  does  it  permit  the  Tribunal  to  avoid  making
    findings on the substantive application.  As a result of  the  decision
    in Ahmadi [2013] EWCA Civ 512 and Adamally & Jaferi [2012] UKUT 244 the
    decision to make an order under Section 47 was unlawful.  The Secretary
    of State accepts that and a fresh removal decision would have been made
    in any event.  However, that process has now been put on hold by reason
    of the requirement imposed by the Upper Tribunal by this decision  that
    the Secretary of State should make a fresh decision taking into account
    the factors that I have explained.

11. This was not a matter that was explored in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and this amounts to an error on a point of law.

DECISION


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error of  law  and
    the appeal is allowed to the limited extent of requiring the respondent
    to make a fresh and lawful  decision  on  the  applicant's  application
    which remains outstanding.


                            [pic]
                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE


