
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06279/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 29th October 2013                            |On 7th November 2013       |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               OMOLOLA OLASODE
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Chukwudolue, Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss H Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge  Blackford
    made following a hearing at Taylor House on 12th July 2013.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 3rd November 1966.   She
    came to the UK on 15th October 2010 with  leave  until  30th  September
    2012 as a Tier 4 (General) Student.

 3. On 17th September 2012 she applied for variation of her leave to remain
    on the basis of her marriage to Olaelel  Ebeneezer  Olasode  which  had
    taken place on 8th August 2012.  She accepted that she could  not  meet
    the requirements of the Rules because her husband was not in a position
    to meet the financial provisions. He had been  working until  2010  but
    was now on benefits, as was she,  and sought to remain  in  the  UK  on
    Article 8 grounds.

 4. The judge accepted that the marriage was subsisting but  said  that  he
    could not see any exceptional circumstances in the  case.   She  joined
    her husband to be in the UK when he was here unlawfully and when  at  a
    time when she in the UK for a temporary purpose to study.  There was no
    expectation that she would be able to remain in the UK. He said that he
    agreed with the Respondent's analysis in relation  to  the  Immigration
    Rules and said that there were no insurmountable obstacle in the way of
    the Appellant returning to Nigeria with her husband.

 5. Separately he considered Article 8 on Razgar principles  and  wrote  as
    follows:

         "I have  no  difficulty  in  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  the
         Appellant's removal from the  UK  would  be  proportionate  to  the
         legitimate aim of immigration control. As I  have  indicated  above
         the Appellant came to the UK at a time when her  husband  was  here
         unlawfully.  She could have had no expectation that  she  would  be
         able to remain in the UK.  I do not find  that  there  are  serious
         problems in her returning to Nigeria with her husband if he chooses
         to accompany her.  As Mr Jack observed, the Appellant ha not  shown
         that she has no assets in Nigeria.  The Appellant had the funds  in
         her application and her travel to study in the UK.  I agree with Mr
         Jack that that must have been  a costly undertaking."

    He dismissed the appeal on Article 8 grounds and treated the Section 47
    removal decision as withdrawn.

The Grounds of Application

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred in laws in considering the proportionality  of  removal.   In
    the case of MF (Article 8 new Rules)  Nigeria  [2012]  UKUT  00393  the
    Upper Tribunal held that it was duty bound to consider the  application
    on human rights grounds and cannot be decided on the basis of the  Home
    Office Rules alone as set out in Appendix FM.  The judge had  erred  in
    his findings and the Appellant is a victim of judicial error.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Brunnen on 22nd  August  2013
    on the grounds that it was arguable that when assessing proportionality
    the judge applied an incorrect test as to  whether  the  husband  could
    accompany her to Nigeria.  He held  that  there  was  not  any  serious
    problem in her returning to Nigeria with her husband if he chose to  do
    so but arguably the question to be addressed was whether that would  be
    reasonable in all the circumstances.

 8. On 9th September 2013 the  Respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

 9. Mr Chukwudolue relied on his grounds and the grant  of  permission  and
    submitted that the judge had applied the wrong test.   The  Appellant's
    husband was a Nigerian national but settled in  the  UK  having  coming
    here in 1990 and obtained indefinite leave in 2012.  The judge erred in
    not focusing on his situation.  The Appellant had leave to remain  here
    as a student at the time of application and was here lawfully.

10. Miss Horsley relied on the decision of the High Court in Nagre R on the
    application of v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720  and  submitted  that  there  was
    "full coverage of an individual's rights under Article 8 in  all  cases
    by a combination of the new Rules and (so  far  as  may  be  necessary)
    under the Secretary of State's residual discretion to  grant  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules" (paragraph 35).

11. The Secretary of State accepted that the new rules did  not  provide  a
    complete answer in  every  case  but,  together  with  the  Immigration
    Directorate Instructions 3.2.8  set out the  exceptional  circumstances
    in which a grant of leave would be appropriate.

12. She relied on the Court of Appeal  decision  in  MF  (Nigeria)  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 which held that the  new  Rules  were  a  complete
    code.  The older cases relied upon by the Appellant  had  been  decided
    without the benefit of the new Rules which set  out  a  more  stringent
    test than mere hardship or inconveniencies.

13. The judge had considered the case on the correct financial  basis.  The
    Appellant had not shown that family life  could  not  be  continued  in
    Nigeria.  She could not meet the requirements of the Rules and  it  was
    not the purpose of  Article  8  to  permit  their  circumvention.   Any
    properly directed Tribunal would have come to the same conclusions.

14. By way of reply Mr Olosode repeated that the Tribunal  was  obliged  to
    conduct  a  fact  finding  exercise  in  respect  of   Article   8   in
    circumstances where the Rules could not be satisfied and the Respondent
    was wrong to introduce an insurmountable obstacles test.

Findings and Conclusions

15. In Nagre Sayles J stated:

         "The approach explained in the Strasbourg case law  indicates  that
         where family life is established when the immigration status of the
         claimant is precarious removal will  be  disproportionate  only  in
         exceptional cases; and also their consideration  of  whether  there
         are insurmountable obstacles to the claimant's residence spouse  or
         partner relocating to the claimant's country of origin to  continue
         their family life there will be a  highly  material  consideration.
         This  is  not  to  say  that  the  question   whether   there   are
         insurmountable obstacles to relocation  will  always  be  decisive.
         The statement of general approach referred to  above  refers  to  a
         range  of  factors  which   may   bear   upon   the   question   of
         proportionality."

16. This Appellant came to  the  UK  in  order  to  study  and  married  an
    individual who had been in  the  UK  unlawfully  for  20  years  having
    overstayed his visit visa and working in breach of  the  conditions  of
    that visa.  He became settled in the UK relatively recently and remains
    a citizen of Nigeria.

17. The Appellant does not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    because her husband is on benefits. She  does  not  meet  EX1B  because
    although  she  has  been   found  to  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a person settled in the UK no insurmountable obstacle
    to family life have been identified to her life with him continuing  in
    Nigeria, the country of which they are both nationals.

18. In paragraph 3.2.8 of  the  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  the
    decision maker is asked, in determining whether there  are  exceptional
    circumstances, to consider all relevant factors including  whether  the
    relationship was formed at a time when  the  applicant  had  either  no
    immigration status or it was precarious.  In this case the  Appellant's
    status was temporary.

19. She plainly neither meets the requirements of  the  Rules  nor  of  the
    Secretary of State's policy as set out in those IDIs.

20. In Nagre Sayles  J  recorded  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    contending that  the  effect  of  the  new  rules  was  to  restore  an
    exceptional circumstances test evaluate to that rejected by  the  House
    of Lords in Huang and by the Upper Tribunal in Iswazu.   The  Secretary
    of State accepted that consideration of what is possible in  Article  8
    claims arising outside the new Rules involves broader consideration  of
    cases by reference to the general factors and the approach set  out  in
    the new guidance on her "residual discretion".

21. In  this  case  the  judge  did  not  consider  the  new  Rules  to  be
    determinative and examined the Article 8 claim  on  traditional  Razgar
    principles.  He  was  perfectly  entitled  to  consider  the  sponsor's
    immigration  history  as  an  adverse  factor  and  indeed   that   the
    Appellant's status was temporary.  There was no error in  referring  to
    the lack of serious problems  in  her  returning  to  Nigeria  with  or
    without her husband.

Decision

22. The original judge did not err in law.  His decision stands.

Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
