
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/06382/2015
                                                               IA/07835/2015
                                                               IA/07837/2015
                                                               IA/07841/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 August 2016                    |On 30 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                               (1) MAHABUB [K]
                               (2) SWEETY [K]
                                  (3) [T K]
                                  (4) [I K]
                        (ANONMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS





Introduction

 1. The Appellants appeal against a decision dated 7 December 2015 of Judge
    D Ross of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT).

 2. The First Appellant, a national of  Holland,  is  the  husband  of  the
    Second  Appellant  and  the  Third  and  Fourth  Appellants  are  their
    children.

 3. The Appellants applied for permanent residence in the UK  relying  upon
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  2006
    Regulations).

 4. The applications were refused on 2  February  2015  with  reference  to
    regulation 15(1)(b) of the 2006 Regulations in relation  to  the  First
    Appellant, and regulation 15(1)(a) in relation to the other Appellants.
     Thereafter the Appellants appealed and requested that their appeals be
    decided on the papers without an oral hearing.

 5. The FtT decided the appeals on the papers, which were  dismissed  in  a
    decision dated 7 December 2015.

 6. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    and permission was granted on 17 May 2016 by Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Hodgkinson.   Judge  Hodgkinson  commented,  inter  alia,  in
    granting permission;

         "The appellants are unrepresented and, as I have  indicated,  their
         appeals were considered on the  available  documents  which,  I  am
         satisfied, did not greatly assist the Judge in his consideration of
         relevant factors. However, having considered  available  documents,
         and  having  considered  the  Judge's  reasoning,  as  set  out  in
         paragraph 12 of his decision, it is arguable that he erred  in  law
         in his  consideration  of  the  documentary  evidence  and  in  his
         application  thereto  of  the  relevant  provisions  of   the   EEA
         Regulations."

 7. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FtT  decision  should  be  set
    aside by reason of material error of law.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. The Appellants attended the hearing. The First Appellant confirmed that
    he did not have legal representation and was  content  to  proceed.  He
    also confirmed that he was the author of the Grounds of Appeal and that
    he could speak English, but he wished to proceed with the assistance of
    his friend acting as a Mackenzie friend. He refused the invitation  for
    a court interpreter. I permitted the friend without objection to assist
    the First Appellant and to address the Tribunal. I was  satisfied  that
    the First Appellant understood the proceedings throughout.

 9. I explained to the First Appellant the purpose of the hearing which was
    to ascertain whether the FtT had erred  in  law.  The  First  Appellant
    relied on the grounds of appeal and added that he had lived in  the  UK
    for ten years and that his children attended school.

10. I heard submissions from Mr Jarvis as to error of law, and he submitted
    that the FtT had not erred in law, and that,  the  Appellants  had  not
    produced evidence to discharge the burden of proof  and  therefore  the
    FtT was correct to dismiss the appeals.

11. In reply the First Appellant stated that he sent all relevant documents
    to the FtT but admitted that some of them were now missing.

12. I then reserved my decision, and explained to the First Appellant  that
    I would issue a written decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

13. I do not find that the FtT erred in law in dismissing the appeals.

14. The Appellants applied for permanent residence. The Respondent  refused
    the application on the basis that there was  insufficient  evidence  to
    show that the First Appellant had been exercising treaty rights  for  a
    continuous period of five years.

15. The FtT considered the documentation  filed  by  the  Appellants  which
    showed that the First Appellant had experienced  periods  of  work  and
    unemployment [12]. Whilst the FtT was incorrect in its observation that
    the First Appellant could only retain his status as a worker if he  was
    unemployed for no longer than six  months,  it  found  that  inadequate
    evidence had been submitted by the Appellants to prove that  they  were
    entitled to permanent residence at [12]. There is no error  of  law  in
    that finding. The Appellants had not provided evidence to discharge the
    burden of proof. As Mr Jarvis rightly  pointed  out  that  pursuant  to
    regulation 6 (2)(1)(b)(i) a person who is no longer working  shall  not
    cease to be treated as a worker for the purpose of paragraph (1)(b)  if
    he was employed for one year or more before  becoming  unemployed.  The
    FtT correctly applied that  provision  and  noted  that  there  was  no
    evidence of the First Appellant's employment  for  the  year  prior  to
    September 2009 when he first became unemployed and, there remained gaps
    in the evidence for the years 2007 and 2008.

16. It was the responsibility of the Appellants,  having  elected  to  have
    their appeals decided on the papers, to ensure that  the  documentation
    that they relied upon, was before the Tribunal. I have  considered  the
    documentation on file in view of the First Appellant's  claim  that  he
    submitted all relevant  documentation,  but  the  documentary  evidence
    adduced fails to establish that the First  Appellant  was  a  qualified
    person for a continuous period of five years. There is a lacuna in  the
    evidence as the FtT correctly identified.

17.   I therefore conclude that the FtT did not materially  err  in  law  in
    dismissing the appeals. Whilst I acknowledge that this decision will be
    received  with  disappointment  as  the  First  Appellant  was  clearly
    concerned about the welfare of his children, but as Mr  Jarvis  pointed
    out, the dismissal of these appeals  does  not  affect  the  Appellants
    right to remain in the UK as EU nationals.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT did  not  involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeals are dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Date 25 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals are dismissed.  There are no fee awards.


Signed      Date 25 August 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral


