
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/06754/2015
     ia/07088/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15 April 2016                         |On 27 April 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                               MR FAZAL USMAN
                             MRS LEILA ISSAKOVA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Joseph, Counsel instructed by Adam Khattak
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin. Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. The respondents are citizen of Pakistan and Estonia born on
    12 April 1985 and 16 August 1985 respectively. I shall however for  the
    sake of convenience continue to refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    referred to before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant's appealed against a decision of the respondent dated  16
    February 2015 to refuse to  issue  the  first  appellant  with  an  EEA
    residence card as the spouse of an EEA national exercising  her  treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom under  Regulation  7  of  the  Immigration
    (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (hereinafter  the   2006
    Regulations).  [The second appellant] appealed against  a  decision  of
    the respondent dated 16 February 2015 to remove  her  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Jackson allowed the appellant's appeal  in  a
    decision dated 27 August 2015.  The respondent made an application  for
    permission to appeal which was granted by Designated Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal who found that it is arguably unclear as to why the judge
    went on to find on the balance of probabilities that the  marriage  was
    not one of convenience and therefore it is arguable that the conclusion
    to  allow  the  appeals  were  perverse  and  irrational  and   granted
    permission.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the evidence and her  findings
    start at paragraph  32  of  the  decision.   The  judge  sets  out  the
    discrepancies in the evidence of the  first  and  second  appellant  in
    their interview which  did  raise  a  reasonable  suspicion  that  this
    marriage is one of convenience and  therefore,  said  quite  correctly,
    that once the respondent has produced evidence that goes to  show  that
    the marriage is one of convenience, the burden of proof then shifts  to
    the appellants to show that it is not.  The judge went on to state that
    certain  discrepancies  in  the  interview  can  be  explained  and  at
    paragraph 42 of the decision, went on  to  consider  the  discrepancies
    which have not been rebutted or explained by the appellants.

 5. At paragraph 43 the  judge  states  that  in  the  refusal  letter  the
    respondent clearly identified sufficient material to call into question
    whether  this  was  a  marriage  of  convenience  given  the  lack   of
    consistency in the answers given as to the couple's relationship.   The
    judge stated that "it is reasonable to expect that a  genuine  marriage
    not solely for the purposes of obtaining an immigration advantage would
    have included a much higher degree of consistency in answers about  key
    points in a person's relationship".

 6. The judge noted that the appellants have not adequately  addressed  all
    the discrepancies highlighted by the respondent but taking into account
    all the evidence available, the judge did not  find  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities,  even  taking  into  account   the   first   appellant's
    immigration history, that he had no  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom (having already failed in a  previous  application  and  having
    been served with a decision to remove him) that the inconsistencies are
    sufficient to establish that this was a marriage of  convenience.   The
    judge then continues, somewhat in a contradictory fashion:

         "The discrepancies in the interview raise serious doubts as to  the
         genuineness and subsistence of the  marriage  despite  the  assured
         shorthold  tenancy  agreement  showing  that  the  appellants   are
         cohabiting, but this is not the same question as to whether it  was
         a marriage purely to obtain a benefit for the  first  appellant  to
         reside in the United Kingdom."

    The judge then goes on to say that the evidence  is  not  in  his  view
    strong enough to reach that conclusion on the balance of  probabilities
    and allowed the first appellant's appeal against  the  refusal  of  the
    respondent to issue him with an EEA residence card.  Having allowed the
    first appellant's appeal, the judge stated that the second  appellant's
    appeal against the decision to remove  her  is  allowed  for  the  same
    reasons because it has not been established that  she  entered  into  a
    marriage of convenience.

 7. The respondent's grounds of appeal stated that the judge has failed  to
    give adequate reasons for findings on a  material  matter.   The  judge
    noted  that  the  Secretary  of  State  clearly  identified  sufficient
    material to establish  reasonable  suspicion  and  call  into  question
    whether the marriage is one of convenience.  As such it is  clear  that
    the judge accepted that the  Secretary  of  State  had  discharged  her
    burden  by  justifying   reasonable   suspicion   on   the   basis   of
    inconsistencies and discrepancies in the  couple's  marriage  interview
    thereby causing credibility concerns.   Having  established  reasonable
    suspicion that the respondent states that it is for  the  appellant  to
    discharge the burden of proof and demonstrate the marriage was not  one
    of convenience.

 8. At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  Counsel  as  to  whether
    there is an error of law in the determination.  Mr Melvin relied on his
    grounds of appeal and stated that in  pursuance  of  Mr  Macdonald  the
    permission Judge who said that it was entirely unclear  why  the  judge
    allowed the appeal after having made adverse credibility  findings  and
    finding that there were serious discrepancies in the  evidence  between
    the two appellants in the interview.  The judge failed to give adequate
    reasons for her conclusion that the marriage is not one of  convenience
    having had set out all the discrepancies in the evidence and  it  is  a
    perverse and irrational finding under the circumstances.

 9. Mr Joseph in his submissions stated that the judge was correct  in  the
    definition of what is a marriage of convenience as set out at paragraph
    43.  He stated that the  question  that  the  judge  asked  herself  at
    paragraph 43 is that while the discrepancies in  the  interview  raised
    serious doubts as to the genuineness and subsistence of  the  marriage,
    despite the assured shorthold tenancy agreement showing the  appellants
    are cohabiting, but this is not the same question as to whether it  was
    a marriage purely to obtain a benefit for the first appellant to reside
    in the United Kingdom.  The evidence is not in my view strong enough to
    reach a conclusion on the balance of probabilities.

Findings as to whether there is an error of law in the determination

10. The judge having found that  there  are  many  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence of the appellants in their asylum interview  which  the  judge
    has set out from paragraph 35 to 43 the judge, nevertheless found  that
    on a balance of probabilities the respondent has not proved  that  this
    is a marriage of convenience.  The burden of proof  in  a  marriage  of
    convenience case is upon the respondent.  The  respondent  demonstrated
    sufficient indicia and suspicion that the appellant's marriage was  one
    of convenience, relied on the interview record and the  inconsistencies
    in the evidence discharged her burden of proof.  The  burden  of  proof
    then shifted to the appellant to show that it  is  not  a  marriage  of
    convenience.  Nowhere in the determination does the  judge  state  what
    evidence the appellant relied upon as to rebut  the  respondent's  case
    that this is a  marriage  of  convenience.   Having  set  out  all  the
    discrepancies and having raised serious doubts in the determination  as
    to the genuineness and subsistence of the marriage, the judge in  total
    perversity allowed the appeal and said that this was not a marriage  of
    convenience.  It is most unclear to me as to the judge's definition  of
    a marriage of convenience set out at paragraph 43.  I do not understand
    the judge's reasoning in this regard.

11. I therefore set aside the determination as it is vitiated  by  material
    error of law.  I remake the decision and I find that the respondent has
    demonstrated that the first appellant has entered into  a  marriage  of
    convenience  with  the  second  appellant.  The   appellant   has   not
    demonstrated  that  theirs  is  not  a  marriage  of  convenience.  The
    inconsistencies in their interview are  sufficient  to  show  that  the
    marriage is fiction and not a reality. The appellants have not given  a
    credible reason for all the inconsistencies in  the  evidence.  I  find
    that if two people are in a genuine and subsisting  relationship,  they
    would not give inconsistent accounts  about  some  fundamental  matters
    pertaining to their relationship. I  endorse  the  judge's  finding  at
    paragraph 43 when he said "it is reasonable to expect  that  a  genuine
    marriage not solely  for  the  purposes  of  obtaining  an  immigration
    advantage would have included a much higher degree  of  consistency  in
    answers about key  points  in  a  person's  relationship".  It  follows
    therefore that the appellants' marriage is one of convenience.

12.  I  make  this  finding  without  having  regard  to  the   appellant's
    immigration  history  which  further  strengthens  my  conclusion.  The
    appellant's application came after all attempts to live in this country
    had failed. I find this purported relationship is an  attempt  for  the
    appellant to continue to live in this country.

13. In this regard the second appellant's appeal to remove  her  from  this
    country is also dismissed.  Both Appeals are dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeals are dismissed pursuant to the 2006 Regulations

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 26th day of April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 26th day of April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana

