
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number: IA/06368/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |     Decision & Reasons           |
|                                             |Promulgated                       |
|On 18 November 2015                          |     On 18 January 2016           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                           FLORENCE CHIOMA AGBARA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Doyle, instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is  an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Judge  Kelly
    promulgated on 24 March 2015 dismissing the appellant's appeal  against
    the respondent's decision on 29 January 2014 refusing  leave  to  enter
    the United Kingdom.

2.   The respondent's concern was in respect of a stamp in  the  appellant's
    passport  and it may be simplest if I set out the relevant parts of the
    judge's decision on this.

         "On 28 September 2011 she was granted entry clearance as a  visitor
         for a period of two  years.  She  first  travelled  to  the  United
         Kingdom in October 2011 and returned to Nigeria in March 2012.  She
         next travelled to the United Kingdom in July 2012 and  returned  to
         Nigeria in December 2012. She obtained a  further  two  year  visit
         visa on 28 September 2013 and arrived for her third  visit  to  the
         United Kingdom on 29 January 2014.   On  her  arrival  at  Heathrow
         airport a decision was  taken  to  cancel  her  leave  pursuant  to
         paragraph 321A of the Immigration Rules on  the  basis  that  false
         representations had been employed or material facts  not  disclosed
         for the purpose of obtaining her second visit visa"

    and this was the decision challenged.

3.   The misrepresentation or matter not disclosed related  to  endorsements
    in the passport.  When she arrived in the United Kingdom on 29  January
    2014 her passport  was found to contain a stamp showing  that  she  had
    exited Nigeria for the purposes  of  the  first  visit  to  the  United
    Kingdom on 11 October 2011 and returned to Nigeria on 21 October  2011,
    but checks in fact revealed that she had not retuned to Nigeria until 8
    March  2012.

4.   The appellant had to say  the  following  about  this:  that  she  only
    became aware of this error, as she puts it, at a later  date,  and  she
    tried to take the matter up when  she  went  back  to  the  airport  to
    highlight the mistakes of the Immigration Officer  but  they  were  not
    interested, did not do anything to correct the mistake  and  there  was
    evidence from both her and her daughter at the hearing and one  of  the
    points that was made in the grant of permission was that the judge  did
    not refer to her daughter's  evidence  as  to  their  belief  that  she
    returned to Nigeria on 8 March 2012.

5.   The judge noted the mandatory nature of paragraph 321A, noted that  the
    appellant accepted she was aware of the inaccuracy in her passport  and
    said although it was unclear whether or not  she  sought  to  gain  any
    advantage through the presence of the inaccurate stamp in her passport,
    as it is common ground that it was, there was no need to establish  any
    particular motive before paragraph 321A could be applied and even if it
    were an error by the immigration authorities at the  airport  that  did
    not make the paragraph inapplicable.

6.   Permission was initially refused by a First-tier Tribunal Judge but  on
    renewal permission was granted by Judge Plimmer who expressed  concerns
    about whether the judge had provided adequate reasons for finding  that
    the respondent had displaced the burden imposed  on  her  by  paragraph
    321A, noted as I say the absence of any reference  to  the  appellant's
    daughter's evidence and questioned whether a failure  to  draw  to  the
    attention of the respondent an  incorrect  date  stamp  amounted  to  a
    representation, quite apart from whether it was a false representation,
    although there is as I remarked in the course of argument the fact that
    the decision includes a reference to non-disclosure  as   well  as  the
    positive making of a representation and that is part of paragraph 321A.

7.   The main points made on the appellant's behalf by  Mr  Doyle  are  that
    the judge failed to take account of what had been said by the Court  of
    Appeal in AA [2010] EWCA Civ 773 about the requirement  for  dishonesty
    and he also referred back in the first set of grounds to  the  decision
    of the Upper Tribunal in Ahmed [2011] UKUT 351 (IAC) which I will  come
    back to in a moment on this point, and  also  noticed  the  point  that
    there would be significant disadvantage to the appellant if the refusal
    were maintained.  That of course  cannot  go  to  the  quality  of  the
    decision, it is a matter really in passing.

8.   As I say, I think it is relevant to look at Ahmed because  this  brings
    to the fore the point about dishonesty and it is I think common  ground
    that no dishonesty has been  alleged in this case and the appellant has
    provided comprehensive evidence about her immigration  history  and  Ms
    Holmes, with characteristic fairness, really does no more than refer to
    the  fact  that  the   appellant   has   nothing   to   gain   by   any
    misrepresentation and that must I think be right.

9.   In the decision in Ahmed it is said in the head note:

         "In order to have made false  representations  or  submitted  false
         documents so as to attract a mandatory refusal under Part 9 of  the
         Immigration Rules an applicant  must  have  deliberately  practised
         deception as defined at paragraph 6. Failing to disclose a material
         fact is also classed as deception.  It follows  that  such  failure
         also requires dishonesty on the part of the applicant or by someone
         acting on his behalf."

10.  So it seems to me one can,  reading  this  across  to  paragraph  320A,
    conclude that dishonesty is a requirement whether it is a matter of the
    making of a false representation or a  non-disclosure  and  as  I  say,
    dishonesty has not been alleged in this  case.   As  a  consequence  it
    seems to me it must follow that the decision of  the  judge  concluding
    that the  appeal  against  the  paragraph  321A  decision  fell  to  be
    dismissed was fundamentally flawed.  It seems to me to follow logically
    from the absence of dishonesty in this case that  the  requirements  of
    the Rule are not made out.  The Secretary of State has  not  discharged
    the burden of proof incumbent upon  her  and  consequently  the  appeal
    falls to be allowed.

 Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

