
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/06529/2014


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 13 February 2015                  |On 6 March 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR Julius ONYEKA EPHI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant:     Mr N Owolabi, Solicitor
For the respondent:    M E Yufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department and the
    respondent is a citizen of Nigeria born on 20 May 1979. However for the
    sake of convenience I shall refer to Mr Ephi as "the appellant" and the
    Secretary of State as "the respondent" which are the designations  they
    had before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant appealed against the decision of the respondent dated  16
    January 2014 refusing his application for a  permanent  residence  card
    pursuant to regulation 10 of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the "EEA Regulations"). The appellant was issued with
    a residence card on 16 January 2009 as the  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national. On 20 August 2013, the  appellant  applied  for  a  residence
    card, claiming to have retained the right of  residence  following  his
    divorce from his EEA sponsor.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Somal allowed the  appellant's  appeal  under
    the EEA Regulations in a determination promulgated on 11 July 2014. The
    respondent appealed against the decision and permission to  appeal  was
    granted by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Appleyard on  11
    September 2014.

Findings of the First-Tier Tribunal

 4. The First-tier Tribunal made the following findings which  I  state  in
    summary.  The  appellant  has  provided  an  abundance  of  documentary
    evidence that points to the sponsor having exercising treaty rights  at
    the date of the appellant's and her divorce on 12 April 2014.  At  that
    time the sponsor was a qualified person as a jobseeker and  working  as
    well. This is reflected the two letters which have been produced  which
    show that her jobseeker's allowance was reduced to reflect  the  change
    in money given to her. Given the sponsor's employment history this  can
    reasonably be taken as income from earnings as a worker for at least 12
    months before the sponsor becoming a jobseeker.

 5. The appellant was honest and explained that after his divorce,  he  had
    found it difficult to obtain information from his sponsor. Because  the
    relationship ended, this is perhaps not surprising that she  could  not
    wish to hand over wage slips or anything that showed him how  much  she
    earned. Considering all the evidence in the  round,  his  EEA  national
    sponsor was exercising treaty rights at the point  of  divorce  and  at
    least from April 2011 beforehand. The appellant does  have  a  retained
    right of residence following the divorce and therefore  has  discharged
    his burden of proof and meets the requirements of regulation 10 (5)  of
    the 2006 regulations to be issued with a residence card.

Grounds of Appeal

 6. The respondent in her grounds of appeal states the  following  which  I
    summarise. The appellant has made a material misdirection in law  on  a
    material matter. At paragraph 7 of the determination  the  Judge  finds
    that the EEA national was exercising treaty rights as at  the  date  of
    divorce. Regulation 10 (5). The Judge however neglected to address  the
    fact that the appellant has totally failed to show that he has  been  a
    worker, self-employed person, self-sufficient person since the date  of
    the decree absolute of 12 April 2013. This failure amounts to an  error
    such as the decision should be set aside.

The Hearing

 7. At the hearing Mr Tufan said that he no longer relies on his grounds of
    appeal and concedes the appeal.




    Decision

    The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.



Signed by,

A Judge of the Upper Tribunal
..........................................
Mrs S Chana
                                                  This 6th day of March 2015

