
IAC-AH-VP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06976/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10 December 2014                             |On 29 December 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr RaChid zeroual
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr M Saleem, Counsel instructed by M & K
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing on Article 8  grounds  the  claimant's
    appeal against the decision by the Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  to
    grant him leave to remain on the grounds  of  long  residence,  and  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom as an illegal  entrant.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity  direction,  and  I  do  not
    consider that such a direction is required for these proceedings in the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a national of Morocco, whose date of birth is 21 August
    1978.  He claims to  have  entered  the  United  Kingdom  secretly  and
    illegally in December 1997.  On 25 November 2007  he  was  arrested  on
    suspicion of illegal entry, and taken to Charing Cross police  station.
    He told the police that his name was Abdo Shkouny, and gave his date of
    birth as being 21 or 22 July 1975.  He stated under  caution  that  the
    last time he entered the UK was in July  or  August  2007  at  Heathrow
    Airport, arriving from Tangiers.  On the same  day,  the  claimant  was
    fingerprinted and served with  a  form  IS15A,  informing  him  of  his
    liability to detention  and  removal.   The  form  was  served  on  the
    claimant in the name of Abdo Shkouny.  According to the IS minute sheet
    at section G of the Home Office bundle, the next day the claimant  told
    the police that he had given them incorrect details, and that his  true
    identity was that of Rashid Zeroual, with a date of birth of 23  August
    1978.  He was given temporary release to report to Becket House on  the
    same day, and then to be notified.  He was asked to provide evidence of
    identity, nationality and status when he reported, and the minute  said
    that his papers would be withdrawn in the event that he  did  not  have
    leave to be in the UK.

 3. On 26 September 2012 the claimant's solicitors applied  on  his  behalf
    for ILR under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.  They provided a
    different version of the claimant's immigration history than that which
    had been provided by the claimant to the police in 2007.

 4. The claimant was fingerprinted again on 11 December 2012,  and  it  was
    determined that he was the same person  as  the  person  who  had  been
    apprehended by the police on 20 November 2007, and served with an IS15A
    notice.  His details had changed slightly from  those  provided  on  26
    November 2007, in that his  first  name  was  now  spelt  "Rachid"  not
    "Rashid"; and his date of birth was now given as 21 August 1978.

 5. The claimant's application  for  leave  to  remain  on  long  residence
    grounds was refused  on  15  January  2014.   The  Secretary  of  State
    strongly disputed the claimant's of his immigration  history.  She  not
    only relied on the contents of his interview with the police, but  also
    on the fact that Home Office records  showed  that  a  visit  visa  was
    issued to a person named Rachid Zeroual with  a  date  of  birth  of  3
    October 1975 in December 2003.   There  was  also  another  visit  visa
    issued to a person of the same name (with a date of birth of 5  October
    1971) in January 2011.  Moreover the visit visa was  issued  in  Rabat,
    Morocco.

 6. In any event, paragraph 276B had  been  deleted  from  the  Immigration
    Rules in July 2012.  Even if his application was to be considered under
    this deleted paragraph in the  Rules,  he  had  failed  to  demonstrate
    fourteen years continuance residence in the UK.

 7. His application had been considered in line with  paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Rules on the basis of his implied private life.   But  he  had  not
    lived continuously in the UK for at least  twenty  years;  nor  had  he
    lived continuously in the UK for less then twenty years but had no ties
    (including, social, cultural or family) with the country  to  which  he
    would have to go if required to leave the  UK.   On  any  view  he  had
    resided in Morocco for the  majority  of  his  life,  and  it  was  not
    accepted he would have severed all ties  with  Morocco.   He  submitted
    several letters of support, implying that he had formed a private  life
    with friends here.  However, his presence in the UK was  not  essential
    for him to  enjoy  his  ties  with  his  friends.   We  could  continue
    relationships with his friends from overseas through modern channels of
    communication.  He considered all the circumstances in  the  particular
    case, he had not  provided  sufficient  evidence  which  might  justify
    allowing him to remain here exceptionally.  There were no  sufficiently
    compelling or compassionate circumstances to justify  allowing  him  to
    remain in the UK outside the Rules.  His application was  thus  refused
    under paragraph 322(1) of HC 395 as amended.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The claimant's appeal came before Judge Clough sitting at Hatton  Cross
    in the First-tier Tribunal on 8 August 2014.  Both parties were legally
    represented.  In his subsequent determination, the judge  accepted  the
    evidence given by the claimant and supporting  witnesses  that  he  had
    been continuously resident in the UK since 1997.  The judge applied the
    five point Razgar test.  In the issue  of  proportionality,  the  judge
    held as follows at paragraph 15:

         I find it would be disproportionate  to  that  end  to  remove  the
         [claimant].  This is because he has been in the UK since  1997  and
         has established himself both in his personal relationships  and  by
         working.  He has worked at entry level jobs such as kitchen porter,
         building and cleaning.  He obtained documents, albeit  false  ones,
         that allowed him to legally work and pay tax and  he  has  done  so
         since 2006.  The [claimant] has established his life in the UK.  He
         has  been,  and  is,  financially  independent  and  speaks  fluent
         English.   Even  taking  into  account  the  direction  in  Section
         117B(iv) of the Immigration Act 2014, in that little weight  should
         be given to a private life established while his immigration status
         was   unlawful   and   precarious,   I   consider   it   would   be
         disproportionate to remove him.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 9. A member of the  Specialist  Appeals  Team  settled  the  Secretary  of
    State's application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Having found that the claimant could not qualify for  leave  to  remain
    under the Rules, it was only if there might be  arguable  good  grounds
    for granting leave to remain outside the Rules would  it  be  necessary
    for the judge to proceed and consider  whether  there  were  compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them, applying Nagre  v
    The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).
     The judge had failed to identify any good grounds for  granting  leave
    to remain  outside  the  Rules  or  any  compelling  circumstances  not
    sufficiently recognised under them.  The fact  the  claimant  had  been
    illegally working with the use of fraudulent documents went towards the
    public interest in removing the claimant.  Reliance was also placed  on
    Nasim & Others  (Article  8)  [2014]  UKUT  0025  (IAC)  where  it  was
    recognised that Article 8 had limited utility  in  private  life  cases
    that were far removed from the protection of an individual's moral  and
    physical integrity.  In short, the First-tier Tribunal Judge materially
    misdirected himself in finding that removing the claimant  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with his private life.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

10. On 3 November 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy  granted  permission
    to appeal as it was arguable that  the  judge  had  given  insufficient
    reasons for concluding that it would be disproportionate to remove  the
    claimant, particularly in the light of his use of false  documents  and
    identity.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

11. At the hearing before me, Mr Melvin developed the arguments advanced in
    the grounds of appeal, and Mr Saleem mounted a  stout  defence  of  the
    decision.  He submitted that the judge's  approach  was  in  accordance
    with the relevant jurisprudence, including Patel & Others  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72, R On  the  Application
    of Ganesabaln v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWHC
    2712 (Admin) and R (On the Application of Halimatu SO Adiya & Others  v
    The Secretary of State for the Department [2014] EWHC 3919 (Admin).

12. After hearing extensive submissions from both parties on the  error  of
    law question, I ruled that an error of law was made  out.   I  gave  my
    reasons for so finding in short form, and my extended reasons  are  set
    out below.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

13. Rule 276ADE does not represent a complete code with regard to a private
    life claim under Article 8 because, unlike the deportation Rules, there
    is no "exceptional circumstances" provision.  But  it  comes  close  to
    being a complete code, and so some consideration of  why  the  claimant
    could not bring himself within Rule 276ADE was a necessary precursor to
    an adequate proportionality assessment outside the Rules.

14. Mr Saleem relied on the following passage in Lord Carnwath's speech  in
    Patel and Others at paragraph [54]:

         The most authoritative guidance on  the  correct  approach  of  the
         Tribunal to Article 8 remains that of Lord Bingham  in  Huang.   In
         the passage cited by Burnton LJ  Lord  Bingham  observed  that  the
         Rules are designed to identify those to whom "on  grounds  such  as
         kinship and family relationship  and  dependants"  leave  to  enter
         should be granted, and that  such  Rules  "to  be  administratively
         workable, require that a line be drawn somewhere".  But that was no
         more than a starting point for  the  consideration  of  Article  8.
         Thus in Mrs Huang's own case, the most relevant Rule (Rule 317) was
         not satisfied, since she was not, when the decision was made,  aged
         65 or over and she was not a widow.

15. Mr Saleem submitted that, by parity  of  reasoning,  Judge  Clough  was
    entitled to take the claimant's failure to satisfy the requirements  of
    Rule 276ADE as merely a starting point in his  freewheeling  Article  8
    assessment outside the Rules.  But the Rules under discussion in  Patel
    & Others were ordinary Immigration Rules, not the  family  and  private
    life Rules introduced in the  summer  of  2012  to  provide  an  almost
    complete code for Article 8 claims.  Thus, following Nagre, the failure
    by an applicant to bring himself within  the  family  or  private  life
    Rules is not merely a starting point in the Article 8  assessment.   In
    many cases it is dispositive of the Article 8 claim  in  its  entirety,
    and in those cases where it is not, the decision  maker  cannot  simply
    substitute his or her own view for that of the Secretary of State as to
    how the balance should be struck.

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses a  clear  error
    of law, as there is insufficient recognition in the  reasoning  process
    that in Rules laid before Parliament it has been decided  that  illegal
    entrants such as the claimant should not acquire  leave  to  remain  on
    long residence and/or private life  grounds  until  they  have  accrued
    twenty  years  unlawful   residence   (discounting   any   periods   of
    imprisonment).  The judge had to ask himself  what  it  was  about  the
    claimant's circumstances which justified him being  granted  Article  8
    relief outside the Rules, when he fell short of twenty  years  unlawful
    continuous  residence.   In  effect  the  judge  advanced  reasons  for
    granting the claimant relief which would be no different to those which
    would apply in the vast majority of cases to claimants who had  managed
    to remain here unlawfully for twenty years.

17. Moreover, the judge's reasoning was flawed as identified in the grounds
    of appeal.  The claimant had not worked legally, because  he  had  only
    been able to obtain work through the use of false  documents.   It  was
    also not the case that the claimant was  financially  independent.   On
    his own evidence, he had been reliant upon the charity of  friends  for
    his maintenance and accommodation since he  had  been  forced  to  stop
    working illegally in September 2013.

The Remaking of the Decision

18. On the issue proportionality, it is a consideration in  the  claimant's
    favour that he can speak English, and that he could probably find  work
    to maintain and accommodate himself if granted  permission  to  do  so.
    But his long residency here has been entirely unlawful, and  there  are
    aggravating features in the claimant's immigration offending.  He  used
    false documents to work illegally, and  he  gave  two  different  false
    names and identities to the police in November 2007 when arrested as  a
    suspected illegal entrant.  Although he gave what is now accepted to be
    his real name the following day, he never provided the police or the UK
    Border  Agency  with  sufficient  information  to  verify  his  claimed
    identity, thus frustrating the ability of UKBA or the  Home  Office  to
    remove him.  In any event,  although  not  expressly  provided  for  in
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act, the fact that the  claimant  was  put  on
    notice of his liability to detention and removal in 2007 means that  he
    had no legitimate  expectation  thereafter  of  acquiring  ILR  on  the
    grounds of long residence under the fourteen year Rule, let alone under
    the new twenty year Rule.

19.  In  conclusion,  I  find  that  the  decision  appealed   against   is
    proportionate to the legitimate  public  end  sought  to  be  achieved,
    namely the maintenance of firm and effective immigration controls.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the claimant's  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  ILR  on  the
grounds of long residence is dismissed under the Rules and also  on  Article
8 grounds outside the Rules.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.



Signed        Date 29 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

