
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/06116/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18 March 2016                         | On 7 April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between

                           MR BOLA SEGUN ADESANYA
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon, counsel instructed by Jein Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  MD
    Dennis (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  FTTJ),  promulgated  on  16
    September  2015,  in  which  he  dismissed  an   appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision, dated 14 January 2013, to  refuse  to  vary  the
    appellant's leave to remain and to remove her from the  United  Kingdom
    under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson
    on 15 February 2016.

Anonymity

 3. No direction has been made previously, and I see no reason for one now.

Background

 4. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom with leave to  enter  as  a
    Highly Skilled Migrant, valid from 17 May 2007 until 17 May 2009. On 14
    April 2010, he was granted further leave to remain until 14 April 2013.

 5. On 14 March 2013 the appellant applied for indefinite leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom on the basis of completing 5 years  residence  in
    the United Kingdom under Tier1. That  application  was  refused  on  14
    January 2013 on general grounds, namely paragraph 322(1A)  and  (2)  of
    the Immigration Rules. In essence, the Secretary  of  State  considered
    that false  documents  or  information  was  submitted  with  both  the
    previous application for further leave to remain as well as the current
    application.  The  reason  for  this  conclusion  was  that  while  the
    appellant had relied upon evidence of self-employed  earnings  in  both
    this and the previous application, following enquiries with HMRC it had
    become apparent that the appellant had submitted no self-assessment tax
    return or declared any income in  relation  to  self-employed  earnings
    from the tax years 2008-2009 until 2012-2013, inclusive.

 6. In his grounds of  appeal,  the  appellant  rejected  the  allegations,
    without addressing them in a substantial way.

The hearing before the FTTJ

 7. The FTTJ heard the appeal in the absence of  a  representative  of  the
    Secretary of State. Having heard  the  appellant's  oral  evidence  and
    considered the documentary evidence produced for the appeal,  the  FTTJ
    rejected the appellant's claim that he had not sought  to  deceive  the
    Secretary of State. The appeal was therefore dismissed under the Rules.
    There was no human rights claim before the FTTJ.

The grounds of appeal

 8. In essence, the grounds argued; (1), that there was a delay of  over  4
    months between the hearing and the date the decision  and  reasons  and
    that this had resulted in procedural  unfairness;  (2)  that  the  FTTJ
    materially misdirected himself as to the burden  of  proof  of  proving
    that false representations were made;  (3)  that  the  FTTJ  failed  to
    decide  a  material   matter,   that   of   whether   the   appellant's
    misrepresentation was dishonest; (4) the FTTJ  made  reference  to  the
    appellant's employed earnings, which was never in dispute; (5) that the
    FTTJ erred in concluding that it was implausible that the appellant, as
    a trained accountant, would  employ  a  bookkeeper  to  deal  with  his
    financial affairs; (6)  that  an  immaterial  consideration  was  taken
    account of, that of the appellant's declarations to HMRC; (7) the  FTTJ
    failed to adequately explain the legal basis for  concluding  that  the
    appellant's failure  to  declare  self-employed  income  precluded  its
    recognition for any other purpose and  (8)  the  FTTJ  had  erroneously
    dismissed the appeal on the basis of lack of documentation for an award
    of points, which was not a matter which was before him.

 9. FTTJ Nicholson granted permission, stating that it  was  arguable  that
    the decision was unsafe in relation to ground 1 alone. While permission
    was not refused on any ground, of the remaining grounds, FTTJ Nicholson
    commented, "some have little if any merit."

10. In her response of 22 February 2016, the respondent opposed the appeal,
    stating that the FTTJ directed himself appropriately. It was said  that
    the grounds failed to identify, with valid reasons, how  the  delay  in
    the promulgation of the decision materially affected  the  outcome.  In
    addition, it was argued that the FTTJ  had  provided  a  "plethora"  of
    reasons why the appellant was not believed.

The hearing

11. At the hearing before me, Mr Bramble indicated that  he  would  not  be
    able to provide any assistance as to what  transpired  at  the  hearing
    before the FTTJ because the respondent was not represented. He  further
    indicated that in his view there was merit  in  the  ground  concerning
    delay and that in his view, the FTTJ had not addressed the evidence the
    appellant had provided to the  respondent  with  his  applications  for
    further leave and had just focused on the tax return issue.  There  was
    potentially an appealable error.

12. Mr Solomon argued that the appellant's credibility  featured  large  in
    the appeal and that the case did not turn on the  documentary  evidence
    before the FTTJ.  He submitted  and  relied  on  the  determination  in
    Arusha and Demushi (deprivation of citizenship - delay) [2012] UKUT  80
    (IAC), with specific reference to paragraph 34, where a rule  of  thumb
    of 3 months  was  referred  to  where  credibility  was  involved.  The
    documentary evidence before the FTTJ was said to be  very  limited,  in
    that there had been no respondent's bundle at all and  very  little  in
    the appellant's bundle. Mr Solomon had been counsel before the FTTJ and
    he had made submissions in the same vein as in the grounds  of  appeal,
    however the submissions were not recorded  in  the  decision.  One  key
    submission was that the specified documents provided  in  the  previous
    applications were not found to be invalid or false

    Decision on error of law

13. The FTTJ made a series of negative  credibility  findings  against  the
    appellant. At [25] he describes him as  deceitful  and  also  that  his
    credibility was  compromised  by  a  number  of  aspects  of  his  oral
    evidence. Furthermore, I accept  that  the  submissions  summarised  in
    ground 1 of the permission application were made to the  FTTJ,  however
    the decision does not either set them out or engage  with  them.  Those
    submissions go to the core of the appellant's case.



14. In  view  of  the  delay  of  4  and  half  months  in  the  particular
    circumstances of this case, where credibility was in issue  and  fairly
    complex arguments were made on the appellant's behalf, I find that  the
    nexus between the delay  and  the  safety  of  the  decision  has  been
    established. I am not satisfied that the decision of the  FTTJ  can  be
    considered safe.



Conclusions


     The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
     making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision to be re-made.


     Directions





   . This appeal is remitted  to  be  heard  de  novo,  by  any  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge (except FTTJ Dennis).
   . The appeal is to be listed for a hearing at Taylor House..
   . Time estimate is 2 hours.




Signed                                       Date: 19 March 2016
T Kamara
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


















