
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06283/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 16th January 2015                         |On 29th January 2015          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          mr md. abdus sobhan sujel
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation, no appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On or about 27th November 2013 Mr Sujel made a combined application for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student and
    for a biometric residence permit.  On 17th January 2014 a decision  was
    made to refuse the application on the basis that no valid  Confirmation
    of Acceptance for Studies was produced. The decision was  appealed  and
    the matter came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cameron on 15th
    September 2014 sitting at Taylor House.

 2. On the Secretary of State's case there was  no  valid  Confirmation  of
    Acceptance for Studies ("CAS") assigned to the Appellant  at  the  time
    when a check was done on  17th  January  2014.  However,  evidence  was
    received by the First-tier Tribunal to the effect that a CAS  was  sent
    on that same date by recorded delivery to the Secretary  of  State,  in
    respect of a "CAS" issued on 10th January 2014.

 3. On the basis that Mr Sujel had a valid CAS assigned to  him  the  judge
    allowed the appeal.

 4. Not content with that decision, by Notice dated 10th October  2014  the
    Secretary of State made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The grounds submit as follows:

         "1.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  errs  in  concluding  that  the
             Appellant can satisfy the requirements of the Rules by relying
             on a CAS issued to him on 10th January 2014.

          2. The Appellant submitted his application on 27th November 2013.

          3. Paragraph 116(a) of Appendix A states:

                  '116.  A Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies will  only
                  be considered to be valid if:

                      (a)  it was issued no more than six months before the
                           application is made...' (emphasis added)

          4. The Respondent asserts that the CAS must be issued before  the
             application is raised.

          5. The Appellant seeks to rely on the CAS which was  issued  over
             six weeks after the application was submitted.  On this  basis
             the CAS is not valid in accordance with Appendix A.

          6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge should have dismissed the appeal
             on this basis.

          7. Permission to appeal is respectfully sought."

 5. On 28th November 2014 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Levin  granted
    permission and thus the matter comes before me.

 6. It was of course open to the Respondent, Mr Sujel to  attend  and  make
    representations or indeed to submit representations either  by  way  of
    'Rule 24 Notice' or otherwise.  As it was this matter was called on  at
    about 11:10am.  Mr Sujel did not attend.   Service  of  the  Notice  of
    Hearing was upon the Appellant at his last known  address.  Whilst  his
    previous solicitors had advised the Tribunal that they were  no  longer
    acting no other address for Mr Sujel was provided.

 7. As it is there simply is no answer to the point of law that is taken by
    the Secretary of State. Insofar as fairness falls to be considered I am
    reminded of what was said by Sales LJ in the case of EK (Ivory Cost) -v-
     Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1517  at
    paragraph 28:

         "The PBS is intended to simplify the  procedure  for  applying  for
         leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom in  certain  classes
         of case, such as economic migrants and students. This is to  enable
         the Secretary of State to process high volumes of applications in a
         fair  and  reasonably  expeditious  manner,  according   to   clear
         objective criteria. This is in the interests of all applicants.  It
         also assists applicants to know what evidence they have  to  submit
         in support of an application."

 8. Put simply there was a Rule that had certain requirements and Mr  Sujel
    did not meet them.  It was open to the Secretary of State to refuse the
    application.  She did so.  The point taken therefore by  the  Secretary
    of State is correct.  The judge materially erred in law  and  it  falls
    for me to remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The re-making

 9. There is as I have already said no answer to  the  point  of  law.   Mr
    Sujel did not meet the requirements.  No sufficient basis  is  advanced
    before me as to why the appeal in the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be
    allowed. In those circumstances the appeal falls to  be  dismissed.   I
    pause only to observe that the arguments advanced on behalf of Mr Sujel
    in the First-tier Tribunal set out in their  letter  of  27th  November
    2013 but sent to the Secretary of State makes reference to the case  of
    Rodriguez (flexibility policy) [2013] UKUT 00042. However by  the  time
    this matter came before the First-tier Tribunal was no longer good law:
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v Rodriguez [2014] EWCA  Civ
    2.

10. Although Mr Sujel raised the issue of human rights in  his  grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal no sufficient evidence was pointed to
    by or on behalf of Mr Sujel. He makes reference at one time  to  having
    been ill and to having expended considerable money in  pursuit  of  his
    education in the United Kingdom. I remind myself however that the right
    to education is generally regarded as a  weak  right  and  that  having
    regard to s. 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    there is in reality little that would favour a favourable  outcome  for
    this Appellant

Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  re-
    made such that the appeal of the First-tier Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed        Date 29th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

