

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/06317/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 3 May 2016                             | On 6 June 2016                  |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                            arwa abdalla hussain
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan, instructed by Citadel Immigration
Lawyers Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. At the end of the hearing I announced my decision  that  there  was  no
    error of law in  the  decision  and  reasons  statement  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge C Chapman that was promulgated on 23 September 2015.

 2. The appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  focuses  on  whether  Judge  Chapman
    ignored a concession made by the Presenting  Officer,  Mr  Khalfey  and
    thereby made findings of fact he was not entitled to make.

 3. Mr Kulong, who represented the appellant before Judge Chapman, provided
    evidence that Mr Khalfey conceded two issues  at  the  appeal  hearing.
    First, it is said he conceded the issue of relationship.  This had been
    disputed at the date  of  decision  but  subsequent  DNA  evidence  was
    sufficient for the Home Office to concede  this  point.   No  issue  is
    taken on this concession by either party.

 4. The second concession is said  to  have  related  to  the  question  of
    whether the appellant had provided satisfactory evidence  to  show  she
    had resided continuously in the UK in  accordance  with  the  2006  EEA
    Regulations.  Mr Kulong asserts that Mr Khalfey conceded at the hearing
    that if the appellant showed she did not need to meet the  requirements
    of regulation 8(2) as an extended family  member,  then  the  issue  of
    dependency disappeared and  no  other  issue  need  be  addressed.   Mr
    Khalfey denies making such a concession.  Mr Kulong and Mr Khalfey each
    provided witness statements supported by their notes  of  the  hearing.
    It is evident that there is a difference in what each recorded.

 5. Mr Mills did not seek to suggest that Mr Kulong was  lying.   He  (like
    myself) has known Mr Kulong for a number of years professionally and at
    most would suggest that Mr  Kulong  had  misunderstood  what  had  been
    discussed at the hearing.  I observed that I had also known Mr  Khalfey
    for a substantial period professionally as he  often  appears  for  the
    Home Office in appeals in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  is  equally
    likely that he may not have realised the impact  of  what  he  said  in
    discussions.

 6. Even though I cannot decide which  version  of  events  I  prefer,  two
    things stand out.  First, it falls  to  Mr  Kulong  to  show  that  his
    version of events is more likely than not to be true.  On the  evidence
    presented I can only find that  it  is  equally  likely  and  so  falls
    slightly short of the relevant standard of proof. Secondly, knowing the
    nature of appeal hearings, it is easy for an off the cuff  remark  made
    by one representative to be  given  unintended  weight  by  the  other.
    Where there is disagreement, it is more likely than not that there  was
    no agreement in the first place.  Of course  if  a  concession  is  not
    clear there is no concession.  For these combined reasons I  find  that
    the appellant has not  established  that  the  concession  claimed  was
    given.

 7. It follows that it was open to Judge Chapman to investigate the  issues
    of dependency and length of residence.  Although the structure  of  his
    decision and reasons statement is not entirely clear and might be  seen
    as conflating the two issues  and  possibly  confusing  the  issues  of
    whether the appellant was an  extended  family  member  rather  than  a
    relative in the direct line, when looked at as a whole his reasoning is
    clear.  There were  gaps  in  the  evidence  regarding  the  length  of
    residence and those gaps could not be filled by the oral  testimony  of
    the appellant or her mother because there were good  reasons  to  doubt
    the reliability of their testimony.  These findings were open to  Judge
    Chapman and since the appellant could not satisfy the  requirements  of
    the 2006 EEA Regulations regarding the issue of a  permanent  residence
    document her appeal had to be dismissed.

Decision

There is no legal error in  the  decision  and  reasons  statement  and  the
outcome is upheld.


                               Signed                     Date 6th June
                                   2016


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
