
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/06564/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 December 2014                  |On 31 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Maimoona Asif
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. B. Lams of Counsel (Direct Access).


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  A  W
Khan promulgated on 3 September 2014 allowing Ms Asif's appeal  against  the
Secretary of State's decision dated 15 January 2014 to refuse to vary  leave
to remain and to remove her pursuant  to  section  47  of  the  Immigration,
Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

Although before me the Secretary of State is the appellant and  Ms  Asif  is
the respondent, for the sake of consistency with the proceedings before  the
First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer to Ms Asif as the Appellant  and
the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

Background

The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on 2 January 1980.

The Appellant last arrived in the UK on 5 June 2011  accompanied  by  her  2
children (dates of birth 18 October 2008 and 31 July  2010).  The  Appellant
held entry clearance as the partner of a  Tier  1  (General)  migrant  valid
until  9  September  2012.  The  Appellant's  husband,  and  father  of  her
children, is Mr Malik Asif  Mahmood  (date  of  birth  28  March  1977).  Mr
Mahmood has been present in the UK with  leave  since  September  2004;  the
Appellant had held earlier entry clearance as a partner prior to June 2011.

On 5 September 2012 both the Appellant and  her  husband  made  applications
for leave to remain. The Appellant's husband applied  for  indefinite  leave
to remain  pursuant  to  paragraph  245CD  of  the  Immigration  Rules;  the
Appellant's application (in which her children were included as  dependants)
was made on the basis of her husband's application for settlement -  and  it
was indicated on her application form at paragraphs 2.1 and 3.15  that  such
an application had been made.

The Appellant's husband's application was  refused  on  11  April  2013;  no
decision was made in respect of the Appellant  by  the  Respondent  at  this
time.  The  Appellant's  husband  appealed  (ref.   IA/13423/2013).   In   a
determination promulgated on 23 October  2013  his  appeal  was  allowed  on
human rights grounds. In consequence the Respondent granted  him  30  months
exceptional leave to remain from 24 December 2013 until 23 June 2016. (I  am
told that he has since made a further application for  indefinite  leave  to
remain.)

On 15 January 2014 the Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application  for
reasons set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter  ('RFRL')  of  that  date,
and a Notice of Immigration Decision was issued. The RFRL  referred  to  the
grant of limited leave to remain to the  Appellant's  spouse,  and  on  that
basis it was determined that because he had not become a settled person  the
Appellant could not succeed under paragraph 286 of the Rules with  reference
to paragraph 284(ii). The application was also  refused  with  reference  to
Appendix FM of the Rules.

The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

Both the Appellant and her husband attended before the  First-tier  Tribunal
to give evidence: they each adopted  their  respective  witness  statements,
but  there  were  no  further  questions  in-chief  and   the   Respondent's
representative did not ask any questions in  cross-examination.  The  First-
tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal on human rights grounds  pursuant  to
Article 8 of the ECHR for reasons set out in his decision.

The Respondent applied for permission to appeal which was granted by  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Cheales on 21 October 2014.

Consideration

The Respondent's grounds in support of the  application  for  permission  to
appeal plead, with particular reference to the cases of Gulshan [2013]  UKUT
00640 (IAC) and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 Admin, that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge  had  failed  to  identify  compelling  circumstances  or  exceptional
circumstances that warranted  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the  Immigration
Rules.  Mr  Whitwell,  in  his  submissions,  emphasised   that   this   was
essentially a  challenge  to  the  proportionality  exercise  undertaken  by
Judge.

In amplification of the grounds of challenge Mr  Whitwell  argued  that  the
Judge erred in relying upon his own evaluation that the Appellant's  husband
would likely be granted indefinite leave to remain  in  circumstances  where
he had not yet even made such an application (paragraph  12).  It  was  also
identified and emphasised that there had in the past  been  a  period  where
the Appellant and her husband had involuntarily lived apart:  the  Appellant
had been residing in the UK with her husband in 2008, but  had  returned  to
Pakistan following the birth of their first child before  returning  to  the
UK in June 2011 (e.g. see at paragraph 11). Finally Mr Whitwell also  argued
that the Appellant and her husband could have had  no  reasonable  basis  of
expectation that they would be allowed to make a future home  in  the  UK  -
pleading by analogy the observations at paragraph 35 of  E-A  (Article  8  -
best interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 315 (IAC).

I do not accept this latter point. The parents in E-A had been students  and
as such had not been  granted  leave  in  a  capacity  that  might  lead  to
settlement, whereas  the  Appellant's  husband  herein  was,  as  a  Tier  1
(General) migrant, in a category that could potentially lead to  settlement.
Be that as it may, I am in any event not satisfied that  such  a  submission
as advanced by Mr Whitwell actually identified any error of law on the  part
of the First-tier Tribunal Judge rather than seeking to reargue the case  on
its merits.

Indeed, it seems to me that such a  criticism  is  apt  in  respect  of  the
Respondent's challenge to the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  more
generally. The history,  including  the  Appellant's  absence  from  the  UK
between 2008 and 2011 was a matter expressly referred to by  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge, and so cannot be said to be a  point  disregarded;  moreover
such  an  absence  is  not  in  any   way   determinative   of   where   the
proportionality balance should be struck  in  the  context  of  the  instant
appeal. Reference to it at this stage (i.e. before the Upper Tribunal at  an
'error of law' hearing), therefore, is no more than to raise an argument  on
the facts. Whilst it is the case that the Judge expressed a view as  to  the
likely outcome of any future application for indefinite leave to remain,  he
prefaced such an observation with the following - "I accept that it  is  not
possible to predict the outcome of the husband's application for  indefinite
leave to remain which he is entitled to make in September 2014".  The  Judge
thereby appropriately identified that he was taking into account  a  likely,
rather than a certain, outcome. In my judgement he is not to be  faulted  in
this regard.

Be that as it may and in any event it seems to me that  the  key  paragraphs
in the Article 8 decision are  13  and  14.  Paragraph  13  accedes  to  the
substance of, in  particular,  paragraphs  4.2  -  4.4  of  the  Appellant's
Skeleton Argument (a copy of which  is  on  file):  the  Appellant  and  her
husband had submitted their applications  at  the  same  time  in  the  same
envelope and yet they had been separated and dealt with differently  and  at
different  times  without  any  explanation  or  justification  ever   being
advanced by the Respondent; it was argued that  had  they  been  dealt  with
together the Appellant would have had her case considered alongside that  of
her husband (he  being  the  principal  applicant  within  the  family)  and
accordingly would likely  have  succeeded  pursuant  to  Article  8  as  the
dependent of her husband in his successful appeal. On the face  of  it  this
is an unusual circumstance that sets this case apart from the vast  majority
of cases involving a  family  unit.  Moreover  at  paragraph  14  the  Judge
identified factors that, in my  judgement,  adequately  justified  departure
from the usual requirements of the  Immigration  Rules:  essentially  it  is
indeed illogical that the Appellant and her children  be  expected  to  quit
the UK in circumstances where her husband has obtained exceptional leave  to
remain on Article 8 grounds and where if they were to be removed this  would
involve either a disruption of the mutual family life or the  husband's  own
abandonment of the private life established in the UK.

Accordingly, in all the circumstances I reject  the  Respondent's  challenge
to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  no  errors  of  law  and
stands.

Ms Asif's appeal remains allowed.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     28 July 2015
