

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/06728/2014
      IA/08097/2014
                                                               IA/08098/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 December 2014                           |On 21 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     LLB
                                    KMcC
                                     ELC
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr E Tuburu of Ty Arian Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).
   2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of  the
      First-tier Tribunal (Judge Doyle)  allowing  the  appellants'  appeals
      under Article 8 of the ECHR against refusals to extend their leave  to
      remain in the UK and to remove them under  s.47  of  the  Immigration,
      Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

   3. For convenience, I will refer to the parties as they  appeared  before
      the First-tier Tribunal.

Introduction

   4. The appellants are citizens of the USA.  The first  appellant  is  the
      mother of the second and third appellants.  The three appellants  were
      born respectively on 26 January 1983, 22 February 2007 and 26  January
      2006.  The second and third appellants are therefore 7 and 8 years old
      respectively.

   5. The first appellant entered the UK in September 2006  with  a  student
      visa and her leave was extended on a number of occasions  until  2009.
      By that time, the first appellant had entered into a relationship with
      a British citizen.  As a result, in 2009  she  was  granted  leave  to
      remain as the unmarried partner of that British citizen.

   6. When the first appellant came to the UK  in  September  2006  she  was
      accompanied by the third appellant who was then  aged  8  months  old.
      The second appellant was born in the UK in February 2007 and has lived
      in the UK since that time.

   7. The first appellant had a third child whilst living in the UK, ("KGS")
      who was born on 28 March 2009.  He is a British citizen.

   8. In September 2012, the first appellant's relationship with her British
      partner, who is the father of KGS, ended.

   9. In December 2012, the three appellants, together with  KGS,  travelled
      to France for a holiday.  On 1 January 2013, they sought  re-entry  to
      the UK.  In doing so, the first appellant told an Immigration  Officer
      that her relationship with KGS's father had come to an  end.   On  the
      basis of that information, the leave of each  of  the  appellants  was
      cancelled and each was granted leave to  enter  as  a  visitor  for  6
      months until 1 January 2013.

  10. On 30 May 2013, the three appellants  applied  for  limited  leave  to
      remain in the UK.  The first appellant relied on her relationship with
      KGS (who is a British citizen) and the  second  and  third  appellants
      relied on their relationship with the first appellant.

  11. On 16 January 2014,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  each  of  the
      appellants' applications.  As regards the first appellant,  she  could
      not meet the eligibility requirements in Appendix  FM,  R-LTRPT3.1  as
      she had leave as "as visitor".    Further,  she  could  not  meet  the
      requirements of paragraph 276ADE based upon her private life in the UK
      as she had not been in the UK for at least 20 years and had  not  lost
      all ties with her home  country.   Finally,  the  Secretary  of  State
      considered that there were no "exceptional circumstances"  to  justify
      the grant of leave under Article 8 outside the Rules.

  12. In relation to the second and  third  appellants,  their  applications
      under Appendix FM failed because the first appellant's application had
      been refused under Appendix FM.  Further, neither appellant  had  been
      in the UK for 7 continuous years at the date of  application  and  the
      Secretary of State considered that it would  not  be  unreasonable  to
      expect the second and third appellants to leave the UK as  part  of  a
      family unit.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

  13. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

  14. Judge Doyle concluded that none  of  the  appellants  could  meet  the
      requirements of Appendix FM or para 276ADE.  Those findings  were  not
      challenged before me.   However,  Judge  Doyle  allowed  each  of  the
      appellants' appeals under Article 8.

  15. The Judge's reasoning is set out in a number of sub-paragraphs at para
      15(a)-(n).  His decision rested, as he recognised in paragraph  15(a),
      "almost entirely on the welfare  of  the  first  appellant's  youngest
      child"- that is KGS.   It  was  accepted  that  there  was  a  genuine
      subsisting relationship  between  the  first  appellant  and  all  her
      children (i.e. the second and third appellants and KGS).  At paragraph
      15(b) Judge Doyle stated:

           "Family life exists because the appellants live  together.   The
           respondent argues that family life and private life can continue
           in the USA.  The essential flaw with the  respondent's  argument
           is that for family life to continue out-with the UK, it would be
           necessary for a British citizen to turn his back on the  UK  and
           live in the USA.  I do not know what is required  of  a  British
           citizen  to  secure  the  right  to  reside  in  the  USA.   The
           respondent  does  not  appear  to  have  considered  that,   and
           certainly offers no evidence of what is required."

  16. At paragraph 15(d) Judge Doyle concluded that:

           "The harsh fact  is  that  implementation  of  the  respondent's
           decision is likely to force separation on the appellants and the
           first appellant's youngest child..... "

  17. At paragraph 15(h), Judge Doyle referred to and cited  the  well-known
      decision in ZH (Tanzania) v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4  and  s.55  of  the
      Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 which  requires  that  a
      child's  best  interests  are  taken  into  account   as   a   primary
      consideration.

  18. At paragraph 15(i) and (j) Judge Doyle quoted  from  the  respondent's
      guidance and the headnote of the Upper Tribunal's decision  in  Sanade
      and Others (British Children - Zambrano -  Dereci)  [2012]  UKUT  0048
      (IAC) as follows:

           "(i)  It is not disputed that  the  first  appellant's  youngest
                 child is a British citizen.  The respondent's own  guidance
                 states (numbered paragraph 13)  "save  in  cases  involving
                 criminality, it will not be possible to take a decision  in
                 relation to the parent of a British citizen child where the
                 effect of that decision  would  be  to  force  the  British
                 citizen child to leave the EU - This is consistent with the
                 ECJ judgement in Zambrano".

           (j)   In Sanade  and  others  (British  children  -  Zambrano  -
                 Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC) the Tribunal held that Case
                 C-34/09 Ruiz Zambrano, BAILII: [2011]  EUECJ  C-34/09  "now
                 makes it clear that where the child or indeed the remaining
                 spouse is a  British citizen and therefore a citizen of the
                 European Union, as a matter of EU law it is not possible to
                 require the family  as  a  unit  to  relocate  outside  the
                 European Union or for the Secretary of State to submit that
                 it would be reasonable for them to do so. "

  19. At paragraph 15(g), having cited the House of Lords' decision if Beoku-
      Betts v SSHD [2008] UKHL 38, Judge Doyle noted that he was required to
      take into account not only the rights of the appellants  and  KGS  but
      also those of the first appellant's mother and sister who were British
      citizens living in the UK.  He said this:

           "...I weigh those interests against the need for the  respondent
           to preserve fair and effective immigration control and to keep a
           watchful eye on the fragile economy of  this  country.   I  find
           that there is no reason why a British citizen should  be  forced
           out of the UK; I can  only  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the
           respondent's decision is a  disproportionate  interference  with
           the  right  to  respect  for  family  life,  not  just  for  the
           appellants, but for their close British citizen relatives."

  20. That conclusion is then mirrored in the Judge's conclusions  at  paras
      15(m) and (n) as follows:

           "(m)  The appellants might be able to make an application to re-
                 enter the UK from abroad.  There is no guarantee  that  the
                 appellants would be granted entry clearance when they apply
                 to re-enter the  country  from  abroad.   The  respondent's
                 decision might separate the first appellant from her  young
                 son.

           (n)   I therefore find that article 8 is engaged.  I  find  that
                 consideration of the  first  appellant's  youngest  child's
                 welfare forms clear arguable grounds for  consideration  of
                 this case out-with the Rules.  The rights of the appellants
                 in  terms  of  Article  8  would   be   breached   by   the
                 implementation of the respondent's decision.  I  find  that
                 the breach amounts to a disproportionate interference  with
                 the appellants'  right  to  respect  for  family  life  and
                 private life."

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

  21. The Secretary of State sought  permission  to  appeal  the  First-tier
      Tribunal's decision on a number of grounds.  Permission was granted by
      the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Saffer) on 29  September  2014  on  the
      basis:

           "5... It is arguable that the Judge erred in his assertion  that
                 it was for the Respondent to establish whether the  British
                 child could enter the USA.  In  addition  it  appears  that
                 little consideration has been given to any interim  welfare
                 arrangements that may be put in place for the British child
                 (whose grandparents live here) during any period whilst the
                 appellants apply for entry clearance if they are removed."

  22. In his oral submissions, Mr Richards, who represented the Secretary of
      State submitted that the Judge had placed the burden of  proving  that
      KGS could enter the USA upon the respondent and that was an error.  It
      was for the appellant to produce any evidence.

  23. Secondly, Mr Richards submitted that the Judge had, in the absence  of
      such evidence, "leapt to the conclusion" that there was  a  breach  of
      Article 8 and had made no attempt to engage in the balancing  exercise
      of weighing the interests of the relevant parties against the need for
      fair and effective immigration control given that the appellants could
      not succeed under the Immigration Rules.

  24. On behalf of the appellants, Mr Tuburu submitted  that  there  was  no
      error of law as it was for the Secretary of State to  prove  that  KGS
      could reside in the USA.  In any event, he submitted that any error of
      law was immaterial.   He  submitted  that  on  the  basis  of  Sanade,
      applying Zambrano, it was simply unreasonable for KGS to  relocate  to
      the USA (in other words move outside the EU) with the  appellants  and
      that made the decision to remove the appellants disproportionate.   He
      accepted that it was necessary to apply  a  "reasonableness"  test  in
      leaving the UK.

Discussion

  25. Whilst the  Judge's  determination  could,  perhaps,  have  been  more
      clearly worded I have concluded that the decision does not contain any
      material error of law.

  26. First, I accept Mr Richards'  submission  that  it  was  not  for  the
      respondent to establish that KGS could secure entry to the USA.   That
      was a matter for the appellants (as in all other matters) to establish
      the facts upon which they relied.

  27. Secondly, however, that error was not material to the  decision.   The
      circumstances of KGS were such that the removal of the first appellant
      was inevitably disproportionate and a breach of Article 8.   In  those
      circumstances, and it was not suggested otherwise before  me,  removal
      of the second and third appellants would be equally  disproportionate.



  28. KGS is a British citizen.  In Sanade, the  Upper  Tribunal  stated  at
      point 5 in the headnote:

           "Case C-34/09  Ruiz Zambrano now makes it clear that  where  the
           child or indeed the remaining spouse is a  British  citizen  and
           therefore a citizen of the European Union, as a matter of EU law
           it is not possible to require the family as a unit  to  relocate
           outside the European Union or for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
           submit that it would be reasonable for them to do so."

  29. That is the passage set out by Judge Doyle at paragraph 15(j)  of  his
      determination.

  30. The Upper Tribunal in Sanade  also  made  clear  at  point  6  of  the
      headnote that:

           "The critical question is whether the child is dependent on  the
           parent being removed for the exercise  of  his  Union  right  of
           residence and whether removal of that parent  will  deprive  the
           child of the effective  exercise  of  residence  in  the  United
           Kingdom or elsewhere in the Union."

  31. The first appellant is KGS'  primary  carer.   The  first  appellant's
      removal would force KGS to leave the EU to be with  his  mother.   The
      circumstances,  therefore,  fell   squarely   within   the   situation
      contemplated in Sanade.

  32. Indeed, as the Judge's quotation in paragraph 15(i) illustrates,  that
      is indeed the  Secretary  of  State's  position  as  set  out  in  her
      guidance.  For example, the IDI "Family Migration: Appendix FM Section
      1.0B: Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and Private  Life:  10-year
      Roots" (November 2014) states at 11.23 under the rubric "would  it  be
      unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave the UK?":

           "Save in cases involving criminality, the  decision  maker  must
           not take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer
           of a British citizen child where the  effect  of  that  decision
           would be to force that British citizen child to  leave  the  EU,
           regardless of the age of that child.  This reflects the European
           Court of Justice judgement in Zambrano."

  33. The Guidance then goes on:

           "Where a decision to refuse  the  application  would  require  a
           parent or primary carer to return to a country outside  the  EU,
           the case must always be assessed on the basis that it  would  be
           unreasonable to expect a British citizen child to leave  the  EU
           with that parent or primary carer."

  34. The consequence is that:

           "In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave  to
           the parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the  UK
           with the child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence  of
           a genuine and subsisting parental relationship."

  35. The Guidance then goes on to deal with the exception to that approach:

           "It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave  where
           the conduct of  the  parent  or  primary  carer  gives  rise  to
           considerations of such weight as to justify the  separation,  if
           the  child  could  otherwise  stay  with   another   parent   or
           alternative primary carer in the UK or in the EU.

           The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:

               .  Criminality  falling  below  the  thresholds  set  out  in
                 paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules;

               . A very poor immigration history, such as where  the  person
                 has repeatedly and deliberately  breached  the  Immigration
                 Rules.

           In considering whether refusal may be appropriate  the  decision
           maker must consider the impact on the child of  any  separation.
           ...."

  36. There is no suggestion in these  appeals  that  the  exceptions  could
      apply.  There is no question of any criminality by  the  appellant  or
      that they have a poor, let alone a  very  poor,  immigration  history.
      They have always been in the UK with leave and,  indeed,  it  was  the
      first appellant's honesty on returning to the UK  on  1  January  2013
      that led to her leave as a partner being cancelled at port.

  37. The effect of the respondent's  own  guidance  is  that  it  would  be
      unreasonable to expect KGS to  leave  the  UK  which  is,  in  effect,
      precisely what Judge Doyle found.  The effect of removal would  be  an
      inevitable separation if the first appellant were  required  to  leave
      the UK and live in the USA with the second and third appellants.

  38. Given that this appeal was determined on 26 August 2014, it is perhaps
      curious that the Judge does not appear to have been  referred  to  the
      new Part 5A of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
      introduced with effect from 28 July 2014 by s.19  of  the  Immigration
      Act 2014.  The provisions in section 117A, 117B and  117D  applied  to
      these appeals (see YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292).

  39. Section 117A applies  Part  5A  to  a  consideration  of  the  "public
      interest question", namely whether any interference  with  a  person's
      right to respect for  private  and  family  life  is  justified  under
      Article 8.2 (see s.117A(1)-(3)).  In considering the  public  interest
      question, the court must, in the context of these decisions :

           "117A(2) ... (in particular) have regard -

           (a)   in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
           117B,..."

  40. Pertinent to these appeals is section 117B(6) which provides that:

           "In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the
           public interest does not require the person's removal where -

              a)  the  person  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, and

              b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
                 United Kingdom."

  41. A "qualifying child" means, for these purposes, a child under the  age
      of 18 who is a British citizen (see s.117D(1)).  KGS is, therefore,  a
      "qualifying child".  It is accepted that the  first  appellant  has  a
      "genuine and subsisting parental relationship" with KGS.

  42. Section 117B(6) states that: "The public interest does not require the
      person's  removal"  where  that  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
      relationship exists and "it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
      child to leave the United Kingdom" (my emphasis).

  43. As the Judge in effect found, applying both the respondent's  guidance
      and Sanade and Others, it would not be reasonable  to  expect  KGS  to
      "leave" the UK.  In those circumstances, the  public  interest  simply
      does not require the removal of the first appellant and by implication
      of course the second  and  third  appellants  who  are  her  dependent
      children.  It was, therefore, irrelevant whether KGS could  enter  the
      USA or not.  It is simply not reasonable to expect him to leave the UK
      to live in America even if he could enter the USA.

  44. In my judgement, Judge Doyle has, in effect,  applied  the  underlying
      policy of s.117B(6) and reached an entirely lawful decision consistent
      with the  respondent's  own  policy,  the  EU  jurisprudence  and  the
      legislative policy reflected in s.117B(6).

  45. Further, I reject Mr Richards' submission that the Judge "leapt to the
      conclusion" that Article 8 was breached.  Apart from failing to  refer
      to s.117B, to which he does not appear to have been referred by either
      representative, the Judge grasped the essential legal  framework.   He
      correctly saw the interests of KGS as being the crucial factor in  the
      appeal and he referred to the respondent's own  guidance  and  the  EU
      jurisprudence that it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  a  British
      citizen child (absent cases of criminality or the  like)  to  relocate
      outside the EU.  He also had regard to  the  interests  of  the  first
      appellant's family in the UK which, as his recitation of the facts  at
      paras 11(c)-(e) shows, includes her mother who is married to a British
      citizen and lives in the UK and is herself a British citizen.  Her two
      younger siblings are in the UK.  One is  a  British  citizen  and  the
      other has ILR and is married to a British citizen and has children who
      are British citizens.  Although the first appellant  has  grandparents
      in the USA, two aunties and two uncles and some younger  cousins,  the
      core of her close and immediate family reside  in  the  UK  either  as
      British citizens or with ILR.  These were, as  the  Judge  recognised,
      further powerful factors supporting his conclusion that the removal of
      the appellants would be a disproportionate interference with their and
      their close relatives' family life in the UK.

  46. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal did not materially  err  in
      law in allowing each of the appellants' appeals under Article 8 of the
      ECHR.

  47. Thus, the Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
      dismissed.






                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date: 20/01/2015


