
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/06259/2014
                                                               IA/06266/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 4th February 2015                 |On 10th March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                 mr Mohammad Atiqul haque (First appellant)
                    mrs saleha KHANAM (sECOND aPPELLANT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Thornhill
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants born on 1st March 1943 and 3rd April  1949  respectively
    are husband and wife and both citizens of Bangladesh.   The  Appellants
    were represented by Mr Thornhill.  The Respondent  was  represented  by
    Miss Johnstone a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. There was a substantial immigration history to this case, a summary  of
    which is  set  out  below  but  culminated  in  the  Appellants  making
    application on the basis that  their  removal  would  be  a  breach  of
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  The Respondent had refused that application  by
    refusal letter dated 20th January 2014  in  which  the  Respondent  had
    considered their position under the Immigration Rules, Article  3,  and
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. That decision had been appealed by the Appellants and  the  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Herwald  sitting  at  Manchester  on
    22nd May 2014.  He had dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules
    and under Article 8 of the ECHR.  Application for permission to  appeal
    was lodged on 12th June 2014 with lengthy Grounds of  Appeal  submitted
    by Mr Nicholson of Counsel.  Permission to appeal was refused by First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Kelly  on  29th  July  2014.   In  refusing  that
    application the judge had noted that the application was essentially  a
    running commentary upon  the  Tribunal's  determination  in  which  the
    author expresses his disagreement with weight that had been attached to
    various  factors  that  found  the  Tribunal  had  directed  itself  in
    accordance with the law and reached conclusions  that  were  reasonably
    open to it on the evidence.  The application was renewed to  the  Upper
    Tribunal in largely similar terms again  drafted  by  Mr  Nicholson  of
    Counsel and on 14th October 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein granted
    permission to appeal.  He indicated  that  without  wishing  to  unduly
    raise the Appellants' hopes he found the First-tier Tribunal  may  have
    made an error of law in  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  and  the
    grounds raised arguable issues as to whether he was entitled  to  reach
    the conclusions that he did and granted permission in respect of all of
    the grounds.  Directions were issued for the Upper Tribunal  to  decide
    firstly whether an error of law had been made  in  this  case  and  the
    matter comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 4. Mr Thornhill, an able and experienced immigration practitioner did  not
    adopt or associate himself with the lengthy Grounds of Appeal that  had
    hitherto been submitted.  That was an understandable approach taken and
    Mr Thornhill focused on specific matters that he  submitted  raised  an
    error of law.  Firstly he indicated that the judge may  have  used  the
    wrong threshold  where  he  referred  to  "exceptional  circumstances".
    Secondly he said the judge had failed to consider the evidence  of  the
    daughter-in-law and thirdly he said there was an over emphasis  on  the
    earlier judge's decision and insufficient regard to the position of the
    Appellants in respect of  their  relationship  with  the  grandson  and
    therefore an inadequate consideration of Razgar.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 5. Miss Johnstone submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision
    was entirely correct both  in  law  and  was  reasonable  and  in  part
    referred to the decision made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge who  had
    originally refused permission.

 6. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    submissions and evidence provided  and  I  now  provide  that  decision
    below.

Decision and Reasons

 7. The Appellants had been granted a two year  multivisit  visa  in  April
    2007 valid until 5th April 2009.  They had come to the UK in late  2007
    on those visas and had then returned  to  Bangladesh.   They  had  then
    returned to the UK in late 2008 on those same visas and shortly  before
    the expiry of those visas in March 2009 applied for indefinite leave to
    remain as dependent relatives of a settled  person.   That  application
    had been refused and they had appealed such decision and  their  appeal
    had been heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lowe on 13th November 2009.
     She had dismissed those appeals under both the Immigration  Rules  and
    under the ECHR.  The Appellants had become appeal rights  exhausted  on
    8th January 2010.  On 15th August 2012 the Appellants were served  with
    a notice of a person liable to removal.

 8. Thereafter there appears to have been  substantial  correspondence  and
    action taken on behalf of  the  Appellants  to  prevent  their  removal
    including the seeking of judicial review, the result of which prevented
    the  Respondent's  intent  to  remove  the  Appellants,  and  for   the
    Respondent  to  regard  previous  correspondence  and  submissions   as
    resulting in a fresh claim such  that  would  lead  to  the  Respondent
    having to reconsider the Appellants' claim and if  appropriate  provide
    an in-country right of appeal.  The Respondent  had  duly  reconsidered
    the Appellants' claim under the terms of the Immigration Rules, Article
    3 and Article 8 of the ECHR and had refused the Appellants'  claims  by
    letter dated 20th January 2014.  Removal directions had also  been  set
    dated 20th January 2014.  It was against that removal decision that the
    Appellants had brought their appeal before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Herwald who had heard that appeal on 22nd May 2014.

 9. The judge had noted at paragraph 2 of the decision  that  it  had  been
    conceded on behalf of the Appellants by Mr Nicholson that their appeals
    could not succeed under the Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  had  also
    noted at paragraph 13(b) that the Appellants did not seek  to  persuade
    the judge that their claim could succeed under Article 3  of  the  ECHR
    and to that extent the judge was focused  on  the  submission  made  on
    behalf of the Appellants, as recorded at paragraph 2  of  the  decision
    that there were exceptional circumstances that would lead the judge  to
    conclude that the appeal should succeed under Article 8 of the ECHR.

10. The judge had  properly  noted  that  the  Appellants'  case  had  been
    previously decided on appeal in  November  2009  by  Immigration  Judge
    Lowe.  He had noted at paragraph 8 of the decision  that  both  parties
    had referred him to the previous determination made in respect  of  the
    Appellants.  In that same paragraph  the  judge  had  correctly  stated
    "Insofar  as  it  is  relevant  I  indeed  take  that   (the   previous
    determination) as  my  starting  point".   The  judge  was  correct  in
    identifying the principles  set  out  in  Devaseelan  insofar  as  that
    previous determination was concerned.  That previous decision was based
    on the Respondent's refusal to allow the Appellants' application  under
    paragraph 319 of the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.
     To the extent that the earlier judge  was  therefore  looking  at  the
    financial and personal circumstances of the Appellants and perhaps more
    particularly their claim under Article  8  of  the  ECHR  that  earlier
    decision  was  clearly  an  important  starting  point  for  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herwald.  Indeed at  paragraph  22  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Herwald had stated:

         "My starting point in this appeal must be  the  decision  of  Judge
         Lowe insofar as it has not been altered by intervening events.   Of
         course that decision was dealing with the old Immigration Rules but
         there are certain striking findings in the decision."

11. The previous judge had heard evidence from the first Appellant and  the
    Sponsor son and  had  reached  conclusions  upon  the  consistency  and
    credibility of the evidence that had been provided before him  in  2009
    in  terms  of  the  Appellants'  circumstances   in   Bangladesh,   the
    composition of the family both in Bangladesh and in the UK, the medical
    health of the Appellants and the dependency or  otherwise  between  the
    Appellants and the Sponsors  in  the  UK.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Herwald had, within his decision, quoted and referred to extracts  from
    the earlier decision in terms of the circumstances and findings made by
    the judge in November 2009.  He was entitled to make such references to
    the earlier decision and the findings contained therein.

12. At paragraph 26 he had indeed stated "I cite this  decision  at  length
    because I find that the personal circumstances  of  all  concerned  had
    changed little in the interim despite some unacceptable  delay  by  the
    Respondent to which I shall refer later".

13. However the judge had not stopped at that point but  correctly  and  in
    terms of Devaseelan had referred himself to what had changed since that
    earlier decision had been made. He had  at  paragraphs  27  and  28  in
    summary reminded himself of the changes since  that  earlier  decision.
    He had noted, quite obviously, that both Appellants were now older.  He
    had noted the medical condition of  the  Appellants  and  had  referred
    himself to the medical reports contained within the Appellants' bundle.
     He had noted as  had  the  previous  judge  that  although  the  first
    Appellant had had a heart attack that  had  occurred  in  2002  several
    years before he applied for settlement in the UK  and  that  the  first
    Appellant had had medical treatment in Bangladesh with  fees  paid  for
    several years prior to his application for settlement in  the  UK.   It
    had also been noted by the previous judge  that  given  the  historical
    nature of that heart attack and circumstances generally it could not be
    said that the application for settlement shortly after the  Appellants'
    arrival on a visit visa had been prompted by a  deterioration  of  that
    health.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Herwald  had  also  noted  from  the
    medical reports that the first Appellant  was  well-mediated.   He  had
    also noted  that  the  other  change  in  circumstance  was  that  both
    Appellants now had diabetes but both were well controlled by medication
    or by diet, both of which was readily available in Bangladesh.  Finally
    he had noted that  the  Appellants  had  developed  closer  and  warmer
    relationships as one would expect with their family and  in  particular
    the 6 year old grandson.

14. Set against the clear findings made by Judge Lowe  in  2009  which  had
    examined  in  detail  the  background  of  the  Appellants  and   their
    circumstances  in  Bangladesh  prior  to  coming  to  the  UK,  it  was
    reasonable for Judge Herwald to have concluded that in reality  and  in
    summary the only change to the  Appellants'  circumstances  were  those
    summarised in paragraphs 27 and 28 of his decision.  It is  clear  that
    in reaching those findings he had looked beyond  the  original  judge's
    decision  and  had  considered  the  evidence  presented   within   the
    Appellants' bundles as he clearly  indicated  at  paragraph  5  of  his
    decision.

15. This was not a case where  the  judge  had  placed  undue  or  unlawful
    emphasis upon that earlier decision.  He was entitled to look carefully
    at that earlier decision because the application then concerned  as  it
    was in large part with Article 8 of the ECHR was precisely  the  matter
    that was before him for consideration.  Secondly the  earlier  decision
    gave a detailed background and account of the Appellants' circumstances
    in Bangladesh prior to coming to the UK and  the  relationship  between
    family members.  Further as parties had  given  oral  evidence  at  the
    earlier appeal hearing and had had that evidence tested, Judge  Herwald
    was entitled to take as a starting point the findings  reached  by  the
    judge in respect of that evidence.  It is also clear however as  stated
    above  that  he  had  properly  in  accordance  with  the  guidance  in
    Devaseelan gone beyond the earlier decision and examined the  available
    evidence before him and  had  thereafter  considered  and  set  out  in
    summary form the changes in circumstances since that  earlier  decision
    that would require him to go beyond that finding.

16. It was submitted that the judge had failed to consider the daughter-in-
    law's evidence.  In the  previous  appeal  hearing  evidence  had  been
    provided by the first male Appellant and  the  Sponsor  son.   On  this
    occasion the decision taken by the  Appellants  presumably  with  legal
    advice was that again only the male Appellant gave evidence and on this
    occasion the Sponsor  son  did  not  give  evidence  but  evidence  was
    provided by the Sponsor daughter-in-law.  It  was  also  noted  by  the
    judge at paragraph 13F that he did not  even  have  a  written  witness
    statement from the second Appellant.  It  is  clear  however  that  the
    judge had before him and had considered the written witness  statements
    of the first Appellant and the Sponsor daughter-in-law.  The judge  had
    also made it clear at paragraph 5 that he had heard the  oral  evidence
    of the Appellant and Sponsor daughter-in-law  and  had  set  out  their
    evidence in the Record of Proceedings and  that  had  been  taken  into
    account together with submissions and the documentary evidence.  It  is
    not incumbent upon a judge to recite within a decision all the evidence
    provided in a case and to do so  often  creates  unnecessary  long  and
    laborious decisions.  In this instance the  judge  had  summarised  the
    Appellants' claim including the evidence from  the  daughter-in-law  at
    paragraph 13A to F in his decision.  That was sufficient and  there  is
    no evidence to suggest that the judge had not taken full regard of  the
    daughter-in-law's evidence.  Indeed an  analysis  of  the  daughter-in-
    law's written statement indicates that in reality there were only three
    paragraphs that dealt with  her  observations  of  the  health  of  the
    Appellants and that which she did for them.  Essentially that  appeared
    to be she checked that the  Appellants  had  a  correct  diet  and  she
    provided them with  meals.   She  referred  to  the  closeness  of  the
    Appellants to her son and provided as an example the fact that her  son
    attended the local mosque each week needing no encouragement to  go  if
    he was aware that the first Appellant was also attending.   In  summary
    therefore there was not a substantial body of evidence presented by her
    and no evidence to suggest the judge had not taken  proper  account  of
    her written and oral evidence.

17. It was submitted that in terms of an examination of Article 8 the judge
    had adopted the wrong test or threshold.

18. The judge had firstly found  that  the  Appellants  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules making such  findings  additional
    to the fact that it was conceded on behalf of the Appellants they could
    not meet  the  Immigration  Rules.   At  paragraph  20  the  judge  had
    specifically noted that Article 8 required  further  consideration  and
    set out at paragraph 20 the relationship between the Immigration  Rules
    and Article 8.  In that paragraph the judge had given  in  summary  his
    understanding of that relationship.  He stated:

         "I bear in mind that where the Immigration Rules and  the  learning
         on Article 8 are in harmony the answer given  by  the  Rules  might
         render   further   enquiry    unnecessary    outwith    exceptional
         circumstances.  I note that after applying the requirements of  the
         Immigration Rules only if there may be arguably  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised by the Rules.   The  term
         'insurmountable obstacles' in the Rules are not  according  to  the
         case of Gulshan obstacles which are impossible to surmount."

19. That is a fair and clear  assessment  of  consideration  of  Article  8
    outside of the Rules and that was a matter clearly in the judge's mind.
     The judge at paragraph 20 had further noted:

         "As the higher courts continue to tie themselves in  knots  on  the
         subject  of  Article  8  I  have  to  decide   on   the   practical
         possibilities of relocation.  In the absence of such  obstacles  it
         is necessary to show other  non-standard  and  particular  features
         demonstrating that  removal  would  be  unjustifiably  harsh  Nagre
         [2013] EWHC 720."

20. The judge perhaps discloses some exasperation that following the advent
    of the changes to the Immigration Rules in  July  2012  there  has  not
    necessarily been  a  clear  consistent  formula  to  assist  judges  in
    determining Article 8 outside of the Rules despite the passage of  time
    and  the  substantial  volume  of  cases  that  are  appealed  on  this
    particular matter.

21. As noted above the judge clearly had in his mind all the  circumstances
    of the Appellants' case including the circumstances and  findings  made
    by the earlier judge and the circumstances that existed thereafter.  He
    had taken into account the best interests of  the  grandson  (paragraph
    29) and he had further taken account of delays in this  case.   He  was
    right to refer to delays caused by the Home  Office  but  he  was  also
    right to note that not only had the  Appellants  failed  to  return  to
    Bangladesh when  they  became  appeal  rights  exhausted  in  2010  but
    thereafter the various means by  which  they  had  used  the  Appellate
    system in order to remain in the UK.  That view of the judge,  inherent
    within paragraph 29 of his decision resonates  with  the  view  clearly
    expressed by the earlier judge as to the attitude  and  intent  of  the
    Appellants and their Sponsors in the decision made in 2009.  The  judge
    was entitled therefore at paragraph 30 that having carefully considered
    the line of cases  including  Gulshan  he  was  not  persuaded  it  was
    necessary for him to look outside of the Immigration Rules.  The  judge
    stated "Whatever jargon or legal language one uses there are simply not
    exceptional circumstances here".   The  use  of  the  term  exceptional
    circumstance in that context does not demonstrate an error of  law.   A
    variety of phraseology is used in case law which may or may not  amount
    to the same thing but there is nothing  to  indicate  this  experienced
    judge did not apply the proper approach.  Indeed at  paragraph  31  the
    judge made clear that even if he had gone on to consider Article  8  he
    did not find circumstances such that he would depart from the  findings
    of the  earlier  judge  to  the  effect  that  such  removal  would  be
    disproportionate.  At paragraphs 31 and 32 he  essentially  in  summary
    form performed a "Razgar" five stage test.

22. In summary as properly noted by the judge who refused  the  application
    for permission to appeal, the judge's  findings  were  lawful  and  the
    conclusions reached by him reasonable on  the  evidence  available  and
    there was no material error of law made in this case.

Notice of Decision

No error of law was made by  the  judge  in  this  case  and  I  uphold  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 10th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

