
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06287/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 March 2015                              |On 27 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE MALES
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Malik ADEEL ABDULLAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Dhanji, Counsel, instructed by Maalik & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Kimnell dated 27 October 2014 which  allowed  the  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision dated 8 February 2013 refusing to issue a
    residence card as confirmation of a right of residence  under  European
    Community law to Mr Malik Abdullah as the spouse  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom. The sole  issue  before
    the First-tier Tribunal was whether Mr Abdullah's marriage  to  an  EEA
    national was a genuine marriage or a marriage of convenience.

 2. Mr Abdullah entered the United Kingdom on a visit visa which was  valid
    until July 2005 and has since been here without leave.  He  married  an
    EEA national, a lady speaking Slovak with a Carpathian Romani  dialect,
    on 10 September 2012 and applied for his residence card on  6  December
    2012. The application was refused on 8 February 2013 on the basis  that
    the marriage was one of convenience.

 3. It was accepted by the Secretary of State that the  appellant  and  his
    wife resided together at the same address but there were  a  number  of
    concerns suggesting that the marriage might be one of convenience. Both
    had a limited knowledge of English, raising a question about  how  they
    could  communicate  with  each  other  effectively.   Their   interview
    transcripts revealed inconsistencies which suggested to  the  Secretary
    of  State's  officials  that  the  couple  were  not   in   a   genuine
    relationship.  For  example  there  were  differences  about  who   had
    completed the application form, about how they had met, where  marriage
    had been proposed, and what had been said in the proposal. Mr  Abdullah
    also had incomplete knowledge about where his wife had lived in Europe.
    There were different accounts about what they did after the wedding and
    a difference as to the purchase of wedding rings in the accounts  which
    they gave. It  was  moreover  considered  to  be  suspicious  that  the
    marriage had taken place just ten days after  a  visit  by  Immigration
    Officers on 31 August 2012.

 4. Other contradictions concerned information  about  their  knowledge  of
    each other's birthdays, when and where they last went out together  and
    Mr Abdullah's knowledge of body piercings which his wife had which were
    plain to see in wedding photographs. From all  this  the  Secretary  of
    State concluded that the marriage was one of convenience.

 5. That led to an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal in which  all  of  the
    matters to which we have just referred were set out.

 6. Against those matters it was found by the First-tier Tribunal that  the
    appellant and his wife had a daughter together. That was shown not only
    by her birth certificate but by DNA analysis confirming that the  child
    was the daughter of both of them. There were two visits unannounced  by
    enforcement officers. One was  the  visit  to  which  we  have  already
    referred, at the end of August 2012. The other was on 31 July 2014.  On
    both occasions Mr Abdullah and his wife (although  they  were  not  yet
    married on the first occasion)  were  found  living  together.  On  the
    second occasion the child was there as well.  That  appeared  to  be  a
    genuine arrangement. In addition there were documents relating  to  the
    same address in which both Mr  Abdullah's  name  and  his  wife's  name
    appeared.

 7. On the basis of that evidence the First-tier Tribunal  determined  that
    the appeal should be  allowed  on  the  basis  that  the  marriage  was
    genuine. We return to his reasoning shortly.

 8. There are two grounds of appeal.  The second, which was to  the  effect
    that the judge had applied the wrong test for the  standard  of  proof,
    was not pursued by Mr Clarke  (representing  the  Secretary  of  State)
    before us this morning. He recognised that the judge had indicated that
    it made no difference in his view as to whether the standard  of  proof
    was the balance of probabilities or a different test.

 9. The sole ground remaining  for  decision  is  that  the  judge  made  a
    material error of law in failing to follow the guidance in the case  of
    Papajorgji (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience)  Greece  [2012]  UKUT
    38  (IAC)  which  deals  with  the  burden  of  proof  in  marriage  of
    convenience cases. What that case decides is that  although  the  legal
    burden of proof is on  an  applicant  to  show  that  the  marriage  is
    genuine, there is "no burden on an applicant in an EU  case  until  the
    respondent raised the issue by evidence. If there was such evidence  it
    was for the applicant to produce evidence to address these suspicions."
    The quotation is from paragraph 20  of  the  decision  referring  to  a
    previous case which the Upper Tribunal upheld in the Papajorgji case.

10. In this case the reasoning of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  follow
    that approach and in that respect contained  an  error  of  law  as  Mr
    Dhanji (representing Mr Abdullah) recognised. The question  however  is
    whether that error is material in the circumstances of this case.

11. What the judge said was this at paragraph 30:

         "The burden in this case is on the respondent to establish that the
         marriage is one of convenience. The respondent has  not  discharged
         the burden. The conflicting answers recorded at the interviews  and
         rehearsed in the refusal letter certainly give strong  grounds  for
         suspicion but against that  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  have
         established that they have been living together for some  time  and
         indeed they have a child together. DNA evidence confirms that  they
         are the parents."

12. The judge went on refer to the evidence showing that the evidence about
    the couple living together was reliable. He added at paragraph 32  that
    "There is no getting away from the fact  that  the  couple  do  have  a
    child" and concluded at paragraph 33:

         "Against  that  background  the  answers  at   interviews,   whilst
         suspicious, are not  sufficient  to  prove  the  respondent's  case
         whether one imposes the standard of a balance of  probabilities  or
         even a somewhat higher test than that, given that some duplicity is
         being alleged here."

13. The judge's statement that the burden in this case was on the Secretary
    of State to establish that the marriage  was  one  of  convenience  was
    wrong if by that he was referring, as it looks as if  he  was,  to  the
    legal burden of proof.  Rather, the approach should have been as in the
    Papajorgji case that the  legal  burden  was  on  Mr  Abdullah  as  the
    applicant for a residence card and that once suspicions were raised  as
    they were it was for him to satisfy that burden. The standard to  which
    he was required to do so was the normal civil standard  of  balance  of
    probabilities.

14. However, despite the error in the judge's statement as to the burden of
    proof, it is clear that he was alive to all of the suspicious  features
    of the appellant's interview and that of his wife and  to  the  various
    factors relied upon by the Secretary  of  State  for  saying  that  the
    marriage was a marriage of convenience. He took all  of  those  matters
    into account but it is clear from the way he expressed  his  conclusion
    that he regarded the facts that the couple were living together at  the
    same premises, that that  was  not  an  artificial  arrangement  but  a
    genuine one, and that they had a child together  as  outweighing  those
    suspicious  features.  In  the  light  of  that   he   concluded   that
    notwithstanding the suspicions the marriage was genuine.

15. In those circumstances it seems to us that the error in the way that he
    stated the burden of proof is not material. Notwithstanding that error,
    on a fair reading of the decision it is clear that the judge's view was
    that despite  the  existence  of  strong  grounds  for  suspicion,  the
    marriage was genuine and subsisting. This was not a case of  the  judge
    fastening on a limited factor or one sole feature of the case.  In  our
    judgment despite the error which we have identified, the judge did give
    due attention to all the  circumstances  of  the  case  and  reached  a
    conclusion which was open to him on the evidence.

16. For those reasons this appeal is dismissed.


NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 18 March 2015

Mr Justice Males

