
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06995/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27 July 2016                           |On 26 September 2016             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE MAY DBE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                         mr selva kumar boominathan
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of Mr Boominathan against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mrs Morris who dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision of 4 February 2015 refusing him leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

2.   We do not think it is necessary to go into his immigration  history  as
    the point that is made in the end is a fairly  short  one.   The  judge
    concluded that on the evidence the appeal had to fail because  although
    he had been given an opportunity to find  an  alternative  sponsor  and
    submit a valid CAS, none has  been  forthcoming  therefore  the  appeal
    required to be dismissed and there were no matters  arising  under  the
    Human Rights Convention which  the  judge  thought  gave  rise  to  any
    concern and therefore the appeal was dismissed on all bases.

3.   Grounds of appeal put in on Mr Boominathan's behalf said amongst  other
    things that he did not receive a 60 day letter from  the  Secretary  of
    State and therefore had no knowledge of  the  scheduled  60  days  time
    period and therefore it was wrong to refuse under  paragraph  245ZX  of
    the Immigration Rules.

4.   Thankfully the matter came into the  hands  of  an  industrious  judge,
    Judge Landes, who commendably looked into the file in some  detail  and
    found that in fact it was the case that an application  had  been  made
    with a new CAS. She found this  at  Appendix  A1  of  the  respondent's
    bundle and we find the application was made on  4  February  2014  date
    stamped as received by, we take it, the respondent on 6  February  2014
    and this has a different CAS number and a  different  sponsor  and  she
    considered the consequence that it was  arguable  that  the  judge  had
    erred in failing to take into account that the appellant Mr Boominathan
    had varied his application and overlooked the new CAS details which  he
    had provided.

5.   We found at E1 the  letter  of  5  December  2013  which  is  what  was
    referred in  short  and  termed  as  the  60  day  letter  sent  to  Mr
    Boominathan, likewise as to when it was received is unclear since after
    the fresh application was made a variation application was made but  we
    can pass by that.  It is clear from the second page of  this  that  the
    specific period was given: the letter says "if you decide  to  continue
    studying in the United Kingdom then you have 60 days in which to find a
    new sponsor, obtain a CAS and submit an application  to  vary  this  60
    days will end on 4 February 2014".

6.   This says nothing about the date of receipt and it  seems  to  us  that
    the only sensible interpretation that can be made of this is that if an
    application was made before close of play on 4 February 2014  then  the
    requirements of the letter of 5 December 2013 would have been  met  and
    that is exactly what Mr Boominathan did or was done on his behalf.  The
    application was made on 4 February 2014, not received until 6  February
    2014, but as we say that is by  the  way  but  the  respondent  in  the
    meantime had sent out her decision letter of 4  February  2015  on  the
    basis that the old CAS was  ineffective  because  the  college  was  no
    longer a Tier 4 Sponsor.  He had been given 60 days to obtain a sponsor
    and had not provided a new CAS within the period.   In  fact  as  seems
    clear to us that had been done within the  terms  of  the  respondent's
    letter of 5 December 2013.

7.   Accordingly there was a mistake by the respondent and a mistake by  the
    judge and exactly these problems  were  identified  by  the  judge  who
    granted permission.  As a consequence we agree with Mr  Avery  when  we
    asked him about the disposal of this appeal, that the  appeal  must  be
    allowed on the basis that the decision was unlawful and the matter will
    have to go back to the Secretary of State to make a decision on the CAS
    that was put in by Mr Boominathan  on  4  February  2014  and  if  that
    decision is against him that that would potentially generate a  further
    appeal right..

8.   The appeal is allowed.  The matter is to go back to  the  Secretary  of
    State for a decision on the fresh application.

Notice of Decision

9.   The appeal is allowed.

10.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date

The Hon. Mrs Justice May
