

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/06234/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 23 July 2015                       |                On 14 August 2015    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                             MR JUSTICE KNOWLES
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MR ALI RAZA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Turner (for appointed Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Secretary of State appeals  against  a  decision  of  First-Tier
       Tribunal Judge Nightingale promulgated on  11  December  2014  ("the
       Decision").  The  Judge  allowed  Mr  Raza's  appeal  on  Article  8
       grounds.  Permission to appeal was granted on  27  January  2015  by
       First-Tier Tribunal Judge Zucker on the basis that the appeal raised
       a question of law relating to the proper construction of the meaning
       of the term "genuine and subsisting parental relationship".





Decision and reasons


    2. On 23 July 2015, the  matter  came  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
       determine whether the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  involved  the
       making of an error of law.  On that occasion, Counsel  for  Mr  Raza
       who was briefed  to  attend  was  taken  unexpectedly  ill  and  was
       replaced at short notice by Mr Turner.  Mr Turner indicated that  he
       may be able to assist the Tribunal depending on  the  ambit  of  the
       issues but recognised that if the issue was one of wider  importance
       he may not feel able to do so and he also needed to consider whether
       to proceed would be in his client's best interest given the lack  of
       time for him to prepare. Additionally, the interpreter who had  been
       booked for the hearing was unable to stay to the  afternoon  and  it
       would not  have  been  appropriate  to  expect  Mr  Turner  to  make
       submissions any earlier than the afternoon.  There was also an issue
       about whether the Tribunal would have sufficient time  available  to
       hear the case during the afternoon.  Accordingly,  the  hearing  was
       adjourned.

    3. By letter dated 4 August 2015, the Secretary of State indicated that
       she wishes to withdraw her case on the basis that,  having  reviewed
       her grounds  alongside  the  documentary  evidence,  she  no  longer
       considers that there is any basis on which to pursue the case.   She
       therefore seeks the Tribunal's consent pursuant to Rule  17  of  the
       Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to withdraw her case.



I hereby give consent to the withdrawal of the Secretary  of  State's  case.
The Secretary of State's appeal is therefore dismissed. The  consequence  is
that there is no longer any challenge to the First-Tier Tribunal's  Decision
and the First-Tier Tribunal's Decision stands.


Signed      [pic]Date        10 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


