
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06464/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 February 2016                          |On 8 April 2016               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   Mr Aman
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kumar, Legal Representative, Capital Solicitors
LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I refer to the Appellant as the Secretary of State and the  Respondent
      as the Claimant in this appeal. The Claimant applied for further leave
      to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student on  30  August  2014  and  his
      application was refused by the Secretary of State on 3 February  2015.
      The application was refused on the basis that the Claimant  failed  to
      meet the requirements of paragraph 245ZX(d). He was  not  awarded  the
      points for maintenance because he had submitted a bank letter  in  the
      name of his parent or legal guardian but it was not accepted that this
      was  evidence  of  funds  because  he  had  provided  no  evidence  of
      relationship to this person.


   2. The Claimant appealed that decision and that appeal was dealt with  on
      the  papers  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holder.  In  a  decision
      promulgated on 1 September 2015 he concluded that the Claimant had  in
      fact demonstrated that Vijay Laxmi was his mother.  He  came  to  this
      conclusion on the basis of documentary evidence in the form of  an  ID
      card bearing the name of the mother and an  affidavit  from  her.   He
      noted that the Claimant had never had a birth  certificate.   He  took
      into account the documents and concluded  that  the  relationship  was
      proved.


   3. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that  decision  and
      the grounds set out that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  direct
      himself in relation to the requirements of Rule 13(ii) of  Appendix  C
      and it was only by reference to that Appendix that the Claimant  could
      satisfy the requirements of 245ZX(d).  The required evidence  was  set
      out in paragraph 13B(a) and was limited to  a  birth  certificate;  an
      adoption certificate or a court document naming the applicant's  legal
      guardian. It is asserted in the grounds that the  affidavit  submitted
      was not a court document as required.  It is also said that the  Judge
      was in error in failing to reconcile or address the  fact  that  there
      was a discrepancy with regard to the date of birth on  the  Claimant's
      passport and the Election Commission card.


   4. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Frankish  on  the
      basis  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  ignored   the   statutory
      evidential requirements under 13B (a)  for  the  purposes  of  meeting
      245ZX(d), namely that a birth or adoption certificate or  other  court
      document must be submitted.  Furthermore there was a contradiction  in
      the dates of birth between two documents.


   5. The appeal now comes before me and I conclude that  having  regard  to
      the requirements of Appendix C, paragraph 13 that the Claimant did not
      provide the requisite documentation with his application. The forms of
      evidence  that  were  provided  were  not  sufficient  to   meet   the
      requirements of the Rules and the First-tier Tribunal was in error  in
      concluding that they were. As the Appellant was relying on funds  from
      his parent and the parent had provided consent that the funds  may  be
      used, he was required to  provide  a  birth  certificate  or  a  Court
      document naming  his  legal  guardian  and  a  letter  confirming  the
      relationship and that consent was given to use their funds to study in
      the UK (paragraphs 13 (ii) and 13B (a) and (b) of Appendix  C).  There
      is no discretion under Appendix C to allow any other form of  evidence
      to be adduced.  The requirements are strict and in circumstances where
      an appellant is unrepresented he is required nevertheless  to  produce
      the  correct  documentation.   If  the  evidence  does  not  meet  the
      requirements of the Rules that is the end of it.


   6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of
      law. I therefore set it aside. This is a points-based application  and
      therefore governed by s85A of  the  2002  with  regard  to  admissible
      evidence. In Ahmed and Another (PBS: admissible evidence) [2014]  UKUT
      365 (IAC) the Tribunal held that the purpose of section 85A  Exception
      2 is quite clear.  Where  a  Points  Based  application  is  made  and
      refused, the assessment by the Judge is to be of the material that was
      before the decision-maker rather  than  a  new  consideration  of  new
      material. In other words the appeal if it  is  successful  is  on  the
      basis that the decision-maker with the material before him should have
      made a different decision, not on the basis that a  different  way  of
      presenting the application would have produced a different decision.


   7. It is clear from  the  discussion  above  that  the  evidence  of  his
      relationship with his mother did not meet the requirements of Appendix
      C of the Immigration Rules and the appeal must therefore be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did contain a material error of  law
and I set it aside.

I re-make the decision dismissing the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
