

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06935/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 2nd September 2013                         |On 3rd September 2013        |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                              OLUWASEGUN BAKER

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Young, solicitor, instructed by Sunrise
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant appeals a  decision  of  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Vaudin  d'Imecourt  who  dismissed  an  appeal  by  him  under  the
        Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds  against  a  decision
        made on 12th February 2013 to  refuse  to  vary  leave  to  remain.
        Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Zucker on the ground that there was an arguable error of law in the
        Judge of the First tier Tribunal's finding that  the  decision  was
        not disproportionate.


     2. Permission to appeal had been sought on the  grounds,  in  essence,
        that the judge  had  fundamentally  misunderstood  the  appellant's
        evidence as regards the appellant's  knowledge  of  the  procedural
        requirements for his variation  application;  that  the  First-tier
        Tribunal had speculated  as  to  the  appellant's  ability  or  non
        ability to pay his academic fees;  that  there  was  no  supporting
        evidence that the appellant had been hospitalised  as  claimed  and
        that the appeal was not covered by CDS  Brazil  [2010]  UKUT  00305
        (IAC); that the judge had given weight  to  irrelevant  matters  in
        determining the appeal namely the intention to return to  his  home
        country or pursue a PhD.  Permission was refused on the  first  two
        grounds but granted on the basis that  it  was  arguable  that  the
        First-tier Tribunal had failed to adequately consider the appeal in
        terms of CDS given that  the  judge  appeared  not  to  have  taken
        account of evidence produced by the appellant with regards  to  his
        hospitalisation and medical condition. Judge Zucker did not reach a
        decision on the final ground.

     3.  The  appellant  had  not  sought  to  renew  the  application  for
        permission to appeal the first two grounds save that before  me  it
        was submitted that  the  skeleton  argument  amounted  to  such  an
        application. I was not provided with any explanation for the  delay
        in submitting such an application or with an application to  extend
        time. I refuse permission to extend time. Even if  I  had  extended
        time and admitted the application I would have  refused  permission
        to appeal:

        a. Ground 1 amounts to no more than a disagreement with the  First-
           tier Tribunal judge's findings that the appellant had  not  been
           entirely candid in his evidence and  that  the  explanation  the
           appellant had given with regards to his failure  to  submit  the
           requisite financial evidence was not accepted;
        b. In so far as ground 2 is concerned the judge had found  that  at
           the date of application to the respondent for a variation he did
           not meet the requirements of the Rules but had  paid  the  fees;
           the issue of fees was for future fees payable which were as  yet
           undetermined  according  to  the  appellant  at  the  First-tier
           Tribunal hearing. There is nothing in this ground.
        c. In any event s85A Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002
           makes clear that evidence adduced after the  submission  of  the
           application (as in  this  appeal)  may  only  be  considered  in
           accordance with the circumstances as set out in s85A(4). It  was
           not submitted that such circumstances apply in this appeal.  The
           appellant does not meet the requirements of the Rules in so  far
           as  maintenance  is  concerned  and  the  appeal  falls  to   be
           dismissed. There is no error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal
           judge's determination as regards meeting the criteria under  the
           Rules.


     4. The First-tier Tribunal judge did not  have  the  medical  evidence
        before him when he reached his decision however the letter from the
        University of Birmingham  did  refer  to  the  appellant's  medical
        condition and granted the appellant an extension of time  in  which
        to complete his course. Mr Young submitted that the failure of  the
        First-tier Tribunal judge to take proper cognisance of the  medical
        issues tainted the finding as regards the application  as  a  whole
        and thus in accordance with CDS the appeal should be allowed.  That
        submission however fails to take  account  of  the  fact  that  the
        appellant does not meet the maintenance requirements of the  Rules;
        his medical condition changed the  nature  of  the  application  in
        terms of it being a request for an extension of  time  to  complete
        the course rather than an extension for a fresh  course.  Alam  and
        Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ
        960 makes clear that the Rules are to be  complied  with.  CDS  pre
        dates the legislative change which was addressed by Alam.  Although
        invited by me to make submissions as to the relevance  of  Alam  Mr
        Young said that the issue in this appeal was of  human  rights  and
        thus the evidence was clearly admissible and the outcome,  had  the
        First-tier Tribunal judge been fully aware of the  evidence,  might
        have been different.


     5. Article 8 does not exist in order to circumvent the requirements of
        the Immigration Rules. The presence of medical factors does not  in
        any way mitigate the failure to comply with the requirements of the
        Rules in so far as maintenance is concerned.  Although  the  First-
        tier Tribunal judge appears to have been  unaware  of  the  medical
        evidence that was produced via the  Birmingham  University  letter,
        had he been so aware the outcome would have been  the  same,  given
        s85A and Alam.

          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside the decision

         ]







                                    Date 2nd September 2013
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
