
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/06403/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 26th September  2013                         |On 1st October 2013        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                            MR SHAIKH RUBEL MIAH
                         (Anonymity Order not Made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim (Instructed by SEB Solicitors)
For the Respondent:  Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant against a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Andonian) promulgated on 15th July  2013  by  which  he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    him leave to remain as the victim of domestic violence.

 2. My first task is to decide whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an
    error of law and if so whether and to  what  extent  the  determination
    should be set aside. Mr Karim addressed me on the  grounds.  The  first
    ground asserts the Judge erred in refusing to adjourn the  appeal.  The
    Appellant did not attend the oral hearing  of  his  appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal  and  the  Judge  was  informed  that  he  was  not
    (mentally) well enough to attend to give oral evidence. In refusing the
    application for an adjournment the Judge took into account  that  there
    was no up-to-date medical evidence about his state of health in support
    of  the  request.  The  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  opposed  the
    application. It is clear therefore the First-tier Tribunal was entitled
    to refuse the request on the basis of the lack of evidence.  Before  me
    Mr  Karim  did  not  seek  to  argue  that  point  but  challenged  the
    phraseology used by the Judge in refusing the  adjournment.  The  Judge
    says at paragraph 5:-

         "The Home Office Presenting Officer opposed the adjournment and  so
         did I."

    It is those last three words which are the  subject  of  challenge.  Mr
    Karim argued that they give the impression of  bias.  I  disagree.  The
    wording may be unfortunate but is simply expressing that the Judge  was
    not prepared to adjourn the case. The Judge goes on to state that there
    was no medical evidence indicating the Appellant was  unfit  to  attend
    nor was there any evidence as to when he might be  fit  to  attend.  He
    noted the claim that his mental state appeared to fluctuate  from  time
    to time meaning it was  not  possible  to  obtain  appropriate  medical
    evidence.  The  Judge  was   entirely   justified   in   those   highly
    unsatisfactory circumstances to  refuse  the  adjournment.  I  entirely
    reject the assertion that it indicates bias on the part of the Judge.

 3. The second ground that  Mr  Karim  relied  upon  has  more  force.   He
    referred to the Judge's findings on credibility. This is a  case  where
    the Appellant came to the UK as  a  spouse  and  who  claims  that  his
    marriage broke down as a  result  of  domestic  violence.  He  had  not
    reported the abuse to the police but had produced a significant  amount
    of documentary evidence that he says supports his claim. Mr Karim  took
    me through the determination to various aspects  where  the  Judge  had
    either misinterpreted, misunderstood or  simply  failed  to  take  into
    account the documentary evidence. One example is where the  Judge  said
    that there was no evidence before him that the  Appellant  presented  a
    suicide risk. Indeed he specifically states that the GPs evidence  does
    not support that claim where it is clear from the GP's letter  that  it
    does refer to it. Another aspect is the Judge's reference to  the  lack
    of evidence about the Appellant's wife's having brought  boyfriends  to
    the house to threaten him. The Judge suggests that there is no evidence
    about that but it is clearly referred to in various documents.

 4. The Judge also makes reference to Counsel failing to ask any  questions
    of the witnesses about various matters. In so doing he  has  failed  to
    take into account that it is not the role of the Appellant's Counsel to
    cross- examine his witnesses about matters that are  contained  in  the
    statement. That is the role of the Home Office Presenting Officer.

 5. I agreed with Mr Karim that the Judge's examination of the evidence  in
    this appeal fell short of the accuracy and care that is required  which
    rendered his findings against the Appellant as to his being a victim of
    domestic abuse unsafe. Given that is the  core  of  what  the  case  is
    about, I agree the determination should be set aside with  no  findings
    preserved. While not conceding, Mr Tufan acknowledged that  there  were
    difficulties with the determination.

 6. Mr Karim argued that as the determination had been set  aside  with  no
    findings preserved the appeal ought to be remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. I did not find that appropriate. It cannot be said in my view
    that the Appellant did not have a proper hearing before the  First-tier
    Tribunal. It is what the Judge did in the  determination  that  was  in
    error and it is to  protect  an  Appellant  from  that  that  there  is
    provision for an onward appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  I  therefore
    indicated my intention to carry on and redecide the matter.

 7. The Appellant and those representing him had  been  put  on  notice  by
    Directions issued by the Principal  Resident  Judge  that  they  should
    prepare for the hearing before the Upper Tribunal on the basis that, if
    the Upper Tribunal decided to set aside the determination of the First-
    tier Tribunal,  any  further  evidence,  including  supplementary  oral
    evidence, that the Upper Tribunal may need to consider if it decides to
    remake the decision, can be so considered at  that  hearing.  There  is
    also a Direction concerning  the  need  to  make  application  for  the
    admission of any  additional  evidence.  In  this  case  no  additional
    evidence has been filed nor any Rule 15 application made.  Despite  the
    Appellant and his family's presence in court Mr Karim made  clear  that
    he had no  intention  of  calling  oral  evidence.  That  was  somewhat
    surprising given the adjournment request before the First-tier Tribunal
    was specifically  to  allow  the  Appellant  the  opportunity  to  give
    evidence. Nevertheless it is a  matter  for  the  Appellant  and  those
    advising him whether he gives evidence or not.  It is also a matter for
    them  whether  to  submit  additional  and  more  up-to-date  evidence.
    However I am entitled to take its absence into account.

 8. I heard submissions from Mr Tufan and Mr Karim. Mr Tufan relied on  the
    detailed Letter of Refusal and argued that this is not a credible claim
    and the Appellant is not a victim of domestic violence.  It  is  to  be
    noted that his claim was made just before his leave to  remain  was  to
    expire and all of the "so-called evidence" stems from that  period  and
    there is nothing earlier than November 2012. He pointed out that  there
    is no direct evidence of domestic violence and  no  tangible  objective
    evidence that that was why the marriage broke down. All of  the  third-
    party evidence relates to matters that persons have been  told  by  the
    Appellant. He acknowledged that in the light of Ishtiaq [2007] EWCA Civ
    386 there is no requirement for specific evidence  to  be  adduced  but
    there is no satisfactory reason in this case why there should not  have
    been evidence from the police. He also noted that despite assertions of
    physical abuse there is no  medical  report  or  evidence  of  physical
    injury.

9.     Finally, in relation to Article 8 Mr Tufan said  that  the  Appellant
    had been in the UK only for a short period of time. He has no  credible
    family life and there is no reason why he should be permitted to remain
    in the UK when he had been allowed to enter purely on  the  base  of  a
    marriage which no longer subsists.

  10. Mr Karim in his submissions reminded me that I needed  to  assess  the
      evidence cumulatively  and  referred  me  to  the  various  pieces  of
      evidence from third parties and submitted that  those together  should
      satisfy me  that   the  Appellant  is  indeed  a  victim  of  domestic
      violence. So far as Article 8 is concerned Mr Karim  argued  that  the
      responsibility the Appellant has for the care of  his  elderly  mother
      does  amount  to  family  life  as  there  is  additional  dependency.
      Additionally he has a relationship with his brother and three  nephews
      and thus is also entitled to succeed on Article 8 grounds.

  11. The Appellant's case, as set out in his statement of 27th  June  2013,
      is that his marriage, which was an arranged marriage,  took  place  in
      Bangladesh on 23rd December 2009. Initially he  and  his  wife  had  a
      loving and caring relationship and he came to the UK on  2nd  November
      2010 as a spouse. He was given a period of leave  until  14th  January
      2013.

  12. The Appellant says that he had been suffering from low  mood,  anxiety
      and depression and that  he  was  unable  to  respond  well  and  give
      consistent statements about all the incidents over the last two  years
      as he could not recollect a lot of the events. He stated  his  unhappy
      marriage and torture from his wife  were  the  main  reasons  for  his
      present medical condition.

  13. In his statement the Appellant claims that his wife started  torturing
      him in June 2011. She took all of his income from his  weekly  salary.
      She threw things at him such as classes and cups. He then refers to  a
      family meeting with a member of his wife's family and a member of  his
      to try and resolve matters. However, matters were not resolved and his
      wife continued to beat him each night. She pulled his hair  and  swore
      at him. The Appellant's brother and brother-in-law met  again  without
      success.

  14. The Appellant says that he and his wife moved in with  his  mother  in
      October 2011 where they remained for 13  months  until  15th  November
      2012. He says that he was desperate to save his marriage and therefore
      avoided reporting matters to the police despite  the  fact  that  many
      people and organisations advised him to do so. He says  that  on  15th
      November 2012 his brother took him to his home  telling  his  wife  to
      leave. He says that his wife used to bring her boyfriend to the  house
      (the  Appellant's  mother's  house)  to   threaten   him   despite   a
      relationship which was not allowed in their religion. The  Appellant's
      physical and mental torture was unbearable to him and by this time  he
      had already developed various forms  of  mental  illness.  The  couple
      therefore separated when she left his mother's home on  15th  November
      2012.

  15. The Appellant also claimed that despite his crying to  see  his  frail
      father in Bangladesh, his wife had hidden his passport so he could not
      visit.

  16. He then says that he took legal advice in January 2013 and as a result
      made the application, the subject of  this  appeal  with  accompanying
      evidence from councillors and friends and acquaintances who knew about
      the family situation.

  17. There is a witness statement from the  Appellant's  brother  who  says
      that he is giving a witness statement because the Appellant is  unable
      to give a good account because he suffers from various forms of mental
      illnesses e.g. low mood, anxiety and depression and he says  that  his
      unhappy married life and torture from his wife were  the  reasons  for
      that medical condition.

  18. The brother says that the Appellant told him in around July or  August
      2011 that his wife had been torturing  him  for  a  month  taking  his
      income and throwing things at him. He says that they arranged a family
      meeting when  his  sister-in-law  said  it  would  not  happen  again.
      Unfortunately it did. He confirms that the couple then moved  in  with
      the Appellant's mother in October  2011  and  remained  there  for  13
      months. He confirms that on 15th November 2012  he  arranged  for  his
      brother to move to his  house  and  instructed  his  sister-in-law  to
      leave. He refers to having heard that she had a boyfriend who she used
      to threaten his brother despite the relationship not being allowed  in
      their religion.

  19. The brother also talks about having heard that this  woman's  previous
      husband had had difficulties with her and that had been the reason for
      the breakdown of that marriage. He, the brother claims, telephoned him
      and told him that he had had a heart attack after two years of torture
      at her hands.

  20. For the reasons given above the Appellant did not give  oral  evidence
      at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  but  his  brother,  the
      author of that statement did. The only significant matter in his  oral
      evidence over and above this statement was he confirmed  that  he  had
      not seen any bruises on his brother.

  21. There was no other oral evidence nor any other witness statements.

  22. I now set out the documentary evidence relied upon. The first document
      is a letter from the Appellant's GP. It is signed by Dr  Rachel  Hines
      of the James Wigg practice in Kentish Town. It is dated 25th  February
      2013 and addressed to the Appellant's representatives in response to a
      request from them. The GP  says  it  is  written  with  the  patient's
      consent. The GP says at paragraph 4 of that letter the following:-

         "Thank you for your letter about Mr Mia (sic). There is mention  of
         suicidal thoughts in his records; however, I am not  aware  of  any
         suicide attempts.

         He has been seen regarding his depression and anxiety.  He  saw  my
         colleague on 14th  December  when  he  described  a  very  negative
         relationship with his ex-wife. He was unhappily married for a  year
         and he had moved from Bangladesh to be with her  here,  it  was  an
         arranged marriage. He said she would call up  boyfriends  while  he
         was there  and  said  if  he  ever  told  anyone  about  the  other
         relationship she would get some of her male friends to attack  him.
         He reports that she regularly threw things at him and also verbally
         abused him. They had separated for three months prior to  this  and
         he reported nightmares and flashbacks and very low mood."

  23. The next document is a letter from Mohammed Joynal Uddin, the chair of
      West Euston Partnership, dated  18th  February  2013  and  written  in
      response to a  request  from  the  Appellant's  representatives.  West
      Euston Partnership is said to be a registered charity. Mr  Uddin  says
      the following:-

         "I confirm that Mr Miah did tell me  that  his  wife  was  mentally
         torturing him. I also confirm that I  attempted  to  mediate  their
         differences by having  a  discussion  with  her  brother  Mr  Anwar
         Hussain at his restaurant but was unsuccessful.

         I further confirm that Mr Miah reported to me  that  he  was  being
         mentally tortured and I am aware that he informed his  doctor  that
         he was contemplating suicide.

         I also confirm that his marriage did break down  in  November  2012
         because of this torture."

  24. The next document is from Cllr Pat Callaghan,  Councillor  for  Camden
      Town and Primrose Hill in the London Borough of Camden. In her  letter
      dated 18th December 2012 she says this:-

         "Mr Miah has since separated from his wife, as he was a  victim  of
         domestic violence. He suffers from depression as a  result  of  the
         mental harassment and domestic violence he suffered at the hands of
         his wife.

         Mr Miah attended my surgery with his family  on  several  occasions
         and made complaints to me  about  his  marital  affairs.  On  these
         occasions I asked him to  seek  help  with  professionals  for  his
         wife's then erratic behaviour. He tried to make  a  go  of  it  and
         failed. For the last six months Mr Miah has lived in Greenland Road
         with his immediate family. He is presently employed in the catering
         in the catering (sic) industry at Monsoon's, 24 York Rise, London.

         As a local Councillor for Camden Town in Primrose Hill ward, I have
         known the Miah family in Greenland Road for 10 years and Mr  Shaikh
         for two years. He is a good character and is very supportive of the
         family and mother who resides with them. His mother  is  physically
         frail with hypertension and diabetes. She has lost the sight in one
         eye and he helps care for her. He also looks  after  three  nephews
         while Mrs Begum (Miah), his sister-in-law is at work.

         I would request that you look at  Mr  Miah's  case  sympathetically
         when considering his application."

  25. The next document  is  a  letter  to  the  Appellant  from  the  Right
      Honourable Frank Dobson MP and dated 10th December 2012 which reads as
      follows:-

         "Further to your visit to my advice service last Friday evening,  I
         confirm that my office has today spoken to your  solicitor  at  SEB
         Solicitors Limited. My office explained to your  solicitor  that  I
         had only met you on one previous occasion -Friday 2 November - when
         you reported that you had suffered physical harm at  the  hands  of
         your ex-wife. Of course, if you continue to suffer such abuse,  you
         must immediately report this to your local police. My  office  also
         explained to your solicitor that, as I do not know you, I am unable
         to provide knowledge about your character."

  26. There is then a letter from  Camden  Psychological  Therapy  Services,
      part of Camden and Islington NHS Foundation Trust, dated 30th November
      2012 addressed to the Appellant indicating that the author, a  Primary
      Care Mental Health Worker, had been asked to contact the Appellant  by
      his GP regarding her services  for  guided  self-help  which  involves
      helping patients to develop techniques to cope with low mood, anxiety,
      stress or other common psychological difficulties. The letter asks the
      Appellant to contact her if he wishes her assistance.

  27. The next document is from Camden and Islington  NHS  Foundation  Trust
      dated 3rd June 2013 enclosing copy medical records. These also  relate
      to matters in November 2012 and indicate that the Primary Care  Mental
      Health Worker met with the Appellant by  telephone  in  late  November
      2012 when he expressed  having  daily  suicidal  thoughts  and  having
      nothing to live for. He also indicated he was not sleeping  at  night.
      He reportedly became tearful.

  28. There is another entry on 14th December 2012 relating to  a  telephone
      conversation between the Primary Care Mental Health Worker and the  GP
      practice, the  GP  having  seen  him  that  day  and  carried  out  an
      assessment of his mental state. He was reported to  be  having  fairly
      regular suicidal thoughts although had not  identified  any  plans  to
      carry  them  out.  He  talked  about  being  abused  in   a   previous
      relationship both verbally and physically and  that  his  partner  had
      been in other relationships at the same time.  There was a  suggestion
      that he may need assistance with PTSD in the future.

  29. The next document is a report by the Primary Care Mental Health Worker
      to the GP practice confirming what had previously been said.

  30. There is a letter dated 25th April 2013 from NAFSIYAT,  Inter-cultural
      Therapy Centre. This is a letter to  the  Appellant  offering  therapy
      which his GP had indicated he might appreciate.

  31. The next document is written by the Bengali Workers Association and is
      dated  19th  February  2013  indicating  that  the   Chair   of   that
      organisation was aware that Mr Miah was trying  to  put  his  marriage
      back on track.

  32. There is then a letter from another Councillor, Cllr Abdul  Quadir  of
      Bloomsbury Ward of  the  London  Borough  of  Camden  and  dated  20th
      November 2012. He reports that the Appellant saw him and told him that
      he had come to the UK in November 2010 and separated after  two  years
      due to domestic  violence  and  that  as  a  result  he  suffers  from
      depression. He indicates that  the  Appellant  was  staying  with  his
      brother at that time who he knew very well and he also knew  his  late
      father very well and that they were a reputable family in Bangladesh.

Findings

  33. I do  not  find  that  the  evidence  in  this  case  establishes  the
      Appellant's marriage broke down as a result of domestic  violence  for
      the following reasons.

  34. The Appellants statement indicates that his wife's  behaviour  started
      in June 2011, some seven months after he arrived in the UK and some 18
      months before the couple finally separated  and  yet  apart  from  his
      brother's statement there is absolutely  no  "corroborative"  evidence
      earlier than November 2012.

  35. Whereas of course  there  are  seldom  actual  witnesses  to  domestic
      violence it is possible to adduce credible evidence. If the  Appellant
      had complained to Councillors, his GP or any of the persons  who  have
      written letters from June 2011 then it is to  be  expected  that  they
      would have said so.  On the contrary, the evidence suggests  that  the
      first he mentioned it was November 2012 - 18 months  after  the  abuse
      began.

  36. I do not find it credible that his wife's behaviour  continued  whilst
      they were living with his mother in his mother's house. If his brother
      was able to secure her eviction from that property  in  November  2012
      then it would have been possible to do so some 18 months earlier.   It
      is also an indication that the Appellant's wife was not  the  dominant
      member of that household.

  37. I do not accept that Appellant, living in his family's home would have
      been forced by his wife to hand over his wages.

  38. While Mr Karim, when we were dealing with the  error  of  law,  argued
      that there was no evidence to support the First-tier Tribunal  finding
      it without credibility that the wife would flaunt a boyfriend in front
      of the  Appellant  for  cultural  reasons,  I  find  there  was.   The
      Appellant is a Muslim from Bangladesh.  His wife is Muslim.  Both  the
      Appellant and his brother refer in their  statements  to  extramarital
      affairs being unacceptable in their religion. The  Appellant  and  his
      wife are of the same religion.  Furthermore I simply do  not  believe,
      living in her husband's family's house, the wife would have behaved in
      such a way, even if there was no religious objection to extra  marital
      affairs.

  39. The wife's behaviour is described in very strong terms  as  "torture".
      Torture suggests very serious abuse and  yet  the  Appellant  did  not
      think it necessary to mention it to his doctor or anybody else for  18
      months. He did not report it to the police. The  explanation  he  gave
      was that he wished to rescue his marriage. That does not sit well with
      the numbers of people he  apparently  did  speak  to  about  it  after
      November 2012. It seems to me that the reason he did not report it  to
      the police or to any other persons before November 2012 is because  it
      simply did not take place. By November 2012 he was in  fact  separated
      from his wife, she had left the matrimonial home on whatever date  and
      for  whatever reason such that as the expiry of his  leave  approached
      he needed to amass evidence to secure his stay in the UK.  While there
      is evidence of mental health issues there is no reliable  evidence  of
      its cause and indeed there is no up-to-date evidence  that  he  is  on
      medication or receiving treatment or therapies.   The  lack  of  up-to
      -date evidence suggests he is not receiving relevant treatment.

  40. The Appellant having been unable to  attend  the  hearing  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal, the hearing before me would have  been  an  ideal
      opportunity for him to advance his case and give evidence and  yet  he
      chose not to do so.

  41. According to the Appellant and his brother this  abuse  was  happening
      under their mother's roof, the rest of the family knew about it and so
      one would assume mother must have also. There is no witness  statement
      from her or indeed from any other family member.

  42. If the Appellant's wife was behaving in this way there is  no  reason,
      now that they are separated, that the Appellant should not have issued
      divorce proceedings based on her behaviour and yet he has not done so.
      He is receiving advice from solicitors. A divorce petition based  upon
      her unreasonable behaviour would have been powerful  evidence  indeed.
      Its absence would suggest that there was no  such  behaviour.   I  was
      provided  with  no  explanation  as  to  why  there  are  no   divorce
      proceedings.

  43. There is no evidence from any of the authors of the letters that  they
      were told of anything prior to November 2012.  It  is  also  the  case
      that they are all reporting what they have been told by the Appellant.
       He did not apparently consult his GP during 18 months of "torture".

  44. Despite the description of quite  serious  mental  health  issues  and
      suicidal thoughts the Appellant has chosen to put forward no  evidence
      that since then that  he  is  undertaking  any  therapies  taking  any
      medications or receiving any counselling. That also  would  have  been
      powerful evidence to support his case but  he  has  chosen  to  submit
      none.

  45. The timing of the evidence taken  together  with  the  timing  of  the
      expiry of the Appellant's visa indicates  to  me  that,  having  taken
      legal advice, the Appellant appreciated that  the  only  way  that  he
      could secure his stay in the UK was  to  say  that  the  marriage  had
      broken down due to domestic  violence.  The  evidence  that  has  been
      adduced falls far short of establishing that.

  46. So far as Article 8 is concerned it is  argued  that  the  Appellant's
      relationship with his mother and his caring role creates a  dependency
      over and above the norm between an adult child and his mother such  as
      to engage Article 8. I do  not  accept  that  it  would  fall  to  the
      Appellant, a man, to carry out the caring duties for his  mother  when
      there  are  female  family  members.   Furthermore  the  Appellant  is
      apparently working.

  47. Even if he were caring for his mother and I have no evidence from  her
      to that effect, he came to the UK with a view to living with his wife,
      not to care for his mother.  There are provisions in the  UK  to  care
      for elderly persons even if the family cannot do so - but in this case
      there are other family members.

  48. The Appellant came to the UK solely to join  his  wife.  The  marriage
      having broken down, for reasons other than domestic violence,  he  can
      have no expectation of being permitted to remain. When he  arrived  in
      the UK as a spouse there could be no expectation by his mother or  any
      other members of the family that he was arriving  to  undertake  their
      care as he was coming as a spouse. With regard to the time he is  said
      to spend caring for his mother  I  note  there  is  reference  to  him
      working which would indicate that he is not present all the  time.  So
      far as his private life is concerned he has been in the UK for a short
      period only. So far as his mental health is  concerned,  I  have  been
      provided with no up-to-date evidence that this is a  particular  issue
      currently or that any treatment he may  need  cannot  be  obtained  in
      Bangladesh. Accordingly, even if Article 8 was engaged in  this  case,
      which is doubtful, the balancing act required  in  the  assessment  of
      proportionality would not tip in the Appellant's favour.  His  removal
      will not represent a disproportionate breach of his right to a private
      and family life.

  49. In summary I find this a thoroughly unmeritorious appeal. Having found
      that the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law in its determination
      and having set it aside I remake the decision and dismiss it under the
      Immigration Rules and under the ECHR.

  50. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date 27th September 2013




Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

