

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/06519/2014
                                                               IA/06520/2014
                                                               IA/06521/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 July 2014                                |On 31 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                    E L I
                                    E J I
                                   D F U I
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr L Latif, Latif Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellants are a family from Nigeria.  They  comprise  a  couple  and
   their young son, born on 29  June  2006.   They  appeal  with  permission
   against a decision by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Duff  dismissing
   their appeals on human rights grounds.

2) The appellants' immigration history is as follows.  The  first  appellant
   entered the UK in September 2004 with leave as a student.  This leave was
   extended on successive occasions until 30 November  2011.   He  was  then
   granted leave as a Tier 1 HS Migrant from November  2011  until  November
   2013.  The second  appellant  entered  the  UK  in  November  2004  as  a
   dependant.  The third appellant was born in the UK on 29 June  2006.   An
   application for all the  appellants  for  further  leave  to  remain  was
   refused on 13 January 2014 with removal directions made under section  47
   of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

3) At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the  parties  were  agreed
   that  the  outcome  of  the  appeals  would  turn  on  the  question   of
   "reasonableness" in relation to  the  removal  of  the  third  appellant,
   having regard to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules and section 55
   of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, as  well  as  under
   Article 8 of  the  Human  Rights  Convention.   There  were  nevertheless
   individual factors in relation to each of the appellants to be considered
   in relation to the issue of proportionality and the family unit had to be
   looked at together.

4) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal was  addressed  on  the  educational
   disadvantages  that  the  child  might  face  by  returning  to  Nigeria.
   Submissions were also made  in  relation  to  the  health  of  the  first
   appellant and his position as a serving soldier in the Nigerian Army  and
   whether he would face consequences on return for his absence  from  duty.
   On this last point the judge took  the  view  that  there  was  no  clear
   evidence that the first appellant was regarded by the Nigerian Army as  a
   deserter but, even if this was so, it was not accepted that he would  not
   receive a fair hearing  from  a  Nigerian  court  martial.   It  was  not
   established that he would be sentenced  to  a  term  of  imprisonment  on
   return and the outcome of the proceedings was entirely speculative.

5) So far as  medical  services  were  concerned  the  judge  accepted  that
   medical services in Nigeria were not of the same standard as  in  the  UK
   and might not be available  free  of  charge  but  nevertheless  services
   existed.  The first appellant  had  substantial  family  connections  and
   there was no reason to suppose that his health would suffer significantly
   on return.

6) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal looked at the return of  the  family
   as a unit and, at paragraph 16  of  the  determination,  gave  particular
   attention to the best interests of the third appellant as a  child.   The
   most important single factor in relation to those best interests was that
   the third appellant should remain in the care of his parents  and  should
   not be separated from them.  The child was Nigerian, as were his parents.
    At the time of the hearing he had spent just short of eight years in the
   UK, spoke only English, and was well integrated  into  society  here  and
   doing well at school.  It would undoubtedly cause him hardship so far  as
   both the third appellant and his parents were concerned to leave the  UK.
   It would take the third appellant time to adjust to life in  Nigeria  and
   he might encounter problems in doing so.  Nevertheless he was still young
   and at an adaptable age and would have the support of his parents and his
   wider family in Nigeria.  There had never been any expectations that  the
   family would remain  in  the  UK  and,  notwithstanding  that  the  third
   appellant  had  been  here  for  more  than  seven  years,  the   overall
   circumstances made it reasonable to expect the third appellant  to  leave
   the UK and accompany his parents to Nigeria.
7) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that  the  judge  arguably
   erred by not giving the child's best interests sufficient weight  and  by
   not differentiating between consideration of Article 8 within and outwith
   Appendix FM.  It was further arguable that the judge did not  follow  the
   guidance in Zoumbas [2013] UK  SC  74  in  not  identifying  whether  the
   child's best interests lay  in  staying  in  the  UK  before  considering
   whether these interests were outweighed.

Submissions

8) At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Latif  relied  on  the  grounds  of  the
   application for permission to appeal.  According to the application,  the
   judge took the view that as the first two appellants did not  qualify  to
   remain under the Immigration Rules, it would be reasonable to expect  the
   third appellant to leave the UK with them as he is a  Nigerian  national.
   In making this finding the judge omitted  to  make  a  proper  assessment
   under paragraph 276ADE and also a proper  assessment  of  proportionality
   under Article 8, on the basis that the third appellant had been here  for
   7 years as a child.  This should have been the primary consideration.

9) It was further pointed out in the application that as originally  drafted
   paragraph 276ADE did not include a requirement of reasonableness.  It was
   observed that the child concession policy  in  DP5/96  was  withdrawn  in
   December 2008 on the basis that  children  in  these  circumstances  were
   adequately protected by Article 8.   The  judge  had  not  given  primary
   consideration to the best interests of the child nor had  given  adequate
   weight to the fact the child had been here for 7 years.  The judge placed
   considerably more weight on  the  fact  that  the  child's  parents  were
   Nigerian nationals who were not qualified to remain under the Immigration
   Rules and would not succeed on the basis of proportionality in their  own
   right.

10) It is further submitted in  the  application  that  the  judge  did  not
   properly distinguish between consideration of Article 8 under Appendix FM
   and consideration of the proportionality test  in  the  case  of  Razgar.
   These were different tests  and  the  judge  had  confused  the  test  of
   exceptionality under Appendix FM with the test of  proportionality  under
   Razgar. The judge did not  explain  why  he  was  considering  the  third
   appellant  under  Razgar  and  if  so  why  the  removal  would  not   be
   disproportionate given the third appellant had been in the  UK  for  more
   than 7 years and where the interests of the child should be  the  primary
   consideration.

11) Mr Latif further referred to the case of Zoumbas.   The  primary  reason
   that the third appellant did not succeed according to the judge, was that
   his parents did not  succeed.   The  judge  should  have  considered  the
   appeals under paragraph 276ADE  and  under  proportionality.   The  judge
   should have had  proper  regard  to  the  length  of  residence  and  the
   disruption to the child's education.  The child was born here.  He  spoke
   only standard English.  The period of 7 years was a  considerable  period
   for a child and could be compared with the 20 year  period  required  for
   adults to establish a private life claim in terms of paragraph 276ADE.

12) For the respondent Mr Mangion submitted that the judge had given  proper
   consideration to the issues.  It had been  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
   appellants that the judge considered first the situation of  the  parents
   and then considered the position of the child.  This  was  the  order  in
   which the judge had addressed the issues but it did not follow from  this
   that the judge did not properly consider the interests of  the  child  at
   paragraph 16.  In Zoumbas the court said that the proper approach was  to
   consider the parents' situation and then to consider if the  position  of
   the child altered the balance of proportionality.  This was the  approach
   followed by the judge.

13) Mr Mangion continued that the judge had considered paragraph 276ADE  and
   referred to the child having been here for his  whole  life.   The  judge
   applied the test of reasonableness even if this was not in  the  specific
   context of paragraph 276ADE.  The position in terms of paragraph EX.1 had
   been considered in the reasons  for  refusal  letter.   The  respondent's
   decision of 13 January 2014 was made after paragraph 276ADE  was  amended
   to include the test of reasonableness  Mr Mangion further referred to the
   recent case of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at paragraph 60.   He
   submitted in terms of this the disruption to the child's education should
   not be given great weight.  Mr Mangion further referred to  the  case  of
   Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT  640.   He
   submitted there was no specific procedure to  be  followed  according  to
   Zoumbas.  The  best  interests  of  the  third  appellant  were  properly
   considered at paragraphs 16 and 17 of the determination.

14) In response Mr Latif relied on his  earlier  submission  and  emphasised
   the proper approach to residence of 7 years by a child.

Discussion

15) I note that early in the determination, at paragraph  6,  the  Judge  of
   the First-tier Tribunal identified the principal issue he had to  decide,
   which was whether it was reasonable to  expect  the  third  appellant  to
   leave the UK, given his length of residence here.   The  judge  correctly
   identified that the relevant provisions under which this issue was to  be
   considered were paragraph 276ADE and Article 8, having regard to the duty
   under section 55 of the 2009 Act to have regard to the best interests  of
   the child as a primary consideration.

16) Having thus directed himself the judge then  went  on  to  look  at  the
   circumstances of the family as a whole and then, at paragraphs 16 and 17,
   to consider where the best interests of the child lay in relation to  the
   other members of the family and the child's own circumstances.

17) In the case of Zoumbas it was submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State
   approached the best interests of the child in  the  wrong  way  but  this
   argument was not accepted by the Court.  The Court  found  that  although
   the wellbeing of the children was a primary consideration, this  did  not
   mean  that  this  had  to  be  considered  first  with   every   possible
   countervailing issue considered thereafter.   The  Secretary  of  State's
   decision letter had to be read as  a  whole  and  the  substance  of  the
   decision had to be analysed.  I approached the determination by the Judge
   of the First-tier Tribunal in these appeals in the same manner.

18) It was further argued  in  Zoumbas  that  the  assessment  of  the  best
   interests of the children was flawed because  it  was  assumed  that  the
   parents would be removed.   The Court found that it  was  legitimate  for
   the Secretary of State to ask herself first whether it  would  have  been
   proportionate to remove the parents if they had no children and then,  in
   considering the  best  interests  of  the  children,  ask  whether  their
   wellbeing  altered  that  provisional  balance  in  the   proportionality
   exercise.  This is to a large extent the approach taken by the  Judge  of
   the First-tier Tribunal in deciding these appeals.

19) It must be accepted, of course, that the immigration  history  of  these
   appellants is very much more favourable than the immigration  history  of
   the appellants in Zoumbas.  These appellants have been  here  with  leave
   throughout the period of their residence and the third appellant's period
   of residence has been continuous and exceeds 7 years in length.

20) Nevertheless, the judge was entitled to find that the best interests  of
   the third appellant were to remain with his parents.  He made the finding
   that there was nothing disproportionate in itself about  the  removal  of
   the parents, putting the interests of the child to  one  side,  and  then
   considered whether the best interests of the child altered the balance of
   proportionality.  The judge was entitled to follow  this  approach.   The
   judge accepted that there would be significant disruption to the  child's
   education but pointed out that he would have the support of  his  parents
   and of the extended family in Nigeria,  which  was  the  country  of  his
   nationality.  This was a conclusion that the judge was entitled to  reach
   for the reasons which were given.

21) It was submitted that the judge failed to distinguish  properly  between
   the test of  reasonableness  under  paragraph  276ADE  and  the  test  of
   proportionality under Razgar.  Reference was made to the case of Gulshan,
   in terms of which, after applying the requirements of the Rules, only  if
   there might arguably be good grounds for granting leave to remain outside
   the Rules was it necessary to go on to consider under Article  8  whether
   there were compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the
   Rules.

22) In these appeals the judge rightly considered the same factors would  be
   relevant in relation to proportionality as were relevant to the issue  of
   reasonableness  under  paragraph  276ADE.   The  judge  did  not  take  a
   different approach to the issue of reasonableness under paragraph  276ADE
   from the approach to  the  issue  of  proportionality  under  Article  8.
   Although the judge might be criticised in theory for not going through  a
   two stage process, first under the Rules and then under Article 8, it has
   not been shown that the judge applied the wrong test in law, either under
   paragraph 276ADE or under Razgar, or that the  judge  neglected  to  take
   into account any relevant factor  or  took  into  account  an  irrelevant
   factor.  The judge found, in effect, that in the  circumstances  of  this
   appeal the application of the  test  of  reasonableness  under  paragraph
   276ADE and the application  of  the  proportionality  test  under  Razgar
   reached the same result, namely that  it  was  neither  unreasonable  nor
   disproportionate for the family to be removed to Nigeria.

23) Since this appeal was heard before the First-tier Tribunal,  section  19
   of the Immigration Act 2014 has come into force inserting a  new  section
   117B into the 2002 Act.  This states that in  considering  the  balancing
   exercise under Article 8, where a person is not  liable  to  deportation,
   the public interest does not require a person's removal where -
   a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with
      the qualifying child, and
   b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom.

24) The terms "qualifying child" includes a person under 18  who  has  lived
   in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of 7 years or more, whether
   or not a British citizen.

25) Under this provision the third appellant would have  been  a  qualifying
   child on the basis of his length of residence.  The test to be applied in
   relation to proportionality under Article 8, however,  would  under  this
   statutory provision be the same as the test applied by the judge,  namely
   whether it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to  leave  the
   United Kingdom.

26) This emphasises that the approach of the judge was  the  correct  one  -
   the issue was one of reasonableness and the judge was  entitled  to  find
   that it would not be unreasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  UK
   with his parents.

27) For the reasons I have given above, I am not satisfied  that  the  Judge
   of the First-tier Tribunal erred in the conclusions which he reached  and
   accordingly his decision shall stand.

Conclusions

28) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error on a point of law.

29) I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

30) The First-tier Tribunal  made  an  order  for  anonymity  and,  for  the
   reasons given by the Tribunal, I continue that order (pursuant to Rule 14
   of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed                                             Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal                        31 October 2014

