
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA061822015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 7 July 2017                           |On 10 July 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                            MISS JOSETTE NALICAO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ilahi, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant's appealed against  the  decision  of  the  respondent's
      dated 17 November 2014 to refuse to vary her leave to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (student) Migrant and to remove her by  way
      of Directions under section 47  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  and
      Nationality Act 2002. Rights.  Judge of the first-tier Tribunal  Cohen
      dismissed the appellant's appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  18
      November 2016.

   2. Permission to appeal was granted by first-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant
      Hutchinson on 17 May 2017 stating that it is arguable that as part  of
      the Article 8 assessment the Judge has misdirected himself by  failing
      to apply section 117B of the Nationality Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
      2002.


   3. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  in  dismissing  the  appellant's
      appeal stated the following which I summarise. The appellant's  appeal
      is dismissed the extent that  she  relies  on  the  Immigration  Rules
      because she has not submitted a valid CAS and  therefore  was  awarded
      zero points. The appellant confirmed that she did  not  have  a  valid
      CAS. There was no evidence whatsoever to indicate that she  sought  to
      register at a new college to indicate what she has been doing  in  the
      interim.


   4. In respect of Article 8 the Judge accepted that the  appellant  is  in
      the United Kingdom where she  has  studied.  She  entered  the  United
      Kingdom in 2008 and there is no  evidence  that  she  has  any  family
      members in this country and  therefore  her  removal  will  not  cause
      interference to her right to a family life. The appellant's  boyfriend
      does not constitute family life. The  appellant  has  established  her
      private life in the United Kingdom in the full knowledge that she  has
      no continuing right to remain here. She is a 30-year-old woman in good
      health. She lived for the majority of her life including her formative
      years in the Philippines. She achieved a degree in  that  country  and
      studied and worked in accountancy. The appellant has  studied  in  the
      United Kingdom and has achieved the BSC degree, knowledge,  experience
      and skills will stand her in good stead upon return to Philippines  in
      finding employment. She can progress her  career  in  the  Philippines
      having the benefit of having lived, studied and worked abroad and this
      will make her attractive to many companies.


   5. The appellant's immediate family members including her mother,  sister
      and grandmother remain in the Philippines and  they  can  provide  her
      valuable support upon her return. The  appellant  does  not  meet  the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules. The  life  that  the  appellant
      established in the United  Kingdom  is  not  sufficiently  serious  to
      warrant   her   exclusion   from   the   United   Kingdom   as   being
      disproportionate. The  appellant's  case  is  not  one  of  the  small
      minority of cases that it  was  anticipated  would  be  allowed  under
      Article 8  as  invented  in  cases  like  Huang  and  EB  Kosovo.  The
      respondent's decision to exclude the appellant from this country  will
      not be a disproportionate response and would not breach her Article  8
      rights to a private life. The Judge dismissed her appeal.

   6. The grounds of  appeal  essentially  state  that  the  judge  has  not
      considered the new part 5 in Immigration and  Asylum  and  Nationality
      Act 2002. He has not considered  Paragraph  117B  of  the  Immigration
      Rules and therefore has materially  erred.  This  new  part  sets  out
      certain mandatory public interest considerations in immigration  cases
      which bind the Tribunal when deciding  whether  permission  should  be
      granted and were in force at the time of the  Tribunal  decisions.  It
      was incumbent on the Tribunal to consider the  appellant's  Article  8
      rights given that any decision made by the Tribunal would  potentially
      engage such  rights,  whether  or  not  such  rights  were  explicitly
      pleaded. If the judge had considered section 117 he would have reached
      a different conclusion.


   7. There is no insurmountable test applied to Article 8. The decision  to
      remove the appellant amounts to a disproportionate  interference  with
      her right to respect for her private life at this stage and there  are
      truly exceptional circumstances worthy of consideration in her case.


   8. At the hearing, I heard brief submissions  from  both  parties  as  to
      whether there is an error of law in her decision.  On  behalf  of  the
      appellant the only ground which  was  raised  was  the  judge  do  not
      consider section 117B of the Immigration and  Asylum  and  Nationality
      Act 2002.

Decision as to Whether there is an Error of Law in the Decision


   9.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
      pursuant to the Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8  of  the  European
      Convention on Human Rights. Cogent reasons  were  given  for  why  the
      respondent's decision will not  breach  the  appellant's  right  to  a
      private life in the United Kingdom and that it would be  proportionate
      to the respondent's legitimate interest to remove her from the  United
      Kingdom.


  10. The complaint against the Judge is that the  Judge  did  not  consider
      section 117B and had he done so he would  have  come  to  a  different
      decision. Although the Judge has not specifically mentioned 117B,  and
      his decision, he took into account all the relevant considerations  of
      the appellant circumstances that he was duty-bound to do. He found the
      appellant came to this  country  as  a  student.  He  found  that  the
      appellant was a young woman who had lived the formative  part  of  her
      life in the Philippines where she had worked and  she  had  family  in
      that country. He found that the appellant could return to  Philippines
      and continue with her career and get a job  with  the  qualifications,
      knowledge and skill that she has acquired in the United Kingdom. These
      findings were open to the Judge on the evidence before him.


  11. Failure by the Judge to specifically mentioned 117B did not  lead  him
      into a material error. There is no indication as to  what  aspects  of
      the appellant circumstances were not taken into account by  the  Judge
      in his decision. In the grounds of appeal, it is  claimed  that  there
      are exceptional circumstances in the appellant's appeal  but  none  of
      these exceptional circumstances have been  detailed.  The  Judge  took
      into account all the circumstances of the appellant which were  before
      him. I find that a differently constituted Tribunal would not come  to
      a different decision on the evidence in this appeal.


  12. In conclusion, I find  that  the  Judge  entitled  to  find  that  the
      appellant has no family life in the  United  Kingdom  and  in  fact  a
      family life is in  the  Philippines  where  her  mother  and  siblings
      remain. The Judge also correctly  found  that  interference  with  the
      appellant's private life by the respondent's decision is proportionate
      in the appellant's circumstances. There is no material error of law in
      the decision and it is merely a quarrel with it. I uphold  the  First-
      tier Tribunal's decision.

Notice of Decision

The appellant appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed by,
A Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Mrs S Chana                             Dated this 7th day of July 2017.




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.




