
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/06340/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 January 2015                             |On 30 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB

                                   Between

                             Sodiq Adesola Taiwo
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Physsas, Counsel, instructed by Graceland
Solicitors    (Lewisham)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This appeal was originally heard at Field House, on 18  November  2014,
    when I was sitting on a panel with the Honourable Lord Burns.  At  that
    hearing we decided that there was an error on  a  point  of  law  in  a
    decision dismissing the appeal, and that there  should  be  a  remaking
    hearing, with no findings preserved.  The error  of  law  decision  and
    directions, produced after that hearing, was as follows.



                    ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


         (i)  The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, now 22 years  old,  who
             has been in the UK since 2006.  He first arrived  as  a  child
             visitor, then had periods of leave as the dependent  child  of
             his father, and then had a period of leave  to  allow  him  to
             pursue an application to join the British Army.  On 17 January
             2014, after a delay of some two years, he was refused  further
             leave to continue  with  his  army  application,  and  it  was
             decided that he should be removed  under  section  47  of  the
             Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


         (ii) His appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  V  M  D
             Fox, in a determination promulgated on 12  August  2014.   The
             concession for those wanting to join the British Army operates
             outside the Immigration Rules, and it was not  suggested  that
             the appellant could comply with any other Rule.  As  a  result
             the appeal was only concerned with Article 8 of  the  European
             Convention on Human Rights, and was dismissed on this basis.


         (iii)    Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
             Judge Lambert, on 13 October 2014.  Permission to  appeal  was
             granted on the basis that it was arguable that the  judge  had
             not considered, as part of the proportionality assessment, the
             appellant's private life, and the impact of  the  respondent's
             delay in processing his application on his efforts to join the
             British Army.


         (iv) The first part of the hearing before  us  was  concerned  with
             confusion about the respondent's bundle in the  appeal.   What
             emerged was that a respondent's bundle had been provided,  but
             it  did  not  contain  the  correct  documents.   Instead   of
             containing documents relevant to the appellant's  application,
             including  a  document  from  the  British  Army,  it  instead
             contained  documents  about  an  application   made   by   the
             appellant's father, as well as a determination  in  an  appeal
             concerned with the appellant's mother and one of his siblings.
               It  appears  that  the  appeal  was  adjourned  twice,  with
             directions aimed at obtaining a respondent's  Rule  13  bundle
             with the correct documents, but on the  day  of  the  eventual
             hearing, 16 July 2014,  the  appeal  went  ahead  despite  the
             correctly compiled bundle still not being available.


         (v)  Mr Whitwell, for the respondent, indicated  that  he  did  not
             have the documents listed on the front sheet of the, including
             the army document.  Ms Physass, for  the  appellant,  was  not
             clear whether the representative at the First-tier hearing had
             had sight of the index on the front sheet of the  respondent's
             bundle, which pointed to the existence  of  the  army  letter.
             During his submissions Mr Whitwell indicated that he would not
             object to any application to amend the appellant's grounds  to
             include this procedural point, connected with  the  fact  that
             the respondent had been in possession  of  important  evidence
             but had not provided it.  In the event,  however,  we  decided
             that an error of law  had  been  established,  justifying  the
             decision being set aside, on the basis of the original  ground
             on which permission to appeal had been granted.  As  a  result
             it was not necessary to consider whether the grounds should be
             amended.


         (vi) It is well-established that, in a consideration of Article  8,
             it will be necessary to consider both family life and  private
             life.  It will often be necessary to consider a combination of
             both.  It is generally accepted that an examination of Article
             8 will start with family life.  Where it has been decided that
             there are no relationships amounting to  family  life  private
             life  ties   will   require   consideration.    Relationships,
             including relationships with relatives that do not  amount  to
             family life, will often be a significant,  and  at  times  the
             most significant, element of an appellant's  private  life  in
             the UK.


         (vii)    It is striking  that  the  judge's  Article  8  assessment
             contains no reference to the  appellant's  private  life.   Mr
             Whitwell attempted to defend the determination  on  the  basis
             that such a  consideration  could  be  inferred  from  general
             statements, particularly the last sentence of [61].   This  is
             not a submission that we can accept.  In  our  view  the  only
             fair reading of the determination as a whole must  be  to  the
             effect that private life was not considered.  Another point of
             concern,  which  arose  on  a   close   examination   of   the
             proportionality assessment, was that the judge, in  conducting
             it, placed weight on  a  number  of  irrelevant  or  erroneous
             factors on the one hand, and failed to give any  consideration
             to the most important factors in the  appellant's  favour,  on
             the other hand.  The judge indicated that  the  appellant  had
             benefited from an education in the  UK  to  which  he  had  no
             entitlement (paragraph 55); and found that the  appellant  had
             "sought  to  establish  himself   without   the   respondent's
             consent"; and that his mother had "facilitated  this  unlawful
             residence" (paragraph 60).


         (viii)   The difficulty  with  these  points,  which  were  clearly
             matters that the judge placed weight on in the proportionality
             assessment, is that the appellant has no history  of  unlawful
             residence in the UK, had not remained without the respondent's
             consent at any time, and has had immigration leave of  a  type
             that has entitled him to education in the UK.  This appears to
             have been clear from the start, and his immigration history is
             in fact  summarised  by  the  judge  at  paragraph  3  of  the
             determination.


         (ix)  The  key  factors   that   were   not   considered   in   the
             proportionality assessment all come under the heading  of  the
             appellant's private life.  The most important aspects were his
             relationships with  his  parents  and  his  siblings  (on  the
             assumption that they were correctly rejected as family  life),
             but there was also his length of residence to  be  considered,
             his age on arrival, and his hopes for  an  army  career.   The
             judge paid particular attention to the fact that  one  of  the
             appellant's siblings had been refused leave, and  had  had  an
             appeal dismissed,  but  the  judge  did  not  mention  another
             appeal, the determination of which  was  in  the  respondent's
             bundle before him, in which the appellant's mother and another
             sibling had had their appeals allowed.  This was  followed  by
             them being given leave  to  remain.   We  were  told,  at  the
             hearing, that this was for a limited period until March  2015.
             Not only was  the  appellant's  private  life,  including  any
             relationships not found to amount to family life,  a  relevant
             factor in the proportionality assessment, but  the  fact  that
             his mother and one of his siblings had  been  given  leave  to
             remain in the UK was an important aspect of this.


         (x)  Other matters were potentially important, in relation  to  the
             connection between the appellant's application to the  British
             Army and the lengthy delay in processing this application, but
             it appears to us that  the  above  points  are  sufficient  to
             establish legal errors requiring the decision to be set aside.
              It is therefore not necessary to go further.


         (xi) Another difficulty was not considered before us, but we  raise
             it with the remaking in mind, so that both sides are prepared.
              The Upper Tribunal in Ghising (family life - adults -  Gurkha
             policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) made it clear  that  a  strict
             reading of Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31  was  incorrect.
             The approach to a consideration of whether  there  was  family
             life between an adult child, such as this appellant,  and  his
             parents and younger siblings, would have to take into  account
             whether an appellant had ever established an independent  life
             outside the family.  In Ghising there  were  references  to  a
             case in which a 23 year old daughter had been found  to  still
             have family life with her parents, having lived with them  for
             all of her life.  With these  legal  principles  in  mind  the
             issue of family life will need consideration in  the  remaking
             process.


         (xii)    Having  considered  the  Practice  Statement,  and  having
             considered submissions from both sides, we decided  that  this
             was a case in which it was appropriate to  follow  the  normal
             course of remaking the decision in the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
             fact-finding necessary did not appear to us to be so extensive
             as to require a remittal to the First-tier, and neither did it
             appear to us that the issues justified  regarding  this  as  a
             situation in which the appellant had been deprived entirely of
             a fair hearing at the First-tier.  The  matter  was  therefore
             adjourned for a remaking hearing in the Upper  Tribunal,  with
             the following directions.


         Notice of Decision


         (xiii)   Having found that there has been an error on  a  point  of
             law we set aside the judge's decision dismissing the appeal on
             Article 8 grounds.  The decision  needs  to  be  remade  as  a
             result, and this will occur within the Upper Tribunal.


         (xiv)    No anonymity direction is made.


         Directions
        i) Both the appellant and the respondent are directed to make their
           best efforts to provide a copy of the  relevant  concession  for
           those wishing to apply to the British Army.
       ii) The respondent is directed to provide all documents referred  to
           on the front sheet of the  respondent's  bundle,  including  the
           British  Army  response  spreadsheet,  and  any  other  relevant
           documents.
      iii) The appellant is directed to produce updated witness  statements
           for the appellant and any other witnesses.  These should include
           evidence as to the appellant's current intentions with regard to
           his British Army application; the current immigration status and
           whereabouts of all of his immediate family members, with details
           of any further applications made or contemplated; and an updated
           position on the current status of the  appellant's  relationship
           with Ms Bangura, who gave evidence at the First-tier hearing.
       iv) The remaking hearing will proceed on the basis that no  findings
           are preserved.
              The appeal will be listed for a remaking hearing with a 2 hour
             estimate and with no interpreter required.

2.   Preparation for the remaking hearing on 9 January  2015  produced  only
    limited results.   The  missing  respondent's  bundle,  that  had  been
    discussed at the error of law hearing,  had  still  not  been  located.
    Neither had either of the representatives been able to provide  a  copy
    of the concession that  operated  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  for
    British Army recruits, that  was  in  operation  when  the  appellant's
    application for further leave was made in January  2012.   Neither  had
    either side found the policy in force when the  decision  that  is  the
    subject of this appeal was  taken  in  January  2014.   A  Home  Office
    guidance document was produced, which was valid  from  20  March  2014,
    entitled  "Armed  forces:  exempt  from  immigration  control".    This
    guidance referred to a change in policy taking place on 11  July  2013,
    after which  date  anybody  intending  to  join  HM  Forces  needed  to
    demonstrate that they had lived and held valid leave in the  UK  for  a
    minimum of five years.

3.   At the start of the hearing Mr Avery, for the respondent,  referred  to
    the appellant being on police bail.  The appellant accepted that he was
    due to return to the police station later in January 2015 in connection
    with an enquiry about a suspected fraudulent internet transaction.

4.   For the remaking hearing the appellant's  solicitors  had  produced  an
    additional bundle (116 pages) which included updated witness statements
    for the appellant; his mother; his partner;  and  his  brother.   There
    were also witness statements for two friends, but the oral evidence  at
    the hearing was from the  appellant  and  the  three  witnesses  listed
    above.

5.   Mr Avery, for the respondent, had obtained a single document  from  the
    respondent's bundle, namely a British Army spreadsheet.  This consisted
    of a number of names, including that of the appellant, in the form of a
    table.   Opposite  the  appellant's  name  was  a  comment   that   his
    application to join the British Army had been withdrawn in 2012.

6.   The factual situation can be summarised, in outline, as  follows.   For
    the most part the facts were not disputed,  with  the  exception  of  a
    factual dispute about the circumstances surrounding the ending  of  the
    appellant's application to join  the  British  Army.   The  appellant's
    position  on  this  was  that  he  had  wanted  to  continue  with  his
    application to join the parachute regiment throughout,  and  indeed  he
    still wanted to pursue this.  The only reason that he had not been able
    to was because the army had  been  unable  to  proceed  when  his  visa
    expired.  Mr Avery's position was that the spreadsheet established that
    the appellant himself had withdrawn his application.

7.   The appellant continues to live with his mother, brother,  and  sister.
    His other sister has returned to Nigeria for  national  service  there.
    The appellant's application to the parachute regiment started in  2011,
    and he passed a parachute regiment course in January  2012.   The  last
    contact he had with the army was in 2014, after a hearing,  where  they
    had told him that his name was still on their system,  but  they  could
    not issue him with a letter.  The appellant's mother leaves for work at
    4am.  As a result the appellant is largely responsible for the care  of
    his younger sister, who is 10.  His brother also leaves for work early.
     His brother suffers from sickle cell anaemia, and the appellant is the
    one who helps him  when  he  has  crises  that  necessitate  him  being
    admitted to hospital.  His brother has a place to  study  architectural
    technology at Anglian Ruskin College in Cambridge.   He  is  hoping  to
    take this up, but there are some doubts over whether he can do so given
    his health.

8.   The appellant's partner is a  naturalised  British  citizen  who  comes
    from Sierra Leone.  She is studying to  be  a  midwife.   She  and  the
    appellant have not lived together, but plan to marry.  The  appellant's
    mother  approves  of  their  plans.   The  appellant's  girlfriend   is
    currently  living  in  a  hostel,  having  had  difficulties   in   her
    relationship with her mother,  but  she  returns  to  the  family  home
    frequently, where she continues to have contact with, and  look  after,
    her younger brother who is 9.  The appellant's girlfriend  is  now  19.
    The appellant's brother has applied for settled status, and is  waiting
    for the result of this before he can proceed with his studies.

9.   The appellant said that he remained committed to joining the  parachute
    regiment, and that he had maintained his fitness for this purpose.  His
    mother, brother, and partner, all supported him in this.  The appellant
    indicated that his mother and brother would be able to work less, if he
    were in the army, and they could therefore take over with looking after
    his younger sister.

Submissions

10.  The submissions  by  Mr  Avery  can  be  summarised  as  follows.   The
    appellant was  relying  on  family  life  to  resist  the  Home  Office
    decision, but from 2011 he had been set on a career in the army,  which
    would itself disrupt his family life.  This was a highly selective  use
    of Article 8 which bordered on abuse.  He was also  relatively  old  to
    rely on family life, and his claim on this basis was  weak.   The  army
    spreadsheet  suggested  that  the  appellant  had  withdrawn  his  army
    application himself, not that it was due to him having no  valid  visa.
    It was accepted that there had been a considerable delay  in  the  Home
    Office reaching the decision.  This was connected to a  change  in  the
    rules for army recruits.  There had been  a  change  from  a  two  year
    residence requirement to a five year residence requirement.  The policy
    outside the Rules that he had benefited from had also  been  withdrawn.
    A change had taken place on 11  July  2013.   Regardless  of  what  the
    policy had been at the date of decision there was no  live  application
    to the army on which leave could have been granted anyway,  because  it
    had been withdrawn in 2012.   The  appellant's  relationship  with  his
    partner was not a basis for him  to  succeed.   They  were  not  living
    together; they were not formally engaged; if the appellant did join the
    British Army this would disrupt their relationship; and they could live
    together in Nigeria, where the appellant had family connections.

11.  Ms Physsas, for the appellant, after  taking  some  time  to  read  the
    armed forces guidance that had  been  produced  at  the  hearing,  made
    submissions as follows.  The appellant had applied  to  enlist  in  the
    British Army, relying on the concession outside the Rules, as  well  as
    relying on Article 8.  The army application process had been started in
    2011, and he had passed the parachute regiment course in January  2012.
    From then on the process  had  been  placed  on  hold  because  of  his
    immigration status.  The spreadsheet that had been  provided  had  very
    limited information on it and should be given little  weight.   It  was
    not on official paper, there was nothing to show it was from the  army,
    and there was nothing from the army to confirm it.  The information  on
    it was also inconsistent with the idea that the appellant's application
    had been held with others for a policy review.  The appellant,  in  any
    event, would have met the  five  year  valid  leave  requirement.   The
    refusal letter refers to the appellant's application  to  enlist  being
    "withdrawn by the army" which itself conflicted with  the  spreadsheet.
    The letter from Teresa Pearce MP, in  October  2013,  and  the  chasing
    letter from Greenwich Community Law Centre in June 2012 suggested  that
    he was, at those times, still pursuing the army application,  and  this
    had been confirmed by all of the witnesses.

12.  Although it has not been provided it is clear that there was  a  policy
    operated by the Home Office, because he was granted leave under  it  to
    pursue his application.   The  new  policy  would  not  have  adversely
    applied to him anyway.  In fairness there was a need for reasons as  to
    why the new policy did not apply, and a decision in relation to the old
    policy.  Given the need for the Secretary of State to be consistent and
    fair the appellant  should  have  been  given  leave  to  remain  on  a
    discretionary basis to continue and complete his application.  The  two
    year   delay   was   excessive,   and   was   relevant   in   assessing
    proportionality.  The appellant had a positive immigration  history,  a
    previous  grant  under  the  concession   (and   his   intentions   and
    circumstances had not changed), he had a plan to join  the  army  which
    was relevant to his private life, there had been a policy in place  and
    the decision was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  for  not  having
    considered it, or disproportionate in view of the delay.  His  ties  to
    the UK had deepened in the period of the delay.

13.  He had ties with family members, namely his mother, his  siblings,  and
    his partner.  Joining the army would not sever these family  ties.   He
    had lived in the UK since the age  of  14.   He  wanted  to  marry  his
    partner, and he also wanted to help his mother financially, so that she
    could work fewer hours.  He was currently closely  involved  in  caring
    for and helping both his sister and his brother.   All  of  the  family
    would be devastated if he were to be removed.  His  future  plans  with
    his partner did not mean that he was currently leading  an  independent
    life.  He had very limited ties to Nigeria, not having been  there  for
    nine years, and having no home to return  to.   Recruits  to  the  army
    still have periods of leave, and may marry.  The delay was significant,
    since the application should have been granted to allow the recruitment
    process to be completed.

Findings

14.  On the central contested factual issue my finding is that  the  account
    given  by  the  appellant  has  been   established,   on   balance   of
    probabilities, as the true version of events.  The letters at pages  55
    to 57 of the appellant's bundle are consistent with  the  account  that
    the appellant has given.  The appellant's evidence on  this  point,  to
    the effect that he never at any stage withdrew his application, has not
    been challenged specifically.  The letter  in  October  2013  indicated
    that the appellant was still pressing, at that stage,  for  a  decision
    that would enable him to continue with  his  application  to  join  the
    armed forces.  Following the end of the oral  evidence  no  submissions
    were made suggesting reasons to disbelieve  the  appellant's  evidence,
    backed up  by  these  letters,  or  the  account  given  by  the  other
    witnesses, to the effect  that  the  appellant's  desire  to  join  the
    British Army remained undimmed despite the considerable delay.

15.  The refusal letter referred to the appellant's application having  been
    withdrawn by the army in April 2012.  The army spreadsheet refers to it
    having been withdrawn by the appellant.   This  inconsistency  suggests
    that the author of the refusal letter may have had access to some other
    information from the British Army, but this  remains  mysterious  given
    the fact that the entire respondent's bundle has been misplaced and has
    not, to date, been found.  Having considered the evidence as a whole on
    this issue my conclusion is that the brief army spreadsheet entry falls
    well short of the kind of reliable evidence  that  might  outweigh  the
    various items of evidence pointing in the other direction.  My  finding
    is that the situation is as described by the appellant, namely that  he
    has remained keen to pursue the application throughout, that  that  was
    the purpose of his application for an extension of leave, and that  the
    lengthy delay in deciding his application was the only reason  for  the
    recruitment process coming to an end.   However  the  matter  might  be
    recorded for administrative purposes by the army, the central point  is
    that the  appellant  needed  leave  to  remain  to  continue  with  the
    application, and he has never obtained it, with  the  result  that  the
    application could not proceed any further.

16.  The refusal letter in January 2014 gives no hint of any reason for  the
    lengthy delay, of two years, in deciding  the  application.   The  MP's
    letter in October 2013 referred to enquiries made of the  Home  Office,
    but contains nothing further than that the Home Office  could  not  say
    how long the application would take.  A letter from the Home Office  to
    Greenwich Community Law Centre in August 2012  referred  to  a  Croydon
    casework team being disbanded, and work being transferred to an  office
    in Sheffield, who were working through  a  backlog  of  cases  in  date
    order.  The submissions by Mr Avery at the  hearing,  therefore,  were
    entirely new, and it was not  clear  on  what  these  submissions  were
    based.  He suggested that the appellant's application had been  delayed
    because of a policy review, and  he  referred  to  a  number  of  other
    applicants being  caught  up  in  delays  for  the  same  reason.   The
    suggestion that this was the real reason for the delay, rather than the
    explanation offered about the transfer to Sheffield, raises a number of
    further questions, particularly given that the change in policy between
    the two year residence and the five year residence requirement was  not
    one that would have impacted on the appellant.  I  can  make  no  clear
    finding on the reasons for the administrative delay  of  two  years  in
    deciding the appellant's application for  further  leave  in  order  to
    continue with his application to join the parachute regiment.   On  the
    evidence available to me the true position remains obscure.

17.  The evidence about the  appellant's  relationship  with  his  immediate
    family members was not challenged in any way.  I could see no reason to
    reject the appellant's account that he was still living  together  with
    his mother and siblings, that he was closely involved in caring for his
    younger siblings, and that he remains in a committed relationship  with
    his partner.

Decision and Reasons

18.  In remaking the decision I have decided to  allow  the  appeal  on  the
    basis that the decision was not in accordance with the law.

19.  The application, when made, was concerned with a matter not covered  by
    the Immigration Rules, namely an application to join the British  Army.
    The appellant had been successful in such an application in  2011,  and
    the further application was made for the purpose of continuing with the
    army recruitment process, which was reasonably  well  advanced  by  the
    time the appellant's leave to remain expired in January 2012.   By  the
    time the appellant was granted further leave  to  remain  to  join  the
    armed forces, in 2011, he had been in the UK lawfully for five years.

20.  If I had been provided  with  the  policy  that  operated  outside  the
    Immigration Rules that was in force when the  current  application  was
    made, in January 2012, I could have considered the question of  whether
    the  appellant  would  have  succeeded  under  that  policy,   if   his
    application had not been delayed.  Similarly, if I  had  been  provided
    with the policy in force when the decision was taken, in January  2014,
    I could have considered whether the application fell within the  policy
    on that date.  Despite the directions made, however, I was not provided
    with the policies in force either at the date of application or at  the
    date of decision.

21.  Given my finding above,  that  the  application  was  only  treated  as
    withdrawn because of the visa delay, the refusal contains a mistake  on
    a factual matter, in that it treats the British Army application as  no
    longer of any relevance.  The refusal, in this respect, fails to engage
    with the key point at issue.  There is  an  obvious  circularity  here.
    The delay by the Home Office in processing the application  caused  the
    army application to be treated as withdrawn; and the Home  Office  then
    proceeded on the basis that there was nothing left to  decide,  because
    of the fact that the application had  been  withdrawn.    The  decision
    maker failed to appreciate that the progress of  the  army  application
    was closely linked to the leave application,  and  that  there  was  no
    separate reason for it being treated as withdrawn.

22.  At the centre of this case is, in  my  view,  a  striking  instance  of
    unfairness caused by unexplained delay.  The appellant was a young  man
    who was well advanced in pursuing his application to join the parachute
    regiment, which demands recruits of a particularly  high  calibre.   He
    might have thought that passing the  fitness  test  was  the  difficult
    part, but in reality it was the Secretary of State's delays that turned
    out to be impossible to surmount.  Despite going to the  MP,  who  made
    enquiries,  and  despite   the   appellant's   representatives   making
    enquiries, there was no explanation of any sort offered for the  delay,
    (and no mention of any  policy  review),  and  neither  was  there  any
    prioritisation of the application.  As a result the appellant's central
    goal, his desire to join the army, was cast  into  a  state  of  limbo.
    When the decision did arrive it failed to address the  key  issue,  and
    instead took  a  reductionistic  route  to  refusing  the  application,
    without engaging fully with the facts of the case.

23.  If the appellant's application had been dealt  with  in  a  timely  and
    efficient manner it appears likely that it would have been  successful,
    and by now the appellant would have been a member of the British  Armed
    Forces.  Nothing has emerged to indicate that the appellant  would  not
    have been successful if the application had been  considered  within  a
    few months of it being made, and nothing was  put  forward  to  suggest
    that the appellant would not be still be successful today, despite  the
    lengthy  delay  that  has  resulted,  both  from  the  delay   in   the
    application, and the delay to date in the appeal process.  I  have  not
    been shown any policy change that  would  have  justified  refusing  to
    allow him to continue. The fact that the appellant  appears  to  be  as
    keen today as he was in 2012 to join the  parachute  regiment,  despite
    the frustrating nature of the delay, is a testament to the strength  of
    his commitment to this career path.

24.  I have considered the submission made by Mr Avery  that  the  appellant
    was making a selective use of  Article  8  bordering  on  abuse.   This
    submission appeared to me to miss the heart of the case.  This case  is
    concerned primarily with an application to join the British Army, as it
    has been from the start.  It was only  through  ignoring  all  evidence
    other than the spreadsheet, and regarding the army issue as  no  longer
    of any relevance, that this submission could  be  made.   In  my  view,
    however, it cannot be correct to characterise this as a case where  the
    appellant is relying solely on his family  relationships  in  order  to
    remain in the UK.  It is undoubtedly true that those relationships  are
    important, but there has never been any reason  to  doubt  the  central
    thrust of the case, from the time that the application was made,  until
    the present.

25.  If the army issue was no longer relevant then the case would take on  a
    different complexion, but given that the army issue remains central  it
    appears to me to be clear that the appellant is now entitled to  pursue
    the application that has been suspended because  the  army  recruitment
    process was not completed when his leave expired in January 2012.

26.  It appears to me that the most  appropriate  outcome  in  remaking  the
    decision in this appeal is to find that the decision under  appeal  was
    not in accordance with  the  law.   That  decision,  as  I  have  said,
    proceeded on an incorrect factual basis.  If  the  decision  maker  had
    been aware of, or engaged with, the fact that it was  only  because  of
    the Home Office delay itself that the army application had been treated
    as withdrawn, then there would have been a need for the decision  maker
    to turn to consider two issues.  The first of  these  would  have  been
    whether the application should be granted on  the  basis  of  a  policy
    outside the Rules covering army recruitment.  The failure to  undertake
    this consideration renders the decision not in accordance with the law,
    on Abdi principles. The second, if the application did not fall  within
    such a policy, or if there was no policy currently in force, would have
    been  whether  the  application  should  have   been   granted   on   a
    discretionary basis outside the Immigration Rules.

27.  I appreciate that this latter point would not have been one that  could
    have been considered, in jurisdictional terms, at any appeal.  However,
    it would only be if these aspects, given the  centrality  of  the  army
    application, had been properly decided, not in the appellant's  favour,
    that the residual issue of leave to remain on Article 8  grounds  would
    have arisen.

28.  Despite deciding that the appropriate disposal of this appeal  is  that
    the decision was not in accordance with the law, and  that  it  is  not
    necessary to consider Article 8 in full, I  would  make  the  following
    observations.  The appellant is clearly closely involved with the  care
    of his two  younger  siblings,  and  is  in  a  serious  and  committed
    relationship with his partner.  If the British Army  application  issue
    were to fall away, therefore, there would be an  arguable  case  to  be
    considered  on  the  basis  of  his  family  life   connections.    His
    connections  with  his  siblings  involve  an  element  of  dependency,
    suggesting that family life continues despite the fact that he  is  now
    over 18.  I would not accept the argument put forward by Mr Avery that
    joining the army would have the same impact on family life  as  removal
    to Nigeria.  This misses two crucial points.  The  first  is  that  the
    appellant intends to send some of his salary to his  mother,  and  this
    will enable her to remain at home  to  care  for  his  younger  sister,
    through not working such long hours.  The second is that members of the
    British Army are allowed periods of leave, and it is not  a  life  that
    demands of soldiers that they cannot marry, or have any family life.

29.  Without it being necessary to proceed to a full analysis of Article  8,
    however, my decision is that the appeal falls  to  be  allowed  on  the
    basis that the decision was not in accordance  with  the  law,  through
    proceeding on a mistake of fact, or alternatively  through  failing  to
    consider or apply a relevant policy.  In my view  the  fairest  outcome
    now would be for the matter to be reconsidered,  with  a  view  to  the
    appellant being given an appropriate period of leave to enable  him  to
    pick up his British Army application where he left it, back in  January
    2012, when this ill-fated application was made.

30.  I have considered the issue  that  was  raised  at  the  start  of  the
    hearing about the appellant being  on  police  bail.   At  present  the
    position is that he is not facing any charges.  If  this  changes  then
    that may, of course, have an impact on any future decision.  The nature
    of my disposal of the appeal, however, and the fact that I am making no
    direction, leaves it open for this  matter  to  be  considered  by  the
    decision maker.  I would  note,  however,  that  there  has  been  such
    serious delay in this case so far, which has impacted so  significantly
    on the appellant's plans, that it appears to me that it would be  wrong
    to deal with this now in anything other than a timely manner.

31.  Neither side raised  any  issue  of  anonymity,  and  I  make  no  such
    direction.  Having allowed the appeal on the basis  that  the  decision
    was not in accordance with the law, I have decided to make a fee award,
    in the sum of �140.  This reflects the significant unexplained delay in
    the decision making process, and the fact  that  it  appears  that  the
    application would have been  successful  if  it  had  been  dealt  with
    properly, and on a proper timescale.

Notice of Decision

The decision dismissing the appeal having been set aside,  for  the  reasons
given above, the decision is remade as follows.

The appeal is allowed on the basis that the decision was not  in  accordance
with the law.

No anonymity order is made.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Having allowed the appeal in remaking it, I  have  decided  to  make  a  fee
award in the sum of �140 for the reasons given above.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb
