

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/07729/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|                                     |                                           |
|Heard at Birmingham Magistrates Court|Decision and Reasons Promulgated           |
|On 25th January 2016                 |                    On 4th February 2016   |
|                                     |                                 |


                                   Before


                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between


                             MR SAIT B.J. CEESAY
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Mahmood of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a citizen of  Gambia  born  on  12  July  1981  appeals
      against the decision of the respondent dated 18 January 2014  refusing
      to issue him with a Registration Certificate  and  Residence  Card  as
      confirmation of his right of residence in the United Kingdom under the
      2006 EEA regulations as the spouse of an EEA national.


   2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cheales  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal,
      finding that the appellant's and the sponsor's relationship is durable
      and as such is entitled to a Residence Card  as  confirmation  of  his
      right to live in this country..


   3. At the hearing it was accepted by both  parties  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge should not have allowed the appeal outright but  should
      have sent the appeal to the Secretary of State for her to exercise her
      discretion.



   4. I accept this position because the Upper Tribunal decision in  Ihemedu
      (OFM's - meaning) Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00340  clarified  that  in  a
      situation such as this "the most an immigration judge is  entitled  to
      do is to allow the appeal as being in not in accordance with  the  law
      leaving the matter as to whether to exercise this  discretion  in  the
      appellant's favour or not to the Secretary of State".



   5. I therefore allow the appellant's appeal to the extent that  a  lawful
      decision remains outstanding before the Secretary of State whether  or
      not to exercise her discretion to grant the appellant a Residence Card
      in accordance with the 2006 Regulations.



      DECISION



   6. The appeal is allowed to the extent that the appeal be  sent  back  to
      the Secretary of State awaiting her lawful decision.


Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                          Dated the 30th day of January 2016
Mrs S Chana







