
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/07303/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 16th March 2016                     |     On 22nd April 2016             |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                            Mr Alinaghi Ashkhasi
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik, Counsel instructed by Fisher Jones
                    Greenwood
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born  on  7th  September  1987.   He
    appeals  against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Pickup
    promulgated on 18th June 2015 dismissing his appeal against a  decision
    to refuse to vary leave to remain on the basis of long residence and  a
    decision to remove him under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

2.   The Appellant was granted leave to  remain  in  the  UK  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant on 23rd February 2013 valid  until  13th  May
    2014. He came to the UK  as  a  student  and  had  been  resident  from
    September 2004 for about a year. He returned to Iran on  8th  September
    2005 and came back to the UK on 27th July 2006. He was absent from  the
    UK for a period of 321 days. The reason for his absence was that he had
    a knee injury and he returned to Iran for treatment  which  took  place
    between 13th October 2005 and 12th January 2006. The Appellant applied,
    before the expiry of his leave, for indefinite leave to remain  on  the
    basis of long residence under paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules.

The Respondent's refusal

3.   The  Respondent  refused  the  application  in  a  decision  dated  5th
    February 2015. The Respondent concluded that the Appellant had  entered
    the UK on 28th September 2004 and  had  been  lawfully  resident  since
    then. However, he had not accrued a period  of  ten  years'  continuous
    lawful residence during which he had not been absent from  the  UK  for
    less than 540 days during the ten year qualifying  period  and  he  had
    been absent from the UK for more than six months at any one time on one
    occasion.

4.   In the refusal letter the Respondent stated:


         "For the purposes of continuous residence 276A(v),  that  residence
         is broken if a person has spent eighteen months or more outside the
         UK. Your application has been carefully considered to  see  whether
         the Secretary of State's discretion should be exercised to overlook
         your excess absences.


         As part of your application you have provided a  detailed  schedule
         of your absences, which have been  checked  against  the  passports
         that you submitted with your application. It is noted that over the
         full period of your residence, some ten years, you have accrued 882
         days' absence from the UK. When  assessing  your  application  UKVI
         have sought to identify a ten year  period  with  your  ten  years'
         residence period in which the least number of  absences  have  been
         taken. At the time  of  decision  the  period  used  was  from  3rd
         February 2004 to 3rd February  2014  -  the  absences  during  this
         period equated to 882 days in total.


         You have stated  that  the  reason  for  the  gap  in  your  lawful
         residence between 8th September 2005 and 27th July 2006, 321  days,
         was due to a knee injury. You have provided evidence  which  states
         that the treatment was from 13th October 2005 to 12th January 2006,
         even if discretion were used to disregard this period your  absence
         would still be 194 days which exceeds the permitted maximum of  180
         days for one absence, therefore you  have  broken  your  continuous
         residence.
         Even with the evidence provided  you  still  exceed  the  permitted
         maximum with the total absence equating to 755 days in total  using
         your actual absence of 194 days.


         Furthermore you have submitted  evidence  that  you  had  treatment
         outside the UK from 11th August 2007  to  3rd  September  2007,  22
         days. However, you still exceed  the  permitted  maximum  with  the
         total absence equating to 699 days in total  taking  the  above  22
         days into account.


         It is considered that the reasons that you have given for  the  gap
         in your continuous lawful residence do not come within the category
         of exceptional reasons as per the modernised  guidance.  Discretion
         does not extend to absences outside the UK.


         Paragraph 276D does not  allow  the  Secretary  of  State  the  use
         discretion where you are satisfied that  276B  has  not  been  met.
         Paragraph 276D states that ILR is to be refused rather than may  be
         refused or  any  other  use  of  flexible  terminology.  Therefore,
         although your claim is plausible for having excess absences  during
         the ten year period, the Secretary of State has no  power  to  take
         that into consideration in the application of paragraph 276C of the
         Immigration Rules. 276D precludes flexible fulfilment of 276B  when
         considering a grant pursuant to 276C.


         As detailed above you are considered to have broken your continuous
         residence in the UK and have not been here legally  throughout  the
         ten years.  As a result you are unable to  demonstrate  ten  years'
         continuous lawful residence in the UK  and  you  are  not  able  to
         satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules with reference to
         paragraph 276B(i)(a)."



Grounds of appeal

5.   An application for permission to appeal was made  on  the  ground  that
    the Respondent had misunderstood the nature of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and misunderstood the nature of the discretion  that  was  exercisable.
    Consequently the decision was not in accordance with the  law  and  the
    First-tier Tribunal should have allowed the  appeal  and  remitted  the
    matter back to the decision maker so that a lawful  decision  could  be
    made, Ukus (discretion: when reviewable) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 307 (IAC).
     It was submitted that there was  a  residual  discretion  within  Rule
    276B.

6.   Further the Respondent wrongly concluded that the discretion which  was
    exercisable outside the Immigration Rules was only in respect of single
    periods of absence of less than 180 days, but in any event  refused  to
    consider her discretion outside the Rules.  This was  contrary  to  the
    Secretary of State's own policy on long residence, which states:

         "If the applicant has been absent from the UK  for  more  than  six
         months in one period and more than eighteen months  in  total,  the
         application  should  normally  be  refused.  However,  it  may   be
         appropriate  to  exercise  discretion  over  excess   absences   in
         compelling or compassionate circumstances, for  example  where  the
         applicant  was  prevented  from  returning  to   the   UK   through
         unavoidable circumstances.


         For all cases you must consider whether the individual returned  to
         the UK within a reasonable time once they were able to do so.


         For the single absence of over 180 days you must consider how  much
         of the absence was due to compelling circumstances and whether  the
         applicant returned to the UK as soon as they were able  to  do  so.
         You must also consider the reasons for the absence.


         For overall absences of 540 days in the ten year  period  you  must
         consider whether the long absence (or  absences)  that  pushed  the
         applicant over the limit happened towards the start or end  of  the
         ten year residence period, and how soon they will be able  to  meet
         that requirement.  If the absences were towards the start  of  that
         period the person may be able to meet the requirements in the  near
         future and so could  be  expected  to  apply  when  they  meet  the
         requirements.  However, if the absences were recent the person will
         not qualify for a long time and so you must consider whether  there
         are particularly compelling circumstances.


         All of these factors must be considered together  when  determining
         whether it is reasonable to exercise discretion."


7.   It was also submitted  (ground  2)  that  the  Tribunal  erred  in  its
    approach to Article 8.  The judge's finding  that  Article  8  was  not
    engaged amounted to an error of law and further his consideration under
    Article 8(2) amounted to an error of  law  because  the  judge  wrongly
    relied on Nasim and others, the factual matrix of  which  was  entirely
    different  to  the  Appellant's  case.  There   were   compelling   and
    compassionate circumstances in this case and the judge  had  failed  to
    properly consider Article 8.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  on
    the following grounds:

         "I am far from convinced but I am satisfied that the  grounds  make
         out  an  arguable  case  that   the   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
         misunderstood the meaning of 'shall be considered' when looking  at
         the length of the Appellant's absence from the UK."




9.   In the Rule 24 response, the Respondent opposed the Appellant's  appeal
    and  stated  that  Judge  Pickup   interpreted   and   considered   the
    requirements of paragraph 276A(a)(v). The judge found at  paragraph  10
    that the Appellant had a total of 882 days absence from the UK and even
    excluding his treatment he had 755 days absence from the  UK.  Thus  he
    failed to meet the Immigration Rules. The judge found that there was no
    discretion within the Rules and gave anxious scrutiny to  the  guidance
    before arriving at this conclusion. The judge found that  even  if  the
    compelling and compassionate circumstances  of  the  medical  treatment
    were considered his absence exceeded the 180 day maximum.


Submissions

10.  Mr Karnik submitted that there were three  points:  whether  there  was
    discretion within the  Rules;  the  Respondent's  failure  to  exercise
    discretion outside the Rules; and the judge's error of law in  relation
    to Article 8. There was no dispute on the period of  absence  from  the
    UK. Within paragraph 276A the Respondent had discretion to consider the
    periods of absence and there was discretion to  disregard  a  break  in
    lawful residence.

11.  Although the Home  Office  guidance  before  the  judge  postdated  the
    decision, it was dated 8th May 2015, it was an explanation of  how  the
    Rules should be understood.  The Respondent therefore had discretion to
    consider absences over eighteen months or over 180 days. The judge  had
    erred in law in failing to find that the Respondent's decision was  not
    in accordance with the law. There was discretion under the  Immigration
    Rules and the Respondent had not considered it. The Respondent and  the
    judge had failed to follow the approach taken in Ukus at paragraph 12.

12.  Further, having concluded  that  there  was  no  discretion  under  the
    Rules, the Respondent fettered her discretion in  failing  to  exercise
    her discretion outside the Rules.

13.  In relation to Article 8, Mr Karnik submitted that there was no  proper
    reasoned conclusion on Article 8(2).   Had  the  judge  looked  at  the
    evidence in the Appellant's witness statement he could have come  to  a
    different conclusion.

14.  Mr Duffy  submitted  that  the  word  "shall"  in  paragraph  276A  was
    mandatory in this instance. There was no  point  in  having  discretion
    outside the Immigration Rules if the Rules themselves provided for such
    discretion. Although "shall" could  be  discretionary  in  relation  to
    construction this was not a Rule where  that  was  the  case  and  this
    interpretation was consistent with  the  case  of  Grunwick  Processing
    Laboratories Ltd and others v Advisory,  Conciliation  and  Arbitration
    Service [1978] AC 655.



15.  The Appellant in his submissions had relied on page 698, paragraph H:

         "The result of this appeal turns solely upon whether that  part  of
         Section 14(1) which I have cited is mandatory or  directory.  Prima
         facie the word 'shall' suggests that it is mandatory but that  word
         has often been rightly construed  as  being  directory.  Everything
         turns upon the context in which it is used -  the  subject  matter,
         the purpose and effect of the Section in which it appears.   In  my
         view Sections 12(1) and 14(1)  read  together  mean  that  ACAS  in
         considering any recognition issue may make  such  enquiries  as  it
         thinks fit but that it must in the course of  those  enquiries  and
         before deciding the issue ascertain the opinions of workers to whom
         the issue relates."


16.  The Respondent did consider her discretion outside the Rules  and  this
    is clear from what is written at page 3  of  the  decision.   Ukus  was
    applicable. The decision was a lawful one and therefore the  First-tier
    Tribunal  could  not  intervene.  The  Respondent  had  considered  her
    discretion outside the Immigration Rules and refused to exercise it  in
    the Appellant's favour.

17.  In relation to Article  8  the  judge  had  properly  directed  himself
    following Nasim and Patel  and  the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  on
    private life alone. The Appellant did not meet  the  Immigration  Rules
    and paragraph 276B was in relation  to  long  residence.   It  was  not
    applicable in giving an indication of where the balance  would  lie  in
    private life cases. There was no deficiency in  the  judge's  reasoning
    and no material error of law.

18.  In response Mr Karnik submitted that the Respondent says the  Rules  do
    not  afford  discretion  and  therefore  there  was  no  discretion  to
    exercise. There  was  no  explicit  consideration  of  an  exercise  of
    discretion outside the Immigration Rules  despite  that  being  clearly
    advanced to the decision  maker  in  the  application.  Therefore,  the
    Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law. The ten  year
    residence Rule should have been part of the  balancing  exercise  under
    Article 8(2). The judge should have taken into account  the  length  of
    lawful residence which was relevant to such a balance.


Relevant Provisions of the Immigration Rules

19.  Paragraph 276A states that for the purposes of paragraphs 276B to  276D
    and 276ADE
    (a) continuous residence means residence in  the  UK  for  an  unbroken
    period, and for these purposes a period shall not be considered to have
    been broken where an applicant is absent from the United Kingdom for  a
    period of six months or  less  at  any  one  time,  provided  that  the
    applicant in question has existing limited leave  to  enter  or  remain
    upon their departure and return, but shall be considered to  have  been
    broken if the applicant:
         (i) has been removed under Schedule 2 of the 1971 Act,  Section  10
         of the 1999 Act, has been deported or has left the UK  having  been
         refused leave to enter or remain here; or
         (ii) has left the UK and, on doing so, evidenced a clear  intention
         not to return; or (ii) left the UK in  circumstances  in  which  he
         could have had no reasonable expectation at  the  time  of  leaving
         that he would  lawfully  be  able  to  return;  or  (iv)  has  been
         convicted  of  an  offence  and  was  sentenced  to  a  period   of
         imprisonment or was directed to be detained in an institution other
         than  a  prison  (including,  in  particular,  a  hospital  or   an
         institution for young offenders), provided  that  the  sentence  in
         question was not a suspended sentence; or
         (v) has spent a total of more than eighteen months absent from  the
         United Kingdom during the period in question.

20.  Paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules states  that  the  requirements
    to be met by an applicant for indefinite leave to remain on the  ground
    of long residence in the United Kingdom are that
    (i)  he has had at least ten years' continuous lawful residence in  the
    UK,
    (ii) having regard to the public interest there are no reasons  why  it
         would be undesirable for him to be given indefinite leave to remain
         on the ground of long residence, taking into account his
         (a)  age; and
         (b)  strength of connections in the UK; and
         (c)  personal history including  character,  conduct,  associations
             and employment record; and
         (d)  domestic circumstances; and
         (e)  compassionate circumstances; and
         (f)  any representations received on the person's behalf; and
    (iii)    the applicant does not fall  for  refusal  under  the  general
    grounds for refusal.
    (iv) the applicant has sufficient knowledge of the English language and
         sufficient knowledge about life in the United Kingdom unless he  is
         under the age of 18 or aged 65 or over at the  time  he  makes  the
         application.
    (v)  the applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration laws,
         except that any period of overstaying for a period of  28  days  or
         less will be disregarded as will any period of overstaying  between
         periods of entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to remain of up
         to 28 days and any period of overstaying pending the  determination
         of an application made within that 28 day period.

21.  Paragraph 276C states that indefinite leave to remain on the ground  of
    long residence in the UK may be granted provided that the Secretary  of
    State is satisfied that each of the requirements of paragraph  276B  is
    met.

22.  Paragraph 276D states that indefinite leave to remain on the ground  of
    long residence in the UK is to be refused if the Secretary of State  is
    not satisfied that each of the requirements of paragraph 276B is met.

Discussion and Conclusions

23.  I find that  on  reading  paragraph  276A(a)(v),  in  conjunction  with
    paragraphs 276B and 276D, leave to  remain  shall  be  refused  if  the
    Appellant has been absent from the UK for  more  than  eighteen  months
    during the ten year period.  The  terms  of  276A(a)(v)  and  276D  are
    mandatory. The Appellant's own evidence is that he has been absent  for
    882 days. Even allowing for his period of illness he  has  been  absent
    from the UK for  755  days.  His  application  was  therefore  properly
    refused under the Immigration Rules.

24.  I find that neither the guidance nor  these  paragraphs  of  the  rules
    provides for discretion within the Immigration Rules such that it would
    be reviewable by the First-tier Tribunal.

25.  I also find that the Respondent considered  whether  to  disregard  the
    periods of absence and to exercise discretion outside  the  Immigration
    Rules. It is clear from  the  Respondent's  refusal  letter  where  she
    states "your application has been carefully considered to  see  whether
    the Secretary of State's discretion should  be  exercised  to  overlook
    your excess absences" and her finding that the gaps in the  Appellant's
    continuous lawful  residence  did  not  come  within  the  category  of
    exceptional reasons, as per modernised guidance. I find that  that  the
    Respondent's refusal to exercise  discretion  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules was a lawful one and was in accordance with the guidance.

26.   Accordingly,  I  find  that  the  Respondent's  decision   to   refuse
    indefinite leave to remain on the basis of ten years' lawful  residence
    was in accordance with the law.   The  question  therefore  is  whether
    there was an error of law in the  judge's  decision  in  reviewing  the
    Respondent's  application  of  the  Immigration  Rules  or  indeed  her
    discretion.

27.  The same argument that was made before me was made  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. It is  clear  from  paragraph  276D  that  there  is  no
    discretion under the  Immigration  Rules  and  the  judge  rejected  Mr
    Karnik's argument that there was discretion  in  relation  to  any  one
    period of 180 days. The judge considered the  long  residence  guidance
    and found that the exercise of discretion related to that  outside  the
    Rules, not a discretion under paragraph 276B or 276D, but in any  event
    it was clear from the refusal decision that even if discretion were  to
    be applied to the period in which the Appellant was  receiving  medical
    treatment his absence would still exceed the permitted  periods  within
    the Immigration Rules.

28.  I find that there was no error of law in the judge's finding  that  the
    Respondent's decision was  in  accordance  with  the  law  because  the
    Appellant could not meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules and the Respondent has reviewed  her  discretion  and
    refused to exercise it in the Appellant's favour.

29.  I also conclude  that  there  is  no  arguable  error  in  the  judge's
    assessment of Article 8.  Although the judge concluded that  Article  8
    was not  engaged  he  went  on  to  consider  whether  the  refusal  of
    indefinite leave and the Appellant's removal were proportionate in  the
    circumstances.  On the facts before the judge, which  he  sets  out  at
    paragraphs 14 to 21, his  finding  that  the  Appellant's  removal  was
    proportionate was one which was open to him on the evidence.

30.  It was submitted by Mr Karnik that the judge failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons  or  indeed  to  take  into  account  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement. However, it  is  quite  clear  from  paragraph  14  that  he
    considered the Appellant's witness statement and he set out  the  facts
    of the Appellant's study, his absence and his medical treatment and the
    nature of the Appellant's private life in the UK such as it was.

31.  The judge properly applied Nasim and others and  Patel  and  Others  to
    the facts as he found them and  his  conclusion  that  the  Appellant's
    removal was proportionate was one which was open to him.  The  decision
    was not lacking in reasons in relation  to  Article  8  and  the  judge
    properly directed himself in law. There was no arguable error of law in
    relation to Article 8.

32.  Accordingly,  in  conclusion,  I  find  that  the  Respondent  properly
    considered the Immigration Rules and properly considered any discretion
    to overlook any breaks in lawful residence, and  concluded  that  there
    were no compelling circumstances to do so.

33.  The Respondent had considered  her  discretion  under  the  appropriate
    guidance and refused to exercise it in the  Appellant's  favour.  There
    was no arguable error  of  law  in  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    Respondent's decision was in accordance  with  the  law  and  that,  in
    refusing to exercise her discretion, she had  taken  into  account  all
    relevant factors  and  there  was  nothing  compelling  to  warrant  an
    alternative  conclusion.   The  appeal  could  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules and there was no arguable error of law in respect  of
    the proportionality assessment under Article 8.

34.  Accordingly, I find that there was no  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision promulgated on 18th June 2015 and I  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

             J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 31st March 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



             J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 31st March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

