
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07846/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice, Belfast     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 August 2016                              |On 6 October 2016             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                 ERMIRA [B]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Muldoon, instructed by MSM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction


 1. The appellant is a national of Albania, born  18  September  1991.  She
    married Mr [B], an Albanian national, in Albania on 28 August 2011.


 2. The appellant's husband  came  to  the  UK  in  2001,  entered  into  a
    relationship with an Irish national in  2005,  lived  with  this  Irish
    national in Belfast and was issued with an EEA residence card  -  valid
    between 13  May  2009  and  13  May  2014  -  as  a  consequence.  This
    relationship broke down in 2011, shortly after  which  the  appellant's
    husband returned to Albania. The appellant's husband  asserts  that  he
    thereafter returned to the UK in July 2012, at which time  he  told  an
    immigration officer that his earlier relationship had broken  down.  He
    was informed that his residence card had been revoked, but he  received
    no further communication from the Home Office in this regard.


 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom without  lawful  authority  in
    July 2012, and the couple's son was born in Belfast on 1 May  2013.  On
    15 July  2013  the  child  was  issued  with  a  certificate  of  Irish
    nationality. The family have remained  living  in  Belfast  since  this
    time. It is the appellant's case that the employment  earnings  of  her
    husband are used to finance  the  family's  outgoings.  It  is  not  in
    dispute  that  the  appellant's  husband  has   not   demonstrated   an
    entitlement to work in the UK at the material times.


 4. On 9 September 2013 the appellant made an application to the  Secretary
    of State for an EEA residence card on the basis of being a parent/carer
    of an EEA national child exercising Treaty Rights as a  self-sufficient
    person.


 5. This application was rejected by the Secretary of State in  a  decision
    dated 28 January  2014.  Within  her  decision  letter  the  SSHD  gave
    consideration  to  regulation  15A(2)  of  the  Immigration   (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("2006 EEA Regulations") but  concluded
    that the appellant's child was not a  self-sufficient  person  for  the
    purposes of such Regulations.





Proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal


 6. The appellant appealed the aforementioned decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. That appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal judge Grimes  on
    7 May 2015 and dismissed in a decision promulgated on 8 June 2015.


 7. Before the First-tier Tribunal Ms Muldoon submitted, on the appellant's
    behalf, that:


      i) The appellant's husband's  earnings  (current  and/or  prospective)
         should be taken into account when determining whether the child  is
         self-sufficient (in reliance on the decision of the CJEU in  Alokpa
         v Ministre du Traveil, de  l'Emploi  et  de  Immigration  (Case  C-
         86/12), and the rationale deployed by the Irish High Court  in  its
         decision in OA & another v The Minister  of  Justice  Equality  and
         Defence [2014] IEHC 384):


     ii) In the alternative, given the apparent  divergence  between  Member
         States as to the interpretation of the meaning of the  term  "self-
         sufficient", the First-tier  Tribunal  should  make  a  preliminary
         reference to the CJEU;


    iii) The appellant should be permitted to remain in  United  Kingdom  in
         line with the principles enunciated in the decision of the CJEU  in
         Zambrano Case C-34/09 [2011]  ECR  I-0000.  The  appellant's  claim
         could not be defeated by the submission that the decision of the UK
         state would not have the effect of compelling the appellant's child
         to leave the European Union because it could not be said  that  the
         child could live in the Republic of Ireland;


     iv) In the alternative, the decision to refuse  the  appellant  an  EEA
         residence card was not in accordance with the law and  leads  to  a
         breach of Article 8 ECHR.


 8. In summary, the First-tier Tribunal concluded as follows:


      i) The meaning of  self-sufficient  in  the  instant  context  is  the
         subject of clear and unambiguous authority from the Court of Appeal
         (W (China) & Another v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1494 and Liu  &  Ors  v
         SSHD [2207] EWCA 1275). The decision in Alokpa did not address  the
         relevance of earnings from illegal working and does not impinge  on
         the interpretation of EU law set forth by the Court of Appeal;


     ii) It was not appropriate  to  make  a  reference  to  the  CJEU,  the
         decision in OA not amounting to a  substantive  divergence  between
         Member States on the issue in play in the instant appeal;


    iii) The appellant has not applied for entry to, or  residence  in,  the
         Republic of Ireland, and has not demonstrated that her child  would
         be prevented from living in the Republic of Ireland;


     iv) The appellant is not required to leave  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
         consequence of the SSHD's decision. Therefore, such  decision  does
         not amount to an interference with the appellant's  private  and/or
         family life rights  under  article  8  ECHR.  In  the  alternative,
         requiring the appellant to make a paid  application  for  leave  in
         this regard is proportionate.





Grounds of Application


 9. The pleaded grounds are threefold:


      i) The FtT applied the wrong test to its consideration of  whether  to
         make a preliminary reference to the CJEU. Its  refusal  to  make  a
         reference is unlawful;


     ii) The FtT's conclusion that the appellant failed to demonstrate  that
         she would not entitled to enter the Republic of Ireland  (with  the
         consequence that her child could not exercise  the  right  to  live
         there) is irrational on the available evidence;


    iii) The FtT failed to give due consideration to Article 8 ECHR.





Legal context

10. It is necessary to set the discussion which follows in its proper legal
    context.


11. Under EU law, Article 7 of the Directive 2004/38 ("Right of residence
    for more than three months") provides:
         "(1)   All Union citizens shall have the right of residence on the
             territory of another Member State for a period of longer than
             three months if they:
            (a)      are workers or self-employed persons in the host
                 Member State; or
            (b)      have sufficient resources for themselves and their
                 family members not to become a burden on the social
                 assistance system of the host Member State during their
                 period of residence and have comprehensive sickness
                 insurance cover in the host Member State; or
            (c)      -      are enrolled at a private or public
                 establishment, accredited or financed by the host Member
                 State on the basis of its legislation or administrative
                 practice, for the principal purpose of following a course
                 of study, including vocational training; and
                 - have comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the host
                 Member State and assure the relevant national authority, by
                 means of a declaration or by such equivalent means as they
                 may choose, that they have sufficient resources for
                 themselves and their family members not to become a burden
                 on the social assistance system of the host Member State
                 during their period of residence; or
            (d)     are family members accompanying or joining a Union
                 citizen who satisfies the conditions referred to in points
                 (a), (b) or (c).

          (2)  The right of residence provided for  in  paragraph 1  shall
             extend to family members who are not  nationals  of  a  Member
             State, accompanying or joining the Union citizen in  the  host
             Member State, provided that such Union citizen  satisfies  the
             conditions referred to in paragraph 1(a), (b) or (c)."


12. Regulation 15A was inserted  into  the  2006  EEA  Regulations  from  8
    November 2012 with the intention of reflecting in  legislation  the  EU
    law rights identified in a number of decisions from the CJEU.


13. The relevant parts of regulation 15A read:



         "15A Derivative right of residence


             1) A person ("P") who is not an exempt person and who satisfies
                the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A) or (5) of this
                regulation is entitled to s derivative right  to  reside  in
                the United Kingdom for as long as P satisfies  the  relevant
                criteria.


             2) P satisfies the criteria of this paragraph if -
                (a)     P is the primary carer of an EEA national; and
                (b)    the relevant EA national -
                  (i)      is under the age of 18
                  (ii)     is residing in the United  Kingdom  as  a  self-
                sufficient person; and
                      (iii) would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom
                  if P were required to leave. ...


           (7)    P is to be regarded as a primary carer of another person
                if -
              (a) P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of that
                person, and
              (b) P -
                  (i)   is the person who has primary responsibility for
                that person's care; or
                  (ii) shares equally the responsibility of that person's
                  care with one other person who is not an exempt person."
14. A 'self -sufficient person' is defined within regulation 4 of the 2006
    EEA Regulations:
         "(1) In these Regulations -
          ...
            (c) "self-sufficient person" means a person who has-


                 (i) sufficient resources not to  become  a  burden  on  the
                 social assistance system of the United Kingdom  during  his
                 period of residence; and
                 (ii) comprehensive sickness insurance cover in  the  United
                 Kingdom;
         ...
         (2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(c), where family  members  of
            the person concerned reside in the  United  Kingdom  and  their
            right to reside is dependent upon their being family members of
            that person-


            (a)  the  requirement  for  that  person  to  have   sufficient
              resources not to become a burden  on  the  social  assistance
              system of the United Kingdom during his period  of  residence
              shall only be satisfied if his resources  and  those  of  the
              family members are sufficient to avoid  him  and  the  family
              members becoming such a burden;
            (b) the requirement  for  that  person  to  have  comprehensive
              sickness insurance cover in the United Kingdom shall only  be
              satisfied if he and his family members have such cover.


         (3) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(d), where family  members  of
            the person concerned reside in the  United  Kingdom  and  their
            right to reside is dependent upon their being family members of
            that person, the requirement for  that  person  to  assure  the
            Secretary of State that he  has  sufficient  resources  not  to
            become a burden on the social assistance system of  the  United
            Kingdom during his period of residence shall only be  satisfied
            if he assures the Secretary of State  that  his  resources  and
            those of the family members are sufficient to avoid him and the
            family members becoming such a burden.
         (4)  For the purposes of paragraphs (1)(c) and (d)  and  paragraphs
            (2) and (3), the   resources of the person concerned and, where
            applicable,  any  family  members,  are  to  be   regarded   as
            sufficient if -
             (a) they exceed the maximum level of resources which a  United
                Kingdom national and his family members may possess if he is
                to become eligible for social assistance  under  the  United
                Kingdom benefit system; or
             (b) paragraph (a) does not apply but, taking into account  the
                personal  situation  of  the  person  concerned  and,  where
                applicable, any family members, it appears to  the  decision
                maker that the resources of the person or persons  concerned
                should be regarded as sufficient.
         (5)  For the  purpose  of  regulation  15A(2)  references  in  this
            regulation to "family members" includes a  "primary  carer"  as
            defined in regulation 15A(7)"
15.  The  Explanatory  Memorandum  to  the  2012  amendments  to  the  2006
    Regulations materially states:
         "Paragraphs (1) and (2) of new regulation 15A  (which  is  inserted
         into the 2006 Regulations by paragraph  9  of  Schedule  1  to  the
         Regulations) specifies that a derivative right of residence  arises
         for the primary carer of a self-sufficient EEA national child where
         the denial of such a right would prevent the child from  exercising
         their own right of residence. This regulation gives effect  to  the
         ECJ judgment in Chen.  The  UK  Border  Agency  has  to  date  been
         operationally compliant with this judgment by virtue  of  paragraph
         257  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which  will  now  be  deleted  on
         commencement of this amending regulation."

16. As to the meaning of self-sufficient person; in a  similar  context  to
    that which presents in the instant case, the CJEU said  as  follows  in
    Alokpa:


         "27...in the context of a case such as that at issue  in  the  main
         proceedings, in which a Union citizen was born in the  host  Member
         State and had not made use of the right to free movement, the Court
         has held that the  expression  'have'  sufficient  resources  in  a
         provision similar to Article 7(1)(b) of Directive 2004/38  must  be
         interpreted as meaning that it suffices  that  such  resources  are
         available to the Union citizens, and that that provision lays  down
         no requirement whatsoever as to their origin, since they  could  be
         provided, inter alia, by a national  of  a  non-Member  State,  the
         parent of the citizens who are minor children  at  issue  (see,  to
         that effect, concerning European Union law  instruments  pre-dating
         that directive, Case C-200/02  Zhu  and  Chen  [2004]  ECR  I-9925,
         paragraphs 28 and 30)."


17. In W (China) and X (China) [2006] EWCA Civ 1494 the Court of Appeal had
    to apply Zhu and Chen to the  cases  of  two  Chinese  nationals  ("the
    parents") whose child had acquired Irish citizenship but who had  lived
    in the UK since 2002. It was asserted that the level  of  the  parents'
    savings, acquired as a consequence of illegal  employment  in  the  UK,
    meant that their child was a self-sufficient person under Article 18 of
    the EC treaty and Directive 90/364.  In the later  decision  of  Liu  v
    SSHD [2007] EWCA 1275[1] Buxton LJ summarised the  conclusions  of  the
    Court of Appeal in W (China) as follows:

         "i)  Applying paragraph 45 of Chen, the right  of  residence  of  a
             minor could only be effectively asserted with the presence and
             support of a carer or guardian, and that, if the  requirements
             of the Directives are  fulfilled,  creates  a  right  for  the
             parent to reside with the child, (W (China) [6]);
         ii)  All of the minor EU citizen and his non-EU citizen carers have
             to  fulfil  the  Directive  requirements   of   (a)   sickness
             insurance; (b) sufficiency of means: (W (China) [8]);
         iii)     Those conditions are pre-conditions to  the  existence  of
             the article 18 right in any given case,  and  thus  the  right
             does not  exist  until  those  conditions  are  fulfilled:  (W
             (China) [16]);
         iv)  The pre-condition of sufficiency of means cannot be  fulfilled
             by funds derived from employment that is precarious because it
             is unlawful: (W (China) [14]);
         v)   The member state is under no obligation to adjust its domestic
             law in order to make available to  the  EU  citizen  resources
             that will enable  him  to  fulfil  the  pre-condition  to  the
             existence of the Article 18 right: (W (China) [16])."
18.  In analysing whether earnings from employment undertaken by  a  non-EEA
    national parent in the host Member State  could  make  the  EU  citizen
    child self-sufficient, the Court in W (China) held that they could not.
    In doing so it quoted with approval the IATs reasons in this regard:

         "It appears that [it] exposes both  himself  and  his  employer  to
         criminal sanctions.  In any event as a  matter  of  fact,  in  such
         circumstances, the employment and the funds deriving from it cannot
         be  regarded  as  anything  other  than  of  an  ephemeral  nature.
         Employment which has no proper or  lawful  prospect  of  permanence
         cannot be  regarded  as  providing  sufficient  resources  for  the
         maintenance either  of  (the  child)  alone,  or  of  her  and  the
         appellants."

19. It is also relevant to cite the following passage from the judgment  of
    Buxton LJ in Liu, at [20 - 21]:

         "The third submission affects all of the appellants, but it  is  of
         particular relevance to the Mouloungui appeal: which because of the
         continual unlawfulness of the presence in  the  United Kingdom  of
         Mr Mouloungui would fail in any event if W (China) were applied to
         it. This submission was that the court should indeed  look  to  the
         future, during the period of long-term residence, and ask  whether,
         if granted permission to remain on Article 18 grounds,  the  adult
         claiming to provide the resources would indeed be able to do so, by
         taking employment if so permitted. The past experience was relevant
         to that question. Wang and Mr and Mrs Ahmed  continue  in  their
         present employment; and Mr Mouloungui, although currently forbidden
         to work, had a "job offer". Permission to remain must therefore  be
         provided in order to  enable  a  parent  to  fulfil  the  resources
         requirement of the Directive,  and  thus  make  a  reality  of  the
         child's right of residence as an EU citizen.
         This approach fails for the reasons that have already been set out.
          By a combination of Article 18 read with the requirements of  the
         Directives, the right to reside only exists once  the  requirements
         of the directives are fulfilled..."




Discussion and Decision


20. Having set out at some length the relevant EU and  UK  legislation  and
    case law, I now return to the instant appeal. As identified above,  the
    appellant asserted before the FtT that a preliminary  reference  should
    be made to the CJEU, and submits before the Upper Tribunal  (ground  1)
    that the FtT erred in law in not taking such a course.


21. The FtT was asked to make a  preliminary  reference  in  the  following
    terms:


         "In circumstances such as the present, is Article  20  TFEU  to  be
         interpreted as meaning  that  it  precludes  a  Member  State  from
         refusing to permit employment to a third country parent of a  young
         minor in circumstances where the minor is a national  of  a  Member
         State, is covered by appropriate sickness insurance, is in care  of
         that parent and where the result of  the  employment  is  that  the
         minor would have sufficient resources not to become a burden on the
         public finances of the host Member State."


22. It is immediately apparent that the Court of Appeal's  decisions  in  W
    (China) and Liu provide the answer to the proposed reference, at  least
    in the context of the current appeal before the Tribunal.  That  answer
    is not favourable to the appellant and is entirely consistent with  the
    FtT's conclusion.


23. Ms Muldoon submits, however, that W (China) should  not  be  the  final
    word on the issue of whether income from appellant's husband, (from the
    past unlawful employment or as a consequence  of  income  derived  from
    likely future employment which he must be permitted to undertake),  can
    be taken into account in determining whether the appellant's  child  is
    self-sufficient.


24. Before the FtT this was said to be so for two reasons,  which  I  shall
    deal with in turn.


25. First, it is submitted that  the  CJEU,  in  its  decision  in  Alokpa,
    widened the scope of the meaning of self-sufficiency over and above the
    meaning ascribed to such phrase in Zhu and Chen and,  consequently,  it
    is that decision and not  the  decision  in  W  (China)  that  must  be
    followed by the Tribunal.


26. As a matter of legal principle it is perfectly possible to undermine  a
    binding national authority by showing that it is  clearly  incompatible
    with the authority of the CJEU (see paragraph 171 of the  judgment  of
    the     Master of the     Rolls     in     R (Countryside
    Alliance v The Attorney General) [2007] QB 305).


27. However, that principle cannot be invoked to the benefit of the instant
    appellant for simple reason that it is plain the CJEU in Alokpa did not
    widen the meaning of the phrase 'self-sufficiency'; indeed,  the  Court
    specifically adopted the meaning of 'self-sufficiency'  as  articulated
    in Zhu and Chen (see paragraph 27 of the judgment in Alokpa:  paragraph
    16 above).


28. Ms Muldoon submitted, in  the  alternative,  that  the  High  Court  of
    Ireland (Barr J in OA & Anor  v  The  Minister  Justice,  Equality  and
    Defence [2014] IEHC 384), had applied the decisions  of  the  Court  of
    Justice in Chen and Alokpa so as give a  wider  interpretation  to  the
    term 'self-sufficiency' that set out in the judgments in W (China)  and
    Liu, having first made reference to, and  cited  from,  both  of  these
    judgments.


29. Consequently, it was said, given that (i) the purpose of a  preliminary
    reference to  the  CJEU  is  "to  prevent  the  occurrence  within  the
    Community  of  divergences  in  judicial  decisions  on  questions   of
    Community Law", and (ii) there is a divergence in judicial decisions on
    the issue of the meaning of self-sufficiency in the instant context  as
    between Ireland and the United Kingdom, reference should be made in the
    instant case. In support of this submission reliance was place  on  the
    decision of the ECJ in CILFIT v  Ministry  of  Health  (Case  C-238/81)
    [1982] ECR 3415.


30. Whilst Ms Muldoon's submission is superficially  attractive,  on  close
    analysis it is in my view misconceived, for the reasons which follow.


31. Article 267 TFEU (formerly Article 264 EC) reads:


         "The Court of Justice of the European Union shall have jurisdiction
          to give preliminary rulings concerning:


      a) The interpretation of Treaties
               b) The  validity  and  interpretation  of  the  institutions,
                  bodies office or agencies of the Union


          Where such a question is raised before any court or tribunal of  a
          Member State, that court or tribunal may, if it considers  that  a
          decision on the  question  is  necessary  to  enable  it  to  give
          judgment, request the Court to give a ruling thereon.


          Where any such question is raised in a case pending before a court
          or tribunal of a Member State against whose decisions there is  no
          judicial remedy under national law, that court or  tribunal  shall
          bring the matter before the Court..."


32. It is immediately apparent from a straight forward reading  of  Article
    267 that it is only where a question arises as to  the  'interpretation
    of Treaties' (necessary to enable the court to give judgment) is raised
    before a court or tribunal against whose decision there is no  judicial
    remedy under national law,  that  such  a  reference  to  the  CJEU  is
    mandatory - as was the case in CILFIT.


33. It is clear, therefore, that neither the First-tier  Tribunal  nor  the
    Upper Tribunal fall within the category of court or tribunal  in  which
    the making of a reference can ever be mandatory. The decision of either
    Tribunal to make a reference in a suitable case is one  of  discretion,
    to be exercised in the light of all material matters.


34. Whilst Ms Muldoon is correct in identifying that one of the  objectives
    of the system of referring questions on the interpretation of  Treaties
    to  the  CJEU  is  to  ensure  the  proper  application   and   uniform
    interpretation of Community law in all Member  States,  the  fact  that
    that there has been an inconsistent interpretation of the  Treaties  as
    between Member States does not place a mandatory obligation on a  court
    or tribunal, which is not one of final instance, to make  a  reference,
    even in a case in which the interpretation of the particular  provision
    is determinative of the matter before the court or tribunal.  It  is  a
    factor to weighed into the overall consideration  of  the  exercise  of
    discretion as to whether a reference should be made.


35. The follows two matters are,  also,  of  undoubted  importance  in  the
    instant case in the consideration of the exercise of the discretion  as
    to whether to make a reference: (i) that the Court of Appeal in both  W
    (China) and Liu has ruled on the interpretation  to  be  given  to  the
    application of the decision of the ECJ in Zhu and  Chen,  which  itself
    was applied without modification by the CJEU in Alokpa; and, (ii)  that
    the ratio of the Court of Appeal's decisions is binding on the Tribunal
    as a matter of precedent in national law.


36. It is difficult to envisage a situation in the Courts  of  England  and
    Wales in which a reference should be made on the interpretation  of  EU
    law by a court or tribunal when that law has already been  the  subject
    of binding interpretation and application by a superior  court  in  the
    same jurisdiction, save where such binding authority is  undermined  by
    later authority from the CJEU.


37. In the instant appeal the First-tier Tribunal were  certainly  entitled
    not to make a reference and in my conclusion did not err in law in  not
    doing so. Furthermore, given what I say above,  and  having  considered
    all of the circumstances of the appeal, I further conclude that  it  is
    not appropriate for the Upper Tribunal to make the reference requested.




38. Moving on to the second  ground  of  challenge,  i.e.  that  the  FtT's
    conclusion that the appellant failed to demonstrate that  she  was  not
    entitled to  enter  the  Republic  of  Ireland  is  irrational  on  the
    available evidence, once again I reject Ms Muldoon's submissions.


39. The framework for this ground lies in the appellant's  submission  that
    if she were required to leave the United Kingdom, her  child  would  be
    compelled to leave the European Union thus depriving the child  of  her
    rights as a Union Citizen. At the factual heart of  the  issue  is  the
    question of whether the appellant could reside with her  child  in  the
    Republic of Ireland - the child being entitled to  reside  there  as  a
    consequence of having Irish nationality.


40. The document which Ms Muldoon submits is determinative of the issue  of
    whether the appellant would be entitled to travel to,  and  reside  in,
    the Republic of Ireland with her Irish national child is  a  print  out
    from the website of the  Irish  Nationality  and  Immigration  Service,
    which reads:


         "Question 2
         My child is an Irish citizen but has not resided in  the  State  at
         any stage. Does the Zambrano judgment allow me a right to reside in
         Ireland?


         Response 2
         No. The Zambrano  judgment  applies  to  an  Irish  born  citizen's
         child's country of residence and  nationality.  If  an  Irish  born
         citizen child has not been  ordinarily  resident  in  Ireland  then
         his/her parent(s) cannot rely on the Zambrano Judgement as a  basis
         for securing a right of residence in Ireland."

41. The FtT concluded as follows regarding this issue:


         "21. The appellant says at paragraph 20 of  her  witness  statement
         that she is not eligible to apply for a derivative  residence  card
         in the Republic of Ireland. She basis this opinion  on  information
         provided  on  the  Irish  naturalisation  and  immigration  Service
         website and reproduced at pages 70-73 of the  appellant  bundle  1.
         This information indicates that parents of an Irish born child  who
         is not ordinarily resident in the Republic of Ireland  cannot  rely
         on the Zambrano judgment. However, information on a website is  not
         the same as an application for leave to  enter  or  remain  in  the
         Republic of Ireland. ...


         23. As she accepted in cross-examination,  the  appellant  has  not
         applied for or been refused entry to or residence in  the  Republic
         of Ireland. In the absence of such a refusal I do not  accept  that
         the appellant has demonstrated that she  has  bene  prevented  from
         residing in the Republic of  Ireland  with  her  child.  I  do  not
         therefore accept that the  effect  of  the  decision  to  refuse  a
         residence card in the UK will be that the appellant's  Irish  child
         will be obligated to leave the territory of the European Union as a
         whole."


42. I concur with the FtT's conclusion and reject the  contention  that  it
    erred in law in reaching such conclusion.


43. Foreign law is a matter of fact in the courts of the United Kingdom. It
    is for the appellant to demonstrate that her child would, as  a  matter
    of fact,  be  compelled  to  leave  the  European  Union  if  she  (the
    appellant) were required to leave  the  United  Kingdom.  The  FtT  was
    perfectly entitled to take into account the failure of the appellant to
    make  an  application  for  entry  and/or  residence   to   the   Irish
    authorities. It was further entitled  to  conclude  that  the  evidence
    relied upon from the INIS website was not determinative of the  outcome
    of such application. The FtT took  all  the  evidence  before  it  into
    account and came to a conclusion of fact which, in my view, was open to
    it give that evidence.


44. I further observe, that the passages from the INIS website relate  only
    to the issue of residency of a third country national -  as  determined
    by the INIS. The appellant would no doubt either have an appeal  or  be
    able to bring a judicial review against a refusal by the INIS to refuse
    her entry or residence - if indeed an application made by the appellant
    were to be refused. Any court or  tribunal  determining  an  appeal  or
    judicial review against such refusal would be bound  to  of  itself  to
    apply EU law. Ms Muldoon did not submit  that  the  interpretation  put
    forward on the INIS website (and upon which she relies)  is  consistent
    with EU law. Consequently, it cannot be ruled out that such a court  or
    tribunal would find in the appellant's favour.

45. Turning finally to the third ground of challenge.  This relates to  the
    FtT's consideration of Article 8 ECHR. Since the  promulgation  of  the
    FtT's decision the Court of Appeal have delivered judgment in the  case
    of TY (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 1233.

46. In TY the Secretary of State refused the claimant's application for  an
    EEA residence card, made as the dependant of a family member of an  EEA
    national residing in the United Kingdom.  The  claimant  appealed  that
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal on two grounds; first, that he  was
    entitled to remain in the UK under the  EEA  Regulations  and,  second,
    that he had an entitlement to asylum because the situation in Sri Lanka
    had deteriorated and he would be persecuted if he were to  be  returned
    there.  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the claimant's appeal on both
    grounds, the latter  ground  being  rejected  on  the  basis  that  the
    Secretary of State had not issued a notice under  Section  120  of  the
    2002 Act and, consequently, that the  applicant  was  not  entitled  to
    pursue asylum grounds in an appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    refusal to issue an EEA residence card.  The  matter  came  before  the
    Upper Tribunal who concurred entirely with the conclusions of the First-
    tier.

47. On appeal to the Court of Appeal Jackson LJ, giving the judgment of the
    court, said as follows:

         "27. Since there is no Section 120 One-Stop Notice,  the  appellant
             is confined to the subject matter of  the  original  decision.
             That is a decision that the  appellant  does  not  fulfil  the
             requirements  of  the  EEA  Regulations.   That  decision   is
             unquestionably  correct.    However   strong   or   weak   the
             appellant's claims may be under the provisions of the  Refugee
             Convention and ECHR, those provisions could  not  entitle  the
             appellant  to  receive  a  residence  card   under   the   EEA
             Regulations.  ...

         33.   Ms  Jegarajah  relies  upon  paragraph  16-18  of  Laws  LJ's
             judgment. She submits that in the  present  case  if,  in  the
             future, the appellant is removed  that  removal  will  be  "in
             consequence of" the refusal to  give  him  a  residence  card.
             Therefore the decision to refuse a residence  card  will  have
             the effect  of  putting  the  UK  in  breach  of  the  Refugee
             Convention and ECHR.

         34.  I have carefully considered this argument and re-read JM  with
             Ms Jegarajah's  submissions  in  mind.  I  have  come  to  the
             conclusion, however, that those submissions  are  flawed.  The
             crucial feature of JM was that the Secretary of State served a
             section 120 one stop notice: see the last  sentence  of  [23].
             That had two consequences. First, if M's  appeal  to  the  AIT
             failed the Secretary of State would  be  able  to  proceed  to
             removal, without giving  M  any  opportunity  to  raise  human
             rights  arguments  or  to  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds.
             Secondly, M was fully entitled to advance  all  his  arguments
             under ECHR and the AIT was obliged to consider them.  The  AIT
             failed to do so, because it misconstrued section 84 (1) (g) of
             the 2002 Act. Accordingly the  Court  of  Appeal  allowed  M's
             appeal. The present case differs from JM in a crucial respect,
             namely that here there was no one stop  notice  under  section
             120.

         35.  It is impossible to say that the Secretary of State's decision
             to withhold a residence card  (a  decision  which  is  correct
             under the EEA Regulations) will or could cause the UK to be in
             breach of the Refugee Convention or the  ECHR.   The  UK  will
             only be in breach of those Conventions if in  the  future  the
             appellant makes an asylum or human  rights  claim,  which  the
             Secretary of State and/or the Tribunals incorrectly reject.

         36.  In the result therefore I reach  a  similar  decision  on  the
             issues before us to the decision reached by the Upper Tribunal
             in Amirteymour...

48. In the instant case the SSHD made a decision to refuse to issue an  EEA
    residence card.  There was no notice served under section  120  of  the
    2002 Act on the appellant, and neither has there  been  a  decision  to
    remove her.

49. I must apply the ratio of TY unless the appellant can demonstrate  that
    it is it is clearly incompatible  with  a  decision  of  the  CJEU.  Ms
    Muldoon sought to tread the latter path  by  placing  reliance  on  the
    decision of the CJEU in SSHD v NA  (Case  C-487/2016),  in  conjunction
    with the terms of the questions of reference from the Court of  Appeal,
    and the Upper  Tribunal's  decision,  in  the  same  case  (the  latter
    referenced as NA (Amos; Zambrano; reg 15A(3)(c) 2006 EEA  Regs)  [2013]
    UKUT 00089).

50. The first two questions referred to the CJEU in NA were:

         "(1) Does an EU citizen have a right to reside  in  a  host  member
         state under Articles 20 and 21 of the TFEU in  circumstances  where
         the only state within the EU in which the citizen  is  entitled  to
         reside is his state of nationality, but there is a finding of  fact
         by a competent tribunal that the removal of the  citizen  from  the
         host member state to his state  of  nationality  would  breach  his
         rights under Article 8 of the ECHR or Article 7 of the Charter

           (2) If the EU Citizen in (1) (above) is a child, does the  parent
         having sole care of that child have a derived right of residence in
         the host member state if the child  would  have  to  accompany  the
         parent on removal of the parent from the host member state?"

51. It is not the CJEU's answer to the questions that Ms Muldoon  prays  in
    aid, but rather the premise upon which  the  reference  was  made,  and
    answered i.e. that removal of NA to the  host  EU  state  would  breach
    Article 8 ECHR.  This,  though,  in  my  view  cannot  not  assist  the
    appellant because she cannot demonstrate that the binding authority  of
    TY is inconsistent with the decision of the CJEU.

52. The CJEU in NA did  not  consider,  or  determine,  the  scope  of  the
    consideration required  under  the  ECHR  when  determining  rights  of
    residence under EU  law.  The  questions  referred  to  the  CJEU  were
    premised on the fact that such a breach would occur.

53. Tracing this back to the Upper Tribunal's decision  in  NA.  The  Upper
    Tribunal proceeded on the basis of an agreement between the parties  as
    to the correct legal position, reflected in part in paragraph 69 of its
    decision where it states:

         "We accept that our decision entails considering the refusal  of  a
         residence card as indicative of an intention to  remove,  but  note
         that this was also how Mr Deller asked  us  to  regard  it  in  the
         context of our Article 8 ECHR consideration  and  it  seems  to  us
         there is no principled basis for taking a different  view  in  this
         respect from that taken in respect of  human  rights  law:  see  JM
         (Liberia). Mr Deller's concession that the decision  adumbrated  an
         intention to remove to Pakistan, was not dependent  on  whether  EU
         law or human rights law provisions were in play"

54. The decision of the Upper Tribunal in NA was promulgated prior  to  the
    Court of Appeal's decision in TY, and paragraph 69 thereof  is  plainly
    inconsistent with it, unless a section 120 notice had  been  served  by
    the SSHD on NA. Either way, it is  clear  that  the  appellant  in  the
    instant case is not assisted by any of the judicial decisions in NA.

55. As such, I consider myself to be bound by the decision in  TY.  Whilst,
    therefore, it is clear  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  its
    consideration  of  the  Article  8  ECHR  ground   (because   it   gave
    consideration to such  ground),  this  was  not  an  error  capable  of
    affecting the outcome of the appeal because the appeal  was  ultimately
    dismissed on that ground.

56. For all the  reasons  given  above,  I  conclude  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision does not contain an error of law requiring it to be
    set aside, and it is to remain standing.

    Signed:
[pic]

    Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
-----------------------
[1] [2]Liu concerned three conjoined cases, all three featuring third-
country national parents of an EU/Union citizen child. The third appeal,
that by Mouloungui, concerned a mother who was in the UK illegally.

