











UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07269/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
| on 4 July 2016                   |21 July 2016                             |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Miss Regina Pilika John Kapinga
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bazini, counsel (instructed by Immigration Visa
Services UK)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the secretary of state  and  to  the
      respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The claimant is a national of Tanzania, born on  17  March  1978.  Her
      appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 28 January 2015 to
      refuse her application for  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  under  the
      Immigration Rules,  was  allowed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Coutts, under paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules. He found that it  was
      not necessary to go on to consider her appeal under Article 8  of  the
      Human Rights Convention.


   3. On 18  May  2016,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett  granted  the
      secretary of state permission  to  appeal.  She  stated  that  it  was
      arguable that the Judge erred in failing to take into account all  the
      evidence or to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
      claimant had not  received  a  letter  from  the  secretary  of  state
      notifying her of the outcome of an application  for  leave  to  remain
      made in November 2001. The Judge referred only to  the  evidence  from
      the post office and did not consider subsequent applications  made  by
      the claimant at a  time  when  she  says  she  believed  the  original
      application was still outstanding.


   4. The second ground was also arguable as the Judge  concluded  that  the
      claimant would  have  no  support  if  removed  from  the  UK,  having
      overlooked the support that she had from family in the UK.


   5.  Mr  Bazini,  who  represented  the  claimant  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, produced certain documents, including part of the record  of
      proceedings that he recorded; part of the claimant's witness statement
      before the First-tier Tribunal and also a letter sent to the  claimant
      at an address in Brent Cross, NW2 1DA, dated 28 February 2003 in which
      the secretary was 'sorry' that she had not received an  earlier  reply
      to her letter dated 17 September 2002 regarding her application  dated
      14 November 2001.


   6. The claimant's immigration history was summarised in the  reasons  for
      refusal. She entered the UK on 23 May 1999 with  leave  as  a  student
      until 23 May 2000. On 14 November 2001 she applied for leave to remain
      as a student which was approved and she was  granted  leave  until  31
      July 2002.


   7. On 14 November 2003 her application for further leave to remain  as  a
      student was refused.  Her subsequent application made on  19  December
      2003 for further leave which was also refused on 9 January  2006  with
      no right of appeal.


   8. On 10 January 2006  she  was  served  with  an  IS151A  notice  as  an
      overstayer. On 5 June 2007 she applied for leave to remain outside the
      Rules which was refused  in  August  2007.  Her  application  dated  6
      December 2012 for leave to remain under the Family  and  Private  Life
      provisions of the Rules was refused on 21 November 2013.


   9. She enclosed in her recent representations letters dated 19  May  2014
      and 10 June 2014 a psychological assessment report and  various  other
      documents in support of her application.


  10. The Judge considered the evidence from the claimant  as  well  as  her
      sister.


  11. He was not satisfied from all the evidence that the claimant had  been
      notified by the secretary of state of the outcome  of  an  application
      that she made on 14 November 2001. The secretary of state's attendance
      note  dated  28  February  2003  showed  that  the  recorded  delivery
      reference number that the Home Office had used was not  recognised  by
      the Post  Office  when  they  made  further  enquiries  following  the
      claimant's contact with them chasing up the result of her  application
      [34].


  12. In the circumstances, he found that the "purported grant of  leave  by
      [the secretary of state] until 31 July 2002 was not  notified  to  the
      claimant as required and in  consequence,  her  application  dated  14
      November 2001 remains outstanding. It followed that  she  was  not  an
      overstayer as  asserted  by  the  secretary  of  state  and  that  she
      continued to have leave under s.3C of the Immigration Act 1971 [35].


  13. He found that she had been living in the UK for about  sixteen  and  a
      half years. She came here for the purpose of education and  to  follow
      her siblings. She now saw her life and future to be in the  UK,  given
      that her siblings are  all  settled  here.  She  has  been  unable  to
      flourish in her career as  she  had  hoped.  This  has  been  in  part
      assisted by the secretary  of  state  who  had  wrongly  declared  her
      immigration status to be precarious [37].


  14. The Judge found that she had  not  had  contact  with  her  mother  in
      Tanzania since she left there. The evidence  showed  that  she  had  a
      difficult relationship emotionally as well as an unloving one. It  was
      credible therefore that no contact had been maintained  between  them.
      If, as asserted by the secretary of state, her mother has visited  the
      UK to see one of her siblings, the claimant has had  no  contact  with
      her when she did so [38].


  15. The evidence in the round showed that the claimant is both financially
      and emotionally reliant on her siblings in the UK, and particularly on
      her sister with whom she lives. This is supported by a medical opinion
      of Dr Citron, which the Judge accepted,  that  the  claimant's  mental
      health was particularly poor owing to the situation in which she finds
      herself. She is likely  to  feel  suicidal  if  removed  to  Tanzania,
      resulting in a forced separation from her family here [39].


  16. Judge Coutts found that to expect her to integrate back into  Tanzania
      would not be lawful. She has no knowledge of  the  country.  She  left
      there 16 and a half years ago when she was only 21. She migrated  from
      a small and remote village, which was several hours' travel from  Dar-
      es-Salaam and some distance from any transport links [40]. She lived a
      sheltered life there and when she migrated she experienced a different
      and more sophisticated life [41].


  17. There is no real prospect of her being able to return to her  village:
      there is no work there, people live on a subsistence basis and she  is
      estranged from her mother. She had lost contact with everyone else she
      knew in the village. That is not surprising as the nearest access to a
      telephone is two hours' walk away [41].


  18. He also found that she would not be  able  to  successfully  integrate
      into Dar es Salaam, a large city of which she has no current or  prior
      knowledge of when she left Tanzania. She will return there as a single
      woman without the support of her  family  and  without  obtaining  the
      qualifications she had  hoped  for  from  the  UK,  which  would  have
      assisted her to find better employment. It is likely  that  she  would
      have to take work that was available, which would be  menial  and  low
      paid [42].


  19. He stated that the  unchallenged  medical  opinion  of  Dr  Citron  is
      unequivocal; that states that she would be  suicidal  if  returned  to
      Tanzania. The resulting risk to her mental health  would  be  profound
      and this would also have a significant effect on her ability  to  cope
      and thrive [43] and [44].


  20. He accordingly found that there would be very significant obstacles to
      the claimant's integration back in Tanzania. She had  accordingly  met
      the provisions of the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of  the
      rules. [45-46]


  21. Mr Duffy relied on the grounds presented. He contends that  the  Judge
      failed to provide adequate reasons for concluding  that  the  claimant
      had not been given a notice that further leave had been granted  until
      31 July 2002. The Home Office records showed that she had submitted an
      application on 14 November 2001. Her address was given.  According  to
      their records, the refusal decision was sent to her  home  address  by
      recorded delivery.


  22. It did not appear from the determination that  the  claimant  disputes
      that this was the correct residential address. What is  said  is  that
      the recorded delivery number was not recognised  by  the  Post  Office
      [34]. No further reasoning is provided. The source of that information
      is unclear. The Post Office was not able to say  with  any  degree  of
      cogency that they had not received a document  from  the  Home  Office
      with the relevant recorded delivery number.


  23. Further, as noted in paragraph 3 of the grounds, if the claimant truly
      thought her application for leave was pending "it begs  the  question"
      why she sought to make two further applications for leave to remain in
      November and December 2003; the claimant would have been wholly  aware
      of her historical  application.  Those  are  matters  which  were  not
      explored by the Judge, although raised in the decision.


  24. The finding that there were very significant obstacles to  integration
      is also disputed. The assessment  was  "misguided".  Very  significant
      obstacles to integration constitutes  a  high  threshold  and  entails
      something  which  would  prevent  or  seriously   inhibit   her   from
      integrating and establishing a private life, or those obstacles  which
      would cause very serious hardship. The relevant standard is determined
      by the standards of Tanzania and not by the UK.


  25. The submission from the grounds is that the Judge relied on her period
      of absence from Tanzania and the mental health conditions  from  which
      she is said to suffer.     However, the claimant spent  the  first  20
      years of her life  in  Tanzania  and  would  have  a  familiarity  and
      knowledge  of  that  country.  While  there  may  be   a   period   of
      unfamiliarity in the new city,  she  has  a  cultural  nexus  to  that
      country and thus re-integration would not cause such severe  hardship.
      Many people successfully migrate to countries where they have no ties.


  26. The conclusion that the extent of her health  issues  meant  that  she
      would face obstacles to integration, was  reached  without  the  Judge
      engaging with objective evidence cited by  the  secretary  of  state's
      decision as to  the  availability  of  mental  health  facilities  and
      treatment. Ms Citron's report speculates that she will  feel  suicidal
      on any proposed  removal.  There  was  however  no  reference  to  the
      available treatment plans in Tanzania. The Judge failed to explore how
      this transition could be managed.


  27. Finally, the Judge ignored evidence that the claimant  is  financially
      supported by her sister  in  the  UK.  As  such,  the  same  financial
      arrangement could be replicated if she resides in Tanzania.


  28. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Bazini submitted that the contention  in
      ground 1 as to whether or not the claimant had been given notice  that
      further leave had been granted until 31 July 2002, was not relevant to
      the Judge's finding that there would be very significant obstacles  to
      the claimant's re-integrating in  Tanzania.  Whether  she  had  s.3(c)
      leave or knew about the earlier decision  does  not  impact  on  those
      findings under paragraph 276ADE.


  29. In any event, Mr Bazini referred to an  extract  from  the  claimant's
      witness statement: which was sent to the secretary  of  state  at  the
      date of her application.


  30. There she stated that she did not hear anything  back  from  the  Home
      Office after she sent her passport and documents to the  secretary  of
      state when applying for further  leave  to  remain  as  a  student  in
      November 2001.


  31. She tried to contact the Home Office but the lines were  always  busy.
      She managed to get through to speak to someone in  February  2003  who
      advised her that her passport had been sent back to her. She was given
      a reference number to check with the local post office, which she did.
      At that time she was living in [ ] Battersea.


  32. The Post Office claimed that they had no record of  it  and  that  she
      should contact the Home Office, if they can provide a  certificate  of
      posting. She then called the Home Office but was told  to  put  it  in
      writing and fax it to them, which she did in May 2003.


  33. She did not receive a reply from the Home Office until about  November
      2003. She then received a letter stating that she was granted leave to
      remain but that it had expired in July 2002. The Home Office wanted to
      know what she was doing. She sent them in return in December 2003, her
      new passport, school letters and other documents, advising  them  that
      she was still studying.


  34. All this information was before the Home Office.  She  called  several
      times  to  check  on  her  application.  They  said   it   was   under
      consideration. She did not hear anything back from them until  January
      2006, where it was stated that she had overstayed, which she had  not,
      because they had misplaced her passport. She did not  know  that  they
      had granted her an extension of leave to remain until 2 July 2002. She
      had been waiting for a reply which took ages.


  35. Mr Bazini referred to a document dated  28  February  2003,  reference
      K1035772, constituting a note asking for a check  to  be  made  as  to
      whether the claimant's documents were sent out by them  correctly.  It
      is noted that nothing has  been  received  as  yet.  The  Post  Office
      claimed that they have no record. RD is set out. The request was  made
      'to deal with this accordingly and to inform of the outcome'.


  36. Mr Bazini produced a further document dated 14 May 2003 with reference
      K1035772 which stated that the claimant was granted leave to remain as
      a student until 31 July 2002. However, her  passport  was  lost  after
      being returned to her home address. The document goes on to state that
      "despite an extensive search, N/T has been found."


  37. She was advised that her current leave to remain expired  on  31  July
      2002 and an application form dated 28 February 2003 was  enclosed.  It
      is stated that no further application appears to  have  been  made  to
      date.


  38. He referred to a letter dated 28 February 2003 to the claimant  at  an
      address  in  Brent  Cross.  The  integrated  case  worker  directorate
      representative stated that he was "sorry" that  she  had  not  had  an
      earlier reply to her letter dated  17  September  2002  regarding  her
      application of 14 November 2001.


  39. As she was aware, a decision had already been made on her application.
      She was granted leave to remain  until  July  2002.  The  Home  Office
      records confirmed that her completed application was sent to her  home
      address at Battersea Park, London SW11. It was under recorded delivery
      on 5 December 2001.


  40. It is  stated  that  as  her  application  was  completed  and  served
      correctly by them, the onus was on  her  to  contact  her  local  Post
      Office regarding the whereabouts of her document as this does not fall
      within their remit.


  41. She was advised that her current leave had expired on 31 July 2002 and
      no  further  application  had  been  forthcoming  from  her.  She  was
      therefore required to make arrangements to leave the UK or to complete
      an enclosed application form to regularise her stay.


  42. Mr Bazini submitted that  the  claimant  did  then  contact  the  Post
      Office. It subsequently turned out however that  her  application  had
      been granted without her knowledge.


  43. Mr Bazini submitted that the secretary of state's officer's attendance
      note showed that the recorded delivery reference number that was  used
      by the Home Office had not been recognised by  the  Post  Office  when
      further enquiries were made  following  the  claimant's  contact  with
      them, when she was 'chasing up' her application.


  44. Accordingly, the Judge concluded that she had  not  been  notified  as
      required of the outcome of the grant of leave until 31 July 2002;  she
      was accordingly not an overstayer as her application dated 14 November
      2001 remained outstanding.


  45. The question  raised  by  the  Home  Office  in  the  grounds  seeking
      permission as to why the claimant would have made further applications
      when she was unaware of the outcome of  the  decision  is  accordingly
      misplaced. The claimant did, for the reasons already referred to, know
      about it. Accordingly there was no evidence that the decision granting
      the leave had been served on her.


  46. The Judge accordingly was entitled to reach the conclusion at [35].


  47. He submitted with regard to ground 2 that the permission  granted  was
      limited. The Judge found the second ground to be arguable as the Judge
      had concluded that the claimant would have no support if removed. That
      however overlooked the support that she has from family in the UK.


  48. However, the Judge has given extensive reasons  as  to  why  paragraph
      276ADE (vi) applied. These are set out from  paragraphs  36-45.  These
      reasons had been set out and explained in detail by  the  claimant  as
      well as her sister who gave evidence. There  was  moreover  a  medical
      report which was relevant and to which the Judge had regard. The Judge
      was entitled to take  into  account  the  prevailing  conditions  with
      regard to the lack of electricity and the like  that  awaited  her  in
      Tanzania.


  49. Mr Bazini  produced  an  extract  from  his  note  of  the  record  of
      proceedings regarding the claimant's sister  who  gave  evidence.  She
      stated that if the claimant were returned to Tanzania  tomorrow,  this
      would have devastating consequences for her and  her  son.  She  would
      have to work  part  time.  She  cannot  afford  that.   Moreover,  the
      claimant assists her son who attends various classes. He is  12  years
      old and cannot go on his own. It would not  be  safe  to  let  him  go
      alone, especially in the dark. The claimant had brought  up  her  son.
      She would accordingly have to give up her full time job.


  50. The suggestion that her sister would be able to fund her  in  Tanzania
      'has disappeared'. There was no basis for that assertion.


  51. There were no submissions made on behalf of  the  secretary  of  state
      'that were not insurmountable obstacles that would face  the  claimant
      in Tanzania'.


  52. He submitted that in effect the secretary of state sought to  re-argue
      the case. However, adequate  reasons  had  been  given  by  the  Judge
      justifying his finding under paragraph 276ADE(vi).


Assessment


  53. I find from the  foregoing  analysis  that  the  conclusion  that  the
      appellant had not been notified as required  of  the  outcome  of  the
      grant of leave until 31  July  2002  was  justified  on  the  evidence
      produced including the appellant's own evidence. The  Judge  was  thus
      entitled to  conclude  that  the  appellant  was  accordingly  not  an
      overstayer  as  her  application  dated  14  November  2001   remained
      outstanding.


  54. Furthermore, the Judge considered in some detail whether  there  would
      be very significant obstacles relating to her integration in Tanzania.
       He has  set  the  factors  out  from  paragraphs  [37]  -  [45].   In
      particular he found that she had left the country more than 16  and  a
      half years ago when she was only twenty years old.  He also relied  on
      the evidence of Dr Citron as to her mental health, including  suicidal
      ideation.  He also noted that the medical opinion  of  Dr  Citron  was
      unchallenged by the respondent [43].


  55. Whilst he has not expressly referred to the availability of  treatment
      in Tanzania the Judge had regard to the cumulative effect of  all  the
      factors leading him to conclude that there would be  very  significant
      obstacles to her successful integration.


  56. Whilst another Tribunal may have come to a different  conclusion,  the
      findings and conclusions are sustainable on the evidence produced  and
      are  neither  irrational  or  perverse.   The  grounds  amount  to   a
      disagreement with the conclusions reached by the Judge and seek to re-
      argue the case.





      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any material error of law and the decision shall stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.














      Signed                             Date 18 July 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

