
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/07392/2014
                                                               IA/07400/2014
                                                               IA/07405/2014
                                                               IA/07410/2014
                                                               IA/07414/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th November 2015                |On 19th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                    mr Ashfaq Muhammad (first Appellant)
                    mrs Shehla Ashfaq (second Appellant)
                       M A (a minor) (third Appellant)
                      R A (a minor) (fourth Appellant)
                       T A (a minor) (fifth Appellant)
                          (no ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss K McCarthy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 23rd  April  1974.
    The second Appellant Mrs Shehla Ashfaq is his wife born on 15th January
    1981.  The third, fourth and fifth Appellants  are  their  three  minor
    children born respectively on 16th December 2002, 15th March  2004  and
    22nd December 2006.   The  Appellants  have  an  extensive  immigration
    history and the immigration history is set out at paragraph  3  of  the
    determination of  Immigration  Judge  Maxwell.   The  Appellants'  most
    recent application was made via solicitors' letters dated 4th  November
    2013 and 4th December 2013 where they asked that the Appellants'  cases
    be considered pursuant to the  European  Convention  of  Human  Rights.
    Those applications were  considered  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and
    refused by a Notice of Refusal dated 17th January 2014.

 2. The Appellants appealed and the appeal came before Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Maxwell sitting at Richmond on 2nd October  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 16th October 2014 the Appellants'  appeals
    were dismissed under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 3. On 24th October 2014  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 6th November 2014  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Murray refused permission to appeal.  On 17th November renewed
    Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  were  submitted  on  the
    Appellants' behalf.

 4. On 16th  February  2015  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Bruce noted that the Grounds of Appeal  of
    the first Tribunal identified an arguable point  of  law  in  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal began its assessment  whether  it  is  "reasonable"
    that the third and fourth Appellants leave the UK with reference to the
    "appalling"  immigration  history  of  their  parents.    Judge   Bruce
    considered that no regard had been given to the historical  development
    of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  nor  the  current  IDI  which  states  that
    "strong reasons" will be required to remove a  child  who  has  accrued
    seven years long residence.  Judge Bruce noted that the starting  point
    was the established private life of the child and that it was  arguable
    that insufficient regard had been had to the Respondent's own  guidance
    on the correct interpretation of that Rule.

 5. Ironically Judge Bruce found that the renewed  Grounds  of  Appeal  had
    less merit and although there was authority for  the  proposition  that
    illegal working is not  to  be  considered  a  "very  serious  criminal
    offence"  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to   draw   adverse
    inferences  from  the  fact  that  the  adults  in  this  family   have
    deliberately sought to  circumvent  immigration  control,  have  worked
    illegally and have accessed services such as education and the  NHS  to
    which they were not entitled.

 6. On 5th March 2015 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  That response submits that the judge  considered
    the submissions made relating to paragraph 276ADE(iv) at  paragraphs  4
    and 5 of his determination and that careful consideration was given  to
    the letters of the third and fourth Appellants and noted  their  wishes
    to remain in education in the UK.  The Rule 24  response  submits  that
    the best interests of the children have been considered  fully  in  the
    determination (their ages being 11 and 10 years  old  at  the  date  of
    determination) and that the judge had  given  strong  reasons  why  the
    children should be removed with their family members as a whole and has
    noted the relevant case law that deals with children who have  exceeded
    seven years'  residence  and  whose  parents  have  a  bad  immigration
    history.  Furthermore the judge it is  submitted  had  dealt  with  the
    requirements of Section 117  that  underpins  the  current  Immigration
    Rules and  that  the  judge  had  explained  how  he  had  reached  his
    conclusions on primary consideration and had carried out the  balancing
    assessment making his decision on proportionality  all  of  which  were
    open for him to make.  The Rule 24  response  concludes  by  submitting
    that the grounds amount to no more than argument about what weight  the
    judge should have placed on the children's over seven years'  residence
    and that there is no material error of law.

 7. It was on that basis that the appeal first came before me to  determine
    whether or not there was a material error of law.  I found  that  there
    was.  At paragraph 25 of the judge's determination  he  has  taken  the
    wording from the decision in EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD  and  I
    agreed with the submission made by Miss McCarthy that in  doing  so  he
    has failed to  give  due  and  proper  relevant  consideration  of  the
    evidence provided and referred to  at  paragraphs  19  and  20  of  his
    determination when deciding that the children would be able  to  settle
    into the educational regime in Pakistan.  At paragraph  19  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge found that the children would  be  able  to  follow
    classes because English is a compulsory subject and science  is  taught
    in English in Pakistan.  It was submitted to me that  the  evidence  is
    that the classes in most schools other than private schools will be  in
    the local language rather than English and that  the  judge  failed  to
    give any due consideration as to whether the children's  parents  could
    afford to send the children to private  school.   Further,  whilst  the
    judge found that the children are capable of communicating in Urdu Miss
    McCarthy emphasised  that  the  evidence  was  that  the  children  can
    understand their mother when she speaks to them in Urdu but  that  they
    reply in English.  She strongly pointed out that  the  children  cannot
    read or write Urdu.  There is some weight in the  submission  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge therefore  ignored  that  evidence  that  the
    children would not be able to follow classes  and  textbooks  that  are
    taught in their local language.

 8. Further I agreed with the point made by Miss McCarthy  that  the  judge
    erred when he found that "none of them has yet reached a crucial  stage
    of their education."  It was difficult to assess  when  that  would  or
    would not be but bearing in mind that the third Appellant has  recently
    moved from primary to secondary school and the fourth Appellant will do
    so at the end of the current school year it was reasonably argued  that
    the judge's analysis was wrong and that even if he had reached  such  a
    conclusion case law in the format of Azimi-Moayed and  Others  supports
    the submission that the children's length of residence  weighs  heavily
    in favour of a finding that their overwhelming best  interests  are  to
    remain in the UK.  I was satisfied that the judge has  failed  to  take
    into account properly these considerations and that  he  has  erred  in
    giving  unreasonable  weight  to  the  first  and  second   Appellant's
    immigration history when comparing that against the rights of the third
    and fourth Appellants in particular to whom he had failed to  give  due
    and full consideration of their position.

 9. In finding that there was a material error of  law  I  gave  directions
    indicating that the matter could be dealt with by way  of  submissions.
    It is on that basis that the appeal comes back before me for rehearing.
     The Appellants appear by their instructed Counsel Miss McCarthy.  Miss
    McCarthy is extremely familiar with this matter.  She  appeared  before
    me on the hearing of the error of law, is the  author  of  the  initial
    Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal and of a skeleton argument that
    is provided to me in readiness of this hearing.  The Secretary of State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Nath.

10. The facts are not in dispute.  The issue is that set  out  both  within
    the error of law and the directions for  the  resumed  hearing,  namely
    whether the best interests of the children should warrant the  allowing
    of the appeal pursuant to Article 8 of the European Convention of Human
    Rights when viewed against the other  factors  including  the  negative
    immigration history of the first and second Appellants.

Submissions/Discussions

11. Miss McCarthy relies on her skeleton argument.  She  acknowledges  that
    the principal issue involved herein is  whether  or  not  the  negative
    behaviour of the first and second  Appellants  in  having  flouted  the
    immigration laws of the  United  Kingdom  is  outweighed  by  the  best
    interests of the children.  She  accepts  that  the  Appellants  are  a
    family from Pakistan consisting  of  father,  mother  and  their  three
    children born 16th December 2002, 15th March  2004  and  22nd  December
    2006 respectively.  She points out that the  older  two  children  have
    remained in the UK continuously since they entered on 8th March 2006 on
    a visit visa and then overstayed and that as at the date of the  Notice
    of Refusal the third and fourth Appellants had  lived  in  the  UK  for
    seven years and five months and the fifth Appellant, who  was  born  in
    the UK, all her life.  As at the date of the  First-tier  decision  the
    third and fourth Appellants had lived in the UK for eight years and six
    months.  I note that a fourth child who is not part of this appeal  was
    born in the UK on 6th April 2014.  As at the date of the rehearing Miss
    McCarthy points out that the older two children have lived  in  the  UK
    for nine and a half years and the third child has spent her entire life
    of nearly nine years in the UK and as of 22nd  December  2016  will  be
    eligible for registration as a British citizen.

12. Miss McCarthy submits the children's best interests  are  the  starting
    point and I refer to the guidance given in EV (Philippines) and  Others
    v the Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  874.
    Namely:

         "A decision as to what is in the best interests  of  children  will
         depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age; (b) the length
         of time that they have been here; (c) how long they  have  been  in
         education and what stage their education has reached; (d)  to  what
         extent they have become distanced from the country to which  it  is
         proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection  with
         it may be; (f) to what extent they will have linguistic, medical or
         other difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and (g) the
         extent to which the  course  proposed  will  interfere  with  their
         family  life  or  their  rights  (if  they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens."

13. Miss McCarthy takes me to paragraphs 26 to 30 of her submissions to  be
    found within her skeleton.  She points out that the  third  and  fourth
    Appellants are children aged 12 and 11 respectively as at the  date  of
    the rehearing and that they arrived in the UK when they were aged 3 and
    2 respectively and that they have lived in the UK for  nine  years  and
    six months as of the date of the rehearing of this appeal.   The  fifth
    Appellant was born in the UK and has spent her entire  life  of  nearly
    nine years in the UK.  She points out that the fifth Appellant will  be
    in a position in December 2016 to register as  a  British  citizen  and
    that the Secretary of State has no discretion to remove  her.   Further
    she points out that the  children  have  only  ever  been  educated  in
    England within the British system and that the older two  children  are
    secondary school students and so they have entered a crucial  stage  of
    their education in which they  are  embarking  on  pre-preparation  for
    choosing options leading to public examinations to be taken  when  they
    are 16.

14. She reminds me that the two older children have not  been  to  Pakistan
    since they entered the UK and that the third child has  never  been  to
    Pakistan.  She submits that they have socialised  as  British  children
    and been  brought  up  as  British  children.   She  takes  me  to  the
    children's statements  and  school  statements  submitting  that  these
    statements show the children to be happy settled children  who  are  no
    different from their British citizen peers, involved  in  sporting  and
    extra-curricular activities,  and  that  they  are  achieving  well  at
    school.  She submits that they have no  memory  of  any  connection  to
    Pakistan so there is no question of "renewing" it and that if they  are
    removed from the UK they would have to start  afresh  in  a  completely
    alien environment.

15. She acknowledges that the children have limited understanding  of  Urdu
    but points out that they are not proficient nor do they  write  it  and
    submits that they would not be able to follow classes  in  Pakistan  in
    Urdu and takes me to the first Appellant's witness statement  in  which
    he submits that it is his belief that if they were returned they  would
    fall behind in their education.  Further she submits that although  the
    children are healthy they would not have access to the  same  level  of
    healthcare in Pakistan and that the overwhelming best interests of  the
    children lie within their remaining in the UK.  She  submits  that  the
    behaviour of their parents plays no part whatsoever  in  deciding  what
    the children's best interests are.

16. Miss McCarthy then takes me to the balancing exercise reminding me that
    the question for the Tribunal is whether  the  best  interests  of  the
    children are  outweighed  by  their  parents'  own  disregard  for  the
    Immigration  Rules.   She  acknowledges  that  the  "seven  year  child
    concession" has been withdrawn but submits that it remains  a  form  of
    benchmark that  to  use  her  phrase  "starts  to  tick  the  balancing
    exercise".  She places emphasis on the ministerial  statements  setting
    out why DP5/96 was  introduced  and  the  ministerial  statements  made
    setting out why it was withdrawn on the basis that it was  now  covered
    by the Article 8 assessment.  She places reliance on the view expressed
    by Blake J in Azimi-Moayed & Others [2013]  UKUT  197  (IAC)  when  the
    judge when analysing what amounts to lengthy residence found that  that
    was not clear-cut but that past and present  policies  have  identified
    seven years as a relevant  period.   She  consequently  indicates  that
    despite the policy being withdrawn it is now enshrined within Article 8
    and that seven years is still considered to be a relevant period.

17. Finally Miss McCarthy points out that the children are now well  beyond
    seven years in their period of residence and in fact are at nine and  a
    half years and that  the  policy  argument  weighs  in  favour  of  the
    children's best interests as being the deciding  factor.   She  submits
    that they have strong ties to the UK and whilst accepting that on their
    own, the first and second Appellants could not win, the  only  criteria
    she submits upon which the Secretary of State can rely is one of public
    interest and she submits that that is outweighed by the best  interests
    of the children.  She asked me to allow the appeal.

18. Mr Nath takes me to the original Notice of Refusal dated  17th  January
    2014.  He starts by reminding me that in that  Notice  of  Refusal  the
    Secretary of State acknowledges that consideration has  been  given  to
    whether it would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  the  first  and  second
    Appellant's three children to accompany them to Pakistan.  He takes  me
    directly to paragraphs 30 to 37 reminding me that neither the first nor
    second Appellant have any immigration status in the UK and indeed  that
    they have not done so since 180 days after their last entry to  the  UK
    as visitors on 3rd August  2006.   He  points  out  that  none  of  the
    Appellants are British citizens and as such the Appellants will all  be
    removed to Pakistan as a family unit.  Consequently  he  contends  that
    the third to fifth Appellants will continue to receive  their  parents'
    support and affection following their return to Pakistan and that would
    greatly assist their re-assimilation into their home country.  He takes
    me to the Country Information  Report  on  education  in  Pakistan  and
    submits that none of the  three  minor  children  Appellants  have  yet
    reached  a  crucial  stage  in  their  education  and   that   adequate
    educational facilities exist in Pakistan and that English  language  is
    used as a medium of education  in  several  subjects.   Accordingly  he
    considers that it would not be unreasonable to expect  the  Appellants'
    children to return to Pakistan with their parents as a family unit  and
    that it would not be contrary to their best interests to expect them to
    do so.  In making such a decision he considers that  the  Secretary  of
    State's duties under Section 55 of the 2009 Act have been appropriately
    discharged.

19.  Mr  Nath  seeks  to  contradict  Miss  McCarthy's  assessment  of  the
    educational upheaval that would befall the children if they are  forced
    to leave the UK and submits that guidance can be found in  the  correct
    approach at paragraph 39 of AM (Section 117B) Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260
    (IAC) which states:

         "The trauma, or excitement, of a new school, new classmates and new
         teachers is an integral part of growing up.  In  too  many  appeals
         the Appellants have presented with arguments whose basic premise is
         that to change a school is to submit a child to a fresh and  unduly
         harsh experience."

20. He submits that the exercise to be carried out is one that needs to  be
    carefully balanced and that the public interest needs to be considered.
     He asked me to give due consideration to the guidance to be  found  in
    SS (Congo) & Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  He asked  me  to  reject  the
    appeal.

Findings

21. This is one of an increasing number  of  appeals  that  appears  to  be
    coming before the Upper Tribunal which requires the Tribunal to conduct
    a balancing exercise between the public interest consideration and  the
    rights to family and  private  life  enshrined  in  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention of Human Rights.  It  has  to  be  remembered  that
    Section 117B is not something new.  Effectively it embodies in  statute
    factors that it  was  already  necessary  for  the  court/Tribunals  to
    consider.  The starting point is  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control is in the public interest.  Further  little  weight
    should be given to a private life established by a  person  at  a  time
    where the person's immigration status is  precarious.   The  first  and
    second Appellants have a quite  appalling  immigration  history.   They
    have openly overstayed their visas.  It is not an issue before me as to
    why they have been allowed to overstay to the length of time that  they
    have.  Bearing in mind shortly before their  visas  expired  the  fifth
    Appellant was born  and  that  the  children  had  all  been  receiving
    education and healthcare throughout the state system, it  is  difficult
    to believe that this can be one of those  cases  where  the  Appellants
    could not have been traced by the Secretary of State.   The  fact  that
    the scenario has arisen at all therefore has been  exacerbated  by  the
    failings of the Home Office.

22. Consequently as a starting point I have regard to the matters  set  out
    in Section 117B of the 2002 Act and that the Appellants  have  remained
    unlawfully within the UK.  Guidance is given as to the approach  to  be
    adopted by the court in the Court of Appeal  in  SS  (Congo)  &  Others
    where Lord Justice Richards in giving the judgment of the court said:

         "39. iv) On the other hand, the fact that the interests of a  child
             are in issue will be a countervailing factor  which  tends  to
             reduce to some degree the width of the margin of  appreciation
             which the state authorities would otherwise enjoy.  Article  8
             has to be interpreted and applied  in  the  light  of  the  UN
             Convention on the Rights of the Child  (1989):  see  In  re  E
             (Children) (Abduction: Custody Appeal) [2011] UKSC 27;  [2012]
             AC 144, at [26].  However, the fact that the  interests  of  a
             child are in issue does not simply provide  a  trump  card  so
             that a child applicant for positive action to be taken by  the
             state in the field of Article  8(1)  must  always  have  their
             application acceded to; see In re E (Children) at [12] and  ZH
             (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]
             UKSC 4; [2011] 2 AC 166, at [25] (under Article 3(1) of the UN
             Convention on the Rights of the Child  the  interests  of  the
             child are a primary consideration - i.e. an important matter -
             not the primary consideration).  It is a  factor  relevant  to
             the fair  balance  between  the  individual  and  the  general
             community which goes some way towards tempering the  otherwise
             wide margin of appreciation available to the state authorities
             in deciding what to do.  The age of the child,  the  closeness
             of their relationship with the  other  family  member  in  the
             United Kingdom and whether  the  family  could  live  together
             elsewhere are likely to be important factors which  should  be
             borne in mind."

23. Blake J in Azimi-Moayed & Others acknowledged that it is  generally  in
    the interests of children to have  both  stability  and  continuity  of
    social and educational provision and the benefit of growing up  in  the
    cultural norms of the society to which they belong.  He  further  noted
    that lengthy residence in a country other than the state of origin  can
    lead to a development of social, cultural and educational ties that  it
    would be inappropriate to disrupt in the absence of a compelling reason
    to the contrary.

24. Each case must inevitably turn on its  own  facts  and  must  give  due
    consideration to the judicial dicta and in particular to  the  guidance
    given in EV (Philippines) recited above as to what  best  interests  of
    children are.  I note Miss McCarthy seeks to rely on  the  enshrinement
    effectively of the Home Office Policy DP5/96 and the fact that a  child
    has spent a significant period of his or her life in the United Kingdom
    will continue to be an important  relevant  factor  to  be  taken  into
    account  when  evaluating  whether  removal   of   their   parents   is
    appropriate.  In this case the third and fourth Appellants had,  as  at
    the date of the Notice of Refusal, lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    seven years and five months.  At the date  of  the  appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal they had been here for some  eight  years  and  six
    months.  At the date of the rehearing before me they had lived here for
    nine and a half years.  I have seen evidence produced on  their  behalf
    in support of their appeals which is not challenged by the Secretary of
    State.  In addition there is a fifth Appellant who has spent his entire
    life of nearly nine years in the United Kingdom and as of 22nd December
    2016 will be eligible for registration as a British citizen.   None  of
    these children have ever been to Pakistan.  Their principal language  I
    accept is English albeit that they have  some  understanding  of  Urdu.
    Their social and indeed cultural upbringing  is  as  if  they  were  UK
    citizens.  I accept that if they are removed they will be removed as  a
    family to Pakistan, English is spoken in  many  Pakistani  schools  and
    that they cannot rely on the benefits of UK healthcare as being a basis
    for their remaining within the UK.

25. However I am persuaded that  the  best  interests  of  these  children,
    bearing in mind their ages, the length of time that they have lived  in
    the UK, their connections to the UK, their schooling,  friends,  family
    and potential difficulties that they would have as  children  who  have
    never been to Pakistan, in adapting to life if they are returned there,
    along with the length of time they have been in education in the UK and
    the stage that their education has reached, are such that it would be a
    breach of their rights pursuant to Article 8 for them to be removed.

26. On that basis, and that basis alone,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  best
    interests of the children outweigh the public interest  in  maintaining
    immigration controls and the removal of the whole family from  the  UK.
    It is clear that the appeals of the first and  second  Appellants  must
    rise and fall alongside those of their three children.  It could not be
    in any Appellant's best interests for the children to be separated from
    their parents.  I emphasise that I am not persuaded by  the  submission
    of Miss McCarthy that the fact that the first and second Appellants are
    of good character, both speak English, are willing and able to work and
    support their  family  and  have  strong  community  ties  to  the  UK,
    outweighs  their  appalling  immigration  history.   However,   it   is
    inappropriate for the Tribunal to be seeking to "punish" the first  and
    second Appellants due to their appalling immigration  history.   It  is
    purely in this instant case, and turning on the facts of this case  and
    applying the legal principles appropriate thereto, that I am  persuaded
    that the public interest of the maintenance of immigration  control  is
    in this case outweighed by the best interests of the children and as  a
    result the Appellants' appeals are allowed pursuant to Article 8 of the
    European Convention of Human Rights.

Notice of Decision

The appeals of all five Appellants are allowed pursuant to Article 8 of  the
European Convention of Human Rights.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
