







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07899/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 3  November 2014                          |On: 20 November 2014         |
|Prepared: 19 November 2014                    |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Mrs Selvarani Balasubramaniam
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Sowerby, counsel (instructed by Indra Sebastian
                    Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer to the appellant as the
         Secretary of State and the respondent as "the claimant."
      2. The claimant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on 19 June 1959. Her
         application for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of her
         marriage was refused by the Secretary of State on 30 January 2014
         as she was not satisfied that the claimant met the English language
         requirements. Further, there were no insurmountable obstacles for
         the couple to live in Sri Lanka. She had not met the requirements
         of the Article 8 rules.
      3. In a determination promulgated on 15 July 2014, First-tier Tribunal
         Judge Baldwin allowed the claimant's appeal under the immigration
         rules.
      4. The basis of the claimant's application was that she was unaware
         when she submitted her application that her English language
         certificate did not suffice. When she learned of this, she took and
         passed an examination with another body, approved by the Secretary
         of State [7].
      5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the claimant was
         given the opportunity to use English with a view to confirming her
         basic mastery of it [8]. The Judge found that she struggled
         considerably in this regard, but did demonstrate some limited
         command of it before he concluded that in the interests of justice,
         she should use the Tamil interpreter [8].
      6. He found that it was clear from an earlier determination of the
         claimant's appeal in July 2011 that the Tribunal accepted that the
         marriage was genuine and subsisting and that her husband could not
         be expected to move back to Sri Lanka, given that he was granted
         British citizenship on the basis of problems he had faced in the
         past in Sri Lanka. She was allowed to join him at the end of 2011
         having had to live apart for the previous 18 years. All that stood
         in the way of the family being allowed to continue the family life
         that they have been able to establish "is the issue of the English
         certificate". [16]
      7. The Judge found that the Secretary of State had not suggested that
         the certificate now proved is not genuine. Nor was there anything
         self-evidently odd about the documents themselves [17].
      8. The Judge went on to state that what did appear very odd was just
         how low a level of English the claimant had, to the extent that he
         concluded that it was not just to proceed without an interpreter.
         Nor did her husband or son, with whom she lives, know the name of
         the college which put her in for the recent tests.
      9. However, it was drawn to the Judge's attention just how basic a
         level of English was required for a pass. He accordingly concluded
         that it is so very elementary that it is probably not possible to
         conclude that the claimant could not have sat the test herself.
         Whilst it would not be surprising if the Secretary of State were
         now to make further inquiries of the issuing body, in the absence
         of evidence before him to suggest that this claimant did not sit
         the test, he found that she probably did so, and passed it.
         Accordingly, she succeeded under the rules and it was not necessary
         to consider Article 8.
     10. On 25 September 2014, First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert granted the
         Secretary of State permission to appeal. She stated that given the
         concerns expressed by the Judge at paragraph 17, there was an
         absence of "cogent evidence based reasoning" for the Judge's
         apparently inconsistent conclusion that the claimant "probably did
         sit the test and passed it."
     11. Mr Whitwell accepted at the outset that the Secretary of State had
         not made any inquiries of the issuing body as to whether or not the
         claimant sat the test herself. There was accordingly no evidence
         before the First-tier Tribunal in that regard.
     12. The secretary of state's grounds were that there was enough reason
         to doubt that the claimant met the requirements, and given the
         Tribunal's concerns, the Tribunal should either have adjourned the
         case to allow the Secretary of State to investigate the matter, or
         to remit the case for further investigations to be carried out.
     13. Mr Sowerby submitted that the Judge's findings were not
         contradictory. He noted that the Secretary of State had not
         suggested that the certificates now provided are not genuine.
     14. In fact, the Judge stated at paragraph 8 that whilst the claimant
         struggled, she did demonstrate some very limited command of the
         language. Further, he concluded that the basic level of English
         required was so elementary that he could not conclude that the
         claimant had not sat the test herself.
     15. In the circumstances, having provided the certificates, the Judge
         found on the evidence before him that the appellant probably did
         sit the test and passed it.


    Assessment
     16. Although the Judge noted that the appellant struggled when giving
         her evidence in English, she had demonstrated some very limited
         command of the language. However, in the interests of justice, he
         concluded that she should have the benefit of a Tamil interpreter.
     17. He subsequently concluded that the level of English required for a
         pass was so basic and elementary that he was unable to conclude
         that the claimant could not have sat the test herself.
     18. The Judge also noted that the Secretary of State had not suggested
         that the certificates provided were not genuine. Nor was there
         anything odd about them. In the absence of any challenge by the
         Secretary of State at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, I
         find that the Judge was entitled to conclude, as he did, that the
         appellant probably sat the test and passed it.
     19. Those were findings open to the Tribunal in the circumstances.


    Decision
         The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
         making of any material error on a point of law.
         The decision shall accordingly stand.
         No anonymity order made.


                               Signed   Date 19/11/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
