
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/07862/2013
                                                               IA/07863/2013
                                                               IA/07864/2013
                                                               IA/07865/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7th November 2013                            |On 11th December 2013      |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                  MYIBAT MOJISOLA IBRAHIM (FIRST APPELLANT)
               GANIYAT OLUWATOYIN ADENIRAN (SECOND APPELLANT)
                   ridhuwanullah ibrahim (third appellant)
                   abdul-fatal ibrahim (fourth appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Al-Rashid, Counsel instructed on behalf of David
A Grant
     Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants, with permission, appeal the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Fletcher-Hill) who in a  determination  promulgated  on
    9th  August  2013  dismissed  the  Appellants'   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision of 28th February 2013 to refuse their  claim  for
    leave to remain  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 2. The first Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 9th March 1971  and
    the remaining three Appellants are her minor children born 9th  October
    2001, 20th September 2007 and 9th April 2009.  No  anonymity  direction
    has been sought on behalf of any party nor any grounds raised as to why
    such an order is necessary.

The background:

 3. On 1st April 2010 the first Appellant made an application  for  an  in-
    country settlement and consideration of a claim based on Article 8  and
    her family and  private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  was  her
    assertion that she had arrived in the United Kingdom on 5th  July  2003
    with  her  eldest  child,  the  second  Appellant,  and  had   remained
    continuously in the UK ever since where the third and fourth Appellants
    were children who  were  born  to  her  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    Respondent's refusal letter noted that  despite  numerous  checks  from
    various sources by the Respondent, they  were  unable  to  confirm  her
    method of entry in the United Kingdom.  Thus it was  assumed  that  she
    had entered the UK illegally and had remained there without leave.  For
    that reason she was liable for removal in accordance with the  Schedule
    2 to the Immigration Act 1971 and notice to this effect was served upon
    her on 4th March 2013.

 4. It was noted that no leave was sought to regularise her status or  that
    of her children until 1st April 2010 when an application was  submitted
    for leave to remain in the UK  along  with  her  three  children.   The
    father of the three children was also resident in  the  United  Kingdom
    but was also a person without leave.  He was also a citizen of Nigeria.



 5. The Respondent gave reasons for refusing the application  in  a  letter
    dated 28th February 2013; it having been refused both under Appendix FM
    of the Immigration  Rules,  taking  into  account  private  life  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR which  fell  to  be  considered  under  paragraph
    276ADE  of  the  Rules  since  9th  July  2012.   The  judge   in   the
    determination  set  out  at  length  at  paragraphs  7  to  27  of  the
    determination the requirements of the Immigration Rules  which  it  was
    common ground the Appellants could not satisfy.  It was also  noted  at
    paragraph  27  that  the  Secretary  of  State  also   considered   the
    exceptional circumstances under paragraph 353B before making a decision
    to remove the Appellants.

 6. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Fletcher-Hill) on
    8th July 2013.  The judge heard oral evidence from the first  Appellant
    only and that was reflected in the determination at  paragraphs  30  to
    68.  The judge set out her findings and assessment  of  the  issues  at
    paragraphs 73 to 95 noting that  it  was  conceded  on  behalf  of  the
    appellants that they could not meet the Immigration Rules but the  case
    was advanced on the basis of Article 8 "outside the Rules".  The  judge
    after considering the evidence and the submissions of the  parties  and
    weighing up the factors relevant in this appeal which  was  principally
    the length of residence of the parties but in particular  the  evidence
    of the Appellant and the eldest child, that the decision to remove  was
    a  proportionate  one.   Thus  the  appeal  was  dismissed  under   the
    Immigration Rules and on Article 8 grounds(outside the Rules".

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that  decision  and  on  18th
    September 2003 permission was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Baker.

The proceedings before the Upper Tribunal:

 8. Thus the appeal was listed before the Upper  Tribunal.   Mr  Al-Rashid,
    who was Counsel before the First-tier Tribunal, appeared on  behalf  of
    the Appellants and Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer  appeared  on
    behalf of the Respondent.  Mr Al-Rashid relied upon the written grounds
    as submitted on behalf of the Appellants.  In his oral  submissions  he
    invited the Tribunal to find that the judge had made a perverse finding
    at paragraph 76 of the determination in her conclusion that the  eldest
    child had not arrived at the same time as  the  mother.   He  submitted
    that the only evidence was the mother's evidence and there was  nothing
    to counteract that and common  sense  would  demonstrate  that  in  the
    absence of any countervailing evidence a child of that  age  would  not
    have travelled alone into the United Kingdom.

 9. He further submitted that the judge made a full assessment in  relation
    to the Article 8 issue (outside the  Rules)  and  that  the  length  of
    residence of the eldest child was of  great  weight  and  significance.
    The judge in this context had dismissed the mother's evidence as  "self
    interested" at paragraph 85 and that in general  terms  the  judge  had
    given the evidence "short shrift" concerning the children's educational
    integration.  The evidence before the Tribunal demonstrated  that  they
    were well integrated into the UK educational system and that the eldest
    child had demonstrated exceptional  progress  in  her  education.   The
    third point relied upon by Mr Al-Rashid was that in this case there had
    been a delay of three years between the application  and  the  date  of
    decision and that had not been  a  factor  that  had  been  taken  into
    account by the judge in weighing the issues of proportionality.

10. Mr Jarvis by way of reply relied upon the Rule  24  response  that  had
    been filed on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State.   In  addition  he
    submitted that there had  been  no  perversity  shown  in  the  judge's
    findings and that the  general  background  of  the  Appellant,  having
    entered illegally, having provided no evidence in support of her eldest
    child being resident in the United Kingdom since 2003 and  the  reasons
    given by the judge in reaching the decision could not be  described  as
    perverse but were findings made on the evidence  and  were  sustainable
    ones.  He  submitted  that  the  judge  had  concerns  over  the  first
    Appellant's evidence and was entitled to act cautiously given the  fact
    that paragraph 75 was not challenged  as  to  her  immigration  history
    being  unreliable  and  that  she  had  given   inconsistent   evidence
    concerning whether she had worked illegally in the  United  Kingdom  as
    reflected in the determination.

11. The judge considered the factors weighing in the balance carefully  and
    whilst it  was  submitted  that  when  considering  the  countervailing
    factors the judge had sought to place some blame on the children,  that
    was not reflected in the determination where she had referred  to  them
    at a number of points as  "innocent  children".   The  judge  also  did
    consider their educational  integration  and  followed  the  structured
    approach set out in MK (India) considering the benefits of  removal  as
    well as the negative aspects.

12. Whilst it was submitted that there was an error of law by the judge  by
    dismissing the mother's evidence as "self interested", that has  to  be
    seen in the context in which the judge was considering it.   The  judge
    was talking about independent evidence of harm and this was a  distinct
    and nuanced enquiry.  All the judge was stating was that there  was  no
    independent evidence and that it had come solely from  the  mother  who
    desired to remain in the United Kingdom.   It  was  understandable,  he
    submitted, for the judge to be cautious.

13. It was further submitted that the judge  did  consider  the  length  of
    residence with care, noting the old DP5/96 policy and it had  not  been
    demonstrated that the conclusion reached by the judge was unlawful,  or
    wrong or that any error of law had been shown in the judge's  approach.
    As to the question of delay, the question  is  whether  there  was  any
    "culpable delay" and not just simply delay.  In this case there  was  a
    short period of  delay  which  was  small  compared  to  the  time  the
    Appellant had been in the country unlawfully.  It was not enough to say
    that there was simply delay but would have to demonstrate  how  it  had
    effect upon the appellants and there was no evidence before the  First-
    tier Tribunal that because of the delay  the  family  or  the  children
    expected to remain in the United Kingdom.  This is  not  a  case  where
    there is any prejudice either and in  those  circumstances,  the  judge
    made an entirely sustainable decision based on the evidence.

14. Mr Al-Rashid by way of reply submitted that  the  issue  of  delay  was
    based on  the  fact  that  during  that  time  it  could  lead  to  the
    development of close ties and that whilst it would have been  described
    by Mr Jarvis as a short period, in the case of minor children any delay
    was of significance.  This is a factor that should have been taken into
    account.  He submitted that there was a degree of blame being  attached
    to the children when it was noted by the judge that  they  had  pursued
    free education and free medical health treatment and  that  was  not  a
    correct approach.

15. After the submissions were given, it appeared that the  main  Appellant
    had given a new document to  Counsel  which  was  claimed  was  an  NHS
    medical card for the eldest child.  Mr Al-Rashid asked  the  Presenting
    Officer to check his file because it was asserted that such a  document
    had been sent to the Respondent.  There were  no  copies  in  the  Home
    Office file nor did they feature in the refusal letter, indeed  to  the
    contrary the Respondent had noted that the documents produced  did  not
    involve any registration on behalf of the child.   This  had  not  been
    referred to the First-tier Tribunal nor in the grounds of  appeal.   Mr
    Al-Rashid stated that there was no support for this document  and  that
    this was not a matter that therefore could be considered any further.

16. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision which I now
    give.

Conclusions:

17. The first ground relied upon by Mr Al-Rashid relates to paragraph 3  of
    the written grounds in which it is  asserted  that  the  judge  made  a
    perverse finding concerning the evidence of when the eldest  child  had
    entered the United  Kingdom.   It  is  submitted  that  the  conclusion
    reached by the judge  that  if  the  Appellant  had  arrived  with  her
    daughter, then aged 18 months, it was more likely than  not  she  would
    have needed medical attention and therefore would have been  registered
    with a GP, was  a  perverse  finding,  was  against  the  evidence  and
    therefore was a flawed finding.  Mr Al-Rashid submitted that there  was
    nothing to counter the mother's oral evidence nor in  terms  of  common
    sense that a child of that age would have travelled with her mother and
    would not have travelled alone.

18. The judge's findings at paragraphs 73 to 77 are as follows:-

         "73. I have been able to see and hear the main Appellant give  oral
             evidence on the various issues raised in this case.

         74.  I find that the main Appellant arrived in the UK on  5th  July
             2003  and  I  accept  the  evidence  that   she   subsequently
             registered with a GP practice in Old Kent Road  on  16th  July
             2003.   Neither  of  these  claims  is   challenged   by   the
             Respondent.

         75.  I find that there is no satisfactory evidence  to  corroborate
             the main Appellant's statement that she has remained in the UK
             continuously ever since.

         76.  I find that if she had arrived with  her  then  18  month  old
             daughter Ganiyat, as she claimed, then a registration  at  the
             GP surgery for that child would also have been made  and  been
             available for production.  It is obvious and more likely  than
             not that a child of tender years  would  have  needed  medical
             attention, especially  as  the  main  Appellant  was  then  an
             experienced mother nursing her first child with no  access  to
             her immediate family for guidance and assistance.  I find  the
             absence of any medical records  for  her  first  child  during
             infancy lead me to conclude that the child arrived in  the  UK
             on a date which the main Appellant has chosen not to disclose.



         77.  The first reliable records for such arrival show that a  child
             by the name of  'Ganiat  Oluwatoyin'  attended  Surrey  Square
             Infants' School in Walworth,  SE18  from  8th  September  2005
             until 22nd July 2009.  There is also evidence that a child  by
             the name of Ganiyat Ibrahim joined the  Surrey  Square  Junior
             School in September 2009.  Both letters in  relation  to  that
             school registration are dated 14th and 15th January  2010  and
             they are the only evidence in the Respondent's bundle provided
             by the schools concerned (Respondent's bundle E1 and F1)."

    I have considered the submission made by Mr  Al-Rashid  concerning  the
    finding made by the judge principally at paragraph 76 and  that  it  is
    challenged  on  the  basis  of  it  being  a  perverse  finding.   Such
    perversity challenge is a high threshold to meet and I have taken  that
    into account in looking at  the  evidence  before  the  judge  and  the
    reasons given for reaching that finding set out at paragraph  76.   The
    judge found that the Appellant entered illegally at the age of  31  and
    there is no challenge to such a finding.  The burden  remained  on  the
    Appellant to demonstrate on the evidence that she had entered with  her
    first child on the date that  she  claimed  in  2003.   The  judge  was
    required to weigh up all of the evidence and that  would  include  also
    the Appellant's oral assertion and  give  evidence  based  reasons  for
    reaching  a  conclusion  on  this  issue.   It  is   plain   from   the
    determination at paragraph 76 that the judge  did  precisely  that  and
    gave a number of reasons for reaching that finding.  Firstly, the judge
    noted that if the Appellant had arrived accompanied by her daughter who
    was then 18 months of age then it  is  more  likely  than  not  that  a
    registration at a GP surgery for that child would also have  been  made
    and been available for production.  This was based on the fact that the
    evidence of the Appellant was that she had registered with a GP on 16th
    July 2003 and had provided documentation in that respect but there  was
    no such similar document produced in respect  of  the  Appellant.   The
    judge also found that given the age of her child at the  time  that  it
    was asserted she had arrived in the United Kingdom at 18  months,  that
    as she was a child of "tender years" that it was more likely  than  not
    she would have needed some medical attention in the light  of  her  age
    and bearing in mind that the Appellant  had  no  immediate  family  for
    guidance and assistance.  That does not seem to me  to  be  a  perverse
    finding  at  all  but  one  that  takes  into  account  the  particular
    circumstances of the first Appellant herself, the age at  which  it  is
    said she entered with a child and the likely needs that a child of such
    tender years may have based on common  sense.   Importantly  the  judge
    found that the absence of any  medical  records  for  her  first  child
    during infancy led the judge to conclude that the child had arrived  in
    the UK on a date which the main Appellant had chosen not  to  disclose.
    The judge was making the point that the first reliable  record  of  the
    second Appellant's residence in the United  Kingdom  was  in  September
    2005 (see paragraph 77) and that there was  no  evidence  from  medical
    records not only concerning the date of registration of which there was
    none but also the judge made the point there  was  an  absence  of  any
    medical records whatsoever for the eldest child during her infancy.

      In reaching a decision on this issue the judge was entitled  to  take
    into account the Appellant's conduct in that she  had  entered  the  UK
    illegally and that there had been some deception on her  part.   Indeed
    it is plain from the determination that the judge  had  concerns  about
    the first Appellant's evidence.  Such can be seen at  paragraph  81  of
    the determination  when  the  judge  considered  inconsistent  evidence
    contained in the birth certificate that had been produced on behalf  of
    the Appellants.  As the judge noted, the birth  certificates  described
    the mothers occupation as "hairdresser/tailor and as a fashion designer
    respectively".  It had been the Appellant's account that she had  never
    worked in the United Kingdom and as the judge correctly  recorded  that
    the evidence on the face of the documents that she had produced, namely
    the birth certificates, "casts doubt on the main Appellant's claim that
    she had never worked in the UK".    Furthermore,  paragraph  75  is  an
    unchallenged finding in which the judge found there was no satisfactory
    evidence to corroborate the main Appellant's  statement  that  she  has
    remained in the UK continuously and thus the judge also found that  her
    immigration history was unreliable.

       The Respondent in the refusal letter dated 28th February  2013  also
    raised the issue of the eldest child's length of residence in the UK as
    a credibility issue where it was stated:-

         "You claim that you have been in the UK since  2003  but  the  only
         evidence you have submitted is a letter from Aylesbury  Partnership
         that states you have been registered with  them  since  July  2003.
         Even if you have been registered with your GP since 2003, this does
         not mean you have been in the UK continuously since this date.  You
         have entered the UK illegally at least once and it is possible that
         you have entered illegally on more than  one  occasion.   For  your
         child Ganiyat Oluwatoyin Adeniran you have submitted a letter  from
         Surrey Square Infant School  that  states  she  attended  from  8th
         September 2005 until 22nd July 2009 and also a letter  from  Surrey
         Square Junior School that states she attended since joining them in
         September 2009.  You have submitted no evidence to  show  that  she
         has been in the UK prior to September 2005."

    Thus the judge was required to evaluate all of the evidence before  her
    including the Appellant's oral assertion as to when the  child  arrived
    and was therefore entitled to make the finding that she did.  It is  an
    entirely sustainable finding and cannot be classed as  a  perverse  one
    and was firmly evidence based.  There is no merit in that ground.

19. The second ground advanced on behalf of the Appellant  relates  to  the
    judge's assessment of the issue  of  human  rights.   It  is  right  to
    observe that Mr Al-Rashid as stated that before the  Immigration  Judge
    there was no issue that  the  Appellants  could  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Indeed the judge dealt with that  issue  in  the  determination
    that the Appellants were not able to meet the requirements for leave to
    remain under Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  taking  into
    account private life under Article 8 of  the  ECHR  which  fell  to  be
    considered under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  However the  case  was
    based on Article 8 "outside the rules".

20.   As noted in the determination, the oldest child could  not  meet  the
    Rules at the time of the application in 2010 as she had not been in the
    UK for seven years.  In this respect it was submitted on behalf of  the
    Appellant that the judge gave little  credence  to  the  importance  of
    family life as set out at paragraph 88 of the  determination.   It  was
    said that the judge  gave  no  weight  to  the  mother's  evidence  and
    dismissed it on the basis that she was a "self interested"  party.   As
    there was no need for separate representation  for  the  children,  the
    children's and the mother's interests being identical, it was not  open
    to the judge to dismiss this evidence  as  "self  interested".   It  is
    submitted on behalf of the Appellant that the judge  did  not  consider
    properly the best interests of the children, giving what was  described
    as "short shrift" to evidence of their education  and  integration  and
    that the evidence had demonstrated a substantial degree of  integration
    and that she had been required to give due weight to that.

21. It is plain that this was a carefully considered determination  of  the
    Immigration Judge.  In doing so the conclusions  demonstrate  that  the
    judge considered the best interests  of  all  three  children.   It  is
    common ground that both parents of the minor Appellants had no leave to
    be in the United Kingdom.  In respect of the Appellants' father, he had
    no leave and therefore as the judge noted at paragraph 85, the  removal
    of the Appellant and her family members would not interfere with  their
    family life as they would be removed together as a family  unit.   Such
    an approach is not contrary to law, indeed as noted in the decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal in EA (Article 8 - best interests of child)  Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 00315,  the  correct  starting  point  in  considering  the
    welfare and best interests of a child would be that it is in  the  best
    interests of a child to live with and be  brought  up  by  his  or  her
    parents, subject to any very strong contra-indication.  Where it is  in
    the best interests of a child to live with and be brought up by his  or
    her parents, and the child's removal with his parents does not  involve
    any separation of family life.  Nevertheless the judge considered it on
    the basis of their established private lives in the United Kingdom.  As
    to consideration of the best interests of the children, the judge quite
    correctly identified that  this  was  the  first  issue  that  required
    consideration (see paragraph 87 of  the  determination)  and  correctly
    applied the decision of ZH (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4  noting  that  a
    child's best interests are  a  primary  consideration  but  are  not  a
    "paramount consideration".  The judge  also  correctly  identified  the
    importance of nationality and that both the children  and  the  parents
    were not British citizens but were all Nigerian nationals, taking  into
    account the importance of nationality as referred to in the decision of
    ZH (Tanzania).

22.   In making an assessment of the best interests of the children, it  is
    plain in my judgment that the judge identified the  following  relevant
    factors; firstly that the best interests of the children were a primary
    consideration and not a paramount one, secondly the importance  of  the
    children's nationality and thirdly to assess  any  harm  or  disruption
    caused or may be caused by their removal from the  United  Kingdom  and
    that included the stage that they were at in the educational system and
    their integration into society.

23.   Whilst the grounds assert the judge failed to give any weight or take
    into account the evidence of their education I do not find that  to  be
    correct.  The judge considered with care any harm or any  disadvantages
    that they would have if returned to Nigeria.  The judge  found  on  the
    evidence that they would not face any problems of  adaptation  of  "any
    magnitude" noting that English was widely spoken in Nigeria and was the
    medium of instruction in schools (paragraph 87).  The judge noted  that
    they would have their parents to assist and guide them  and  the  judge
    placed weight on the evidence that unlike the United Kingdom where  the
    Appellants had no family members resident, in Nigeria they had what the
    judge described as a "wider family circle in Nigeria including at least
    one grandparent and the friends and contacts of that wider circle" (see
    paragraph 87).  The judge also considered and weighed  in  the  balance
    the benefits of a move to Nigeria.  At  paragraph  89  the  judge  said
    this:-

         "One particular advantage which the children would have in  Nigeria
         is that both their parents would be able to work lawfully, so  that
         family life would be placed onto a secure footing rather  than  the
         economic uncertainties which  have  beset  them  in  the  UK  where
         neither parent is entitled to work.  The family  would  accordingly
         be better off, whether or not  in  absolute  material  terms  which
         cannot be regarded as an absolute measure."

    The other factor of benefit to the children  was  that  they  would  be
    brought up in the country of their nationality, namely Nigeria (a point
    expressly considered by ZH (Tanzania).

24. Mr Al-Rashid criticised the judge's approach at  paragraph  88  of  the
    determination with regard to the mother's evidence.  He submitted  that
    the judge dismissed the mother's evidence wrongly.  The judge said this
    at paragraph 88:-

         "There was no suggestion from  any  independent  source  (e.g.  the
         relevant local  authority  Social  Services  department)  that  the
         removal of the three children to Nigeria would be harmful  to  them
         and should be opposed.  There was simply the mother's opinion about
         the children which carried no weight because of its self interested
         nature.  The background country evidence in  the  COIR  shows  that
         healthcare, education and other services are available in  Nigeria.
         There is no suggestion that  Nigeria  is  a  hostile  or  dangerous
         place.  The children would be able to keep in  contact  with  their
         British friends via Facebook, e-mail and other  such  social  media
         which can be regarded as part of modern life.  The  children  would
         be able to make visits to the United Kingdom, funds permitting.  It
         is well-known that children  move  countries  and  continents  with
         their parents all the time.  No one has suggested that  such  wider
         experience of life is harmful.  The fact that none of the children,
         other than the oldest, has been to  Nigeria  is  of  no  particular
         significance given their Nigerian heritage and family links."

25.  A  careful  reading  of  paragraph  88  demonstrates  that  the  judge
    specifically considered the issue of the  effects  of  removal  on  the
    children given their length of residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    considered it in the context of any demonstrable harm to their  welfare
    or the harmful consequences of such removal.  As  the  judge  correctly
    noted there was  no  independent  evidence,  that  is  from  the  local
    authority Social Services department or indeed from any  other  source,
    or anyone objectively tasked with considering the harmful effects  upon
    a child of removal and that there was no evidence of such harm  to  the
    children as a result of their removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  with
    their parents.  All the  judge  was  stating  was  that  there  was  no
    independent evidence of harm other than that of the mother who in  that
    sense could  not  be  classed  as  providing  independent  professional
    evidence as to harm.  There  is  nothing  unlawful  or  wrong  in  that
    approach for the judge  to  state  that  this  was  the  only  evidence
    concerning the harmful effects of removal and that it came  from  their
    mother whose evident desire was to remain in the United  Kingdom.   The
    judge had raised concerns  about  the  Appellant's  evidence  generally
    having noted at paragraph 76 concerns as to  her  immigration  history,
    and her inconsistent evidence concerning her working illegally  in  the
    United Kingdom (see 81) and therefore it was wholly understandable that
    the judge was cautious in accepting her evidence on  the  basis  of  it
    being made only on an oral  assertion  and  unsupported  by  any  other
    evidence as to the harmful effects of removal.

26. The other factors considered by the judge  related  to  the  children's
    personal circumstances noting that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
    children had any health needs and considered the effect of removal upon
    the children.   In  this  context  the  judge  took  into  account  the
    background country materials, which is an entirely correct  and  lawful
    approach  and  at  paragraph  88  noted  that  the   country   evidence
    demonstrated  that  healthcare,  education  and  other  services   were
    available in Nigeria and that there was no suggestion that the children
    would be in any danger in  Nigeria.   The  judge  also  considered  the
    consequences of  their  length  of  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom
    including relationships with friends but noted that the children  would
    be able to keep in contact with their British friends via Facebook,  e-
    mail and other social media which "can be regarded as  part  of  modern
    life".  The judge also referred to the  children  being  able  to  make
    visits if funds permitted.  The judge also observed that "children move
    countries and continents with their parents all the time" and that  "no
    one has suggested that such wider experience of life is harmful".   The
    judge also took into account that only the eldest  child  had  been  to
    Nigeria but reached  the  conclusion  that  the  fact  that  the  other
    children had not was of no particular significance given their Nigerian
    heritage and family links.  In this respect, it is common  ground  that
    both parents are nationals of Nigeria.

27. Contrary to the assertion in the grounds, the judge  did  consider  and
    give weight to the  issue  of  the  children's  education.   The  judge
    considered the  prevailing  country  conditions  in  Nigeria  and  made
    reference to the country materials and the COIR  for  Nigeria  of  June
    2003 at paragraph 90.  The judge noted  that  that  indicated  that  in
    Nigeria primary education begins at age 6 and lasts six  years  and  is
    followed by secondary education beginning  at  12  and  lasting  for  a
    further six years.  Education to junior secondary level from  6  to  15
    years of age is free and compulsory and therefore found that:-

         "All of the Appellant's children would  therefore  be  entitled  to
         participate in the free education in their own country and  I  note
         that the oldest child is about to change schools at age 11  in  the
         UK and her younger sibling is about to commence primary school, and
         will attain 6 years old in September 2013.  The children will  thus
         be ideally placed to  continue  their  education  in  the  Nigerian
         education system."

    The evidence before the Tribunal in respect of Ganiyat noted  that  she
    had been offered a place at the academy in 2013 (as stated by the judge
    at paragraph 90).  The evidence at page 11 noted that she had joined S.
    School in 2005 and her attendance had been  100%  and  that  the  three
    children as a whole had excellent attendance  records  and  that  their
    mother was committed to their development and  that  she  had  attended
    parents' evenings.  The  report  showed  that  there  were  achievement
    certificates made.  The third Appellant started primary school in April
    2012 (see page 36).  The judge had regard to their  education  and  the
    fact that they had excellent attendance records  and  that  the  eldest
    child had done well  in  the  United  Kingdom.   To  some  extent  such
    achievement would conversely make her adaptation  to  Nigeria  and  her
    continuation of education there easier because of  her  ability  rather
    than it being a difficult transition or adaptation as in the case of  a
    child with special needs.   As  noted  in  the  decision  of  MK  (Best
    interests of child) India [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC), it is important when
    considering a child's education to have regard not just to the evidence
    relating to any short term disruption of current schooling that will be
    caused by any removal but also to that relating  to  the  impact  on  a
    child's educational development,  progress  and  opportunities  in  the
    broader sense.  The judge had regard to this by  considering  the  fact
    that whilst their education would be disrupted, the disruption would be
    minimal given the ages of the children, the stage  of  their  education
    presently and also that they would be entitled to free  and  compulsory
    education based on the country material that was before the judge.

28. In making an assessment of the best  interests  of  the  children,  the
    judge had firmly in mind that an important consideration in respect  of
    the children was the length of residence  and  in  particular  for  the
    eldest child.  As the judge noted at paragraph 91:-

         "The fact that one of  the  children  has  resided  in  the  United
         Kingdom for at least seven years is an important  factor  reflected
         in  the  latest  changes  in  the  Immigration   Rules   (paragraph
         276ADE(iv)) but that cannot be regarded as  decisive  or  the  only
         factor in the consideration of where her best interests lie,  given
         that she was not able to satisfy the Immigration Rules.   Miah  and
         Others v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 261 shows that being  a  'near  miss'
         cannot assist her, Ganiyat's best interests plainly are  to  remain
         with her parents and siblings, who must be removed to Nigeria".

29. After weighing up all of the factors outlined above, the judge  reached
    the conclusion that it was in the best interests of  the  children  for
    them to remain with their parents and siblings  and  in  doing  so  the
    judge carefully considered the length  of  residence  of  the  children
    especially the eldest child.  The judge made reference to the period of
    seven years.  As noted in EM (Zimbabwe) CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC) "in the
    absence of countervailing factors, residence of  over  seven  years  of
    children well integrated into the  educational  system  in  the  United
    Kingdom, is  an  indicator  that  the  welfare  of  the  child  favours
    regularisation of the status of mother and children.  The importance of
    a child's length of residence had previously been noted and  identified
    as important and was part of a policy on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State known as DP5/96 which was withdrawn from effect on  9th  December
    2008 but now forms part of the Immigration Rules.  The cases of MK  (as
    cited) and EM (Zimbabwe)  were  considered  before  amendments  to  the
    Immigration Rules which are a reflection of the  executive  policy  and
    seven years as a relevant time but this was in  the  context  of  seven
    years before the application is made.  Nonetheless  the  importance  of
    the length of residence is set out in a  number  of  decisions  of  the
    Upper Tribunal (MK, E-A (Article 8 - best interests of a child) Nigeria
    [2011]  UKUT  00315  (IAC)  and  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others   (Decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197.  As noted in those
    cases, absent other factors, the reason why  a  period  of  substantial
    residence of a child may become a weighty consideration in the  balance
    of competing considerations is that in the course of  such  time  roots
    are put down, personal identities are developed, friendships are formed
    and links are made with the community outside  the  family  unit.   The
    degree of these elements of private life are of course  fact  sensitive
    and depend upon the facts of each particular case.  It  is  also  noted
    that seven years from the age of 4 is likely to be more significant  to
    a child than the first seven years of life.  Very  young  children  are
    focussed on their parents rather than on their peers and are adaptable.
     In this context, the two  youngest  children,  although  born  in  the
    United Kingdom were below the age of 7  and  fell  into  that  category
    which is why the focus of the appeal was based on the eldest child  who
    had a more substantial length of residence.  The judge was required  to
    make a holistic assessment of the evidence  concerning  the  length  of
    time that the Appellant had been in the United Kingdom as it  is  plain
    from the determination that she carried out such an assessment  as  can
    be seen from the preceding paragraphs and I do not find that it can  be
    said that the judge did not consider properly or weigh in  the  balance
    the level of educational integration in the United Kingdom as  asserted
    in the grounds for the reasons that I have set out.

30. The judge when reaching a decision  was  also  entitled  to  take  into
    account the family's immigration history  as  a  countervailing  factor
    weighing against the family's claim to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.
    On the facts of this particular appeal both parents had sought to  make
    their family life in the United Kingdom and to place their children  in
    education in the full knowledge that they had no immigration status and
    as such it was precarious as they had no right  to  be  in  the  United
    Kingdom or remain or have any legitimate expectation of  being  allowed
    to indefinitely.  They were not British citizens nor had they ever been
    "settled" within the meaning of the Immigration Rules.

31. Whilst it is right that the case law and  principles  identified  above
    make a distinction of children who have  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since the age of 4 and therefore the links that they are likely to have
    made are more substantial, that is not a complete answer to  the  issue
    of proportionality which judges are required to carry out and assess by
    balancing and weighing all of the relevant  factors.   Here  the  judge
    considered with care all effects upon the children, not only the second
    Appellant, both positive and negative, whether there  was  evidence  of
    any harmful  effects  upon  removal,  the  stage  and  level  of  their
    education.  Whilst it would be accepted that  their  eldest  child  had
    made friendships in the United Kingdom, there was no specific  evidence
    advanced on behalf of the Appellants in this respect.  The  judge  also
    placed weight  upon  the  countervailing  factors  of  the  Appellant's
    history, noting her illegal entry, the precarious nature of the  family
    life and no expectation of being able to remain.  The judge  considered
    the circumstances of the main Appellant at paragraph 92 noting that she
    had been born and brought up in  Nigeria  and  had  spent  all  of  her
    formative years there.  At the date of the hearing she was 42 but  that
    despite the length of residence she had spent the vast majority of  her
    life outside of the country and had been educated, had worked there and
    had her first child there.   The  judge  noted  "There  was  no  cogent
    evidence of the  main  Appellant  having  established  any  significant
    private life of her own in the UK.  On her own case  her  main  concern
    has been as a mother to her children, that is, family life has been her
    preoccupation".

32. It was submitted on behalf of the Appellant that when  considering  the
    countervailing reasons identified by the judge,  she  wrongly  attached
    blame upon the children.  I do not find that that is reflected  in  the
    careful  determination  of  the  judge.   Whilst  the  judge  noted  at
    paragraphs 82 and 83 that  the  family  had  been  receiving  free  NHS
    treatment  and  had  secured  free  education  despite  their  lack  of
    entitlement, the judge stated:-

         "The children are of course blameless and are innocent  victims  of
         their parents' wrongdoing". (See paragraph 83).

    Furthermore at paragraph 87 the judge also said "The best interests  of
    the innocent children must be considered in the balancing  exercise  by
    which proportionality is exercised".  It is therefore  plain  from  the
    terminology and words used by the judge that the judge made it clear in
    the determination that the  children  were  wholly  innocent  and  this
    should not be  taken  into  account.   All  the  judge  was  noting  at
    paragraphs 82 and  83  is  that  the  main  Appellant  herself  had  no
    entitlement to remain but that it did not mean that the judge  attached
    any culpability upon the children.

      It is also submitted that the judge failed to consider the  issue  of
    delay.  The application had been made by  the  main  Appellant  on  1st
    April 2010 but the decision was not dated  until  28th  February  2013.
    The decision of EB (Kosovo) makes it clear that delay in  the  decision
    making process is not irrelevant but it depends upon the facts of  each
    particular case as to how it becomes relevant  in  the  proportionality
    balance.  In a case where the issue is private life,  as  here,  it  is
    noted that applicants  may  develop  close  personal  social  ties  and
    establish deeper roots in the community the longer the length of delay.
     But  also  delay  is  relevant  that  where  Appellants  have  entered
    illegally and  established  a  family  life  or  private  life  in  the
    knowledge that they have no permission to do  so  and  therefore  their
    existence is a precarious one, that is also an issue concerning  delay.
    Delay is also relevant in reducing the weight to  be  accorded  to  the
    requirement of a fair and firm immigration policy.  The  Appellants  in
    this case could not rely upon any policy, DP5/96 having been  withdrawn
    in 2008, and therefore it cannot be said that they had lost  any  right
    to any claim during the period of delay.  Indeed the  delay  in  itself
    enabled the Appellants to continue living in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    enjoying the benefits that the judge had outlined.  The  way  in  which
    this submission was advanced was that  because  of  the  delay  in  the
    decision making process the Appellants thought that they were  entitled
    to stay.  Such a proposition has to be made on the evidence  and  there
    is no reference to such a view being taken by the main Appellant either
    in her witness statement or her evidence that due to delay  either  she
    or the children had any expectation to remain.

33. Whilst there is no specific reference to the  issue  of  delay,  it  is
    plain that the judge was aware that the parties had  been  resident  in
    the United Kingdom for  a  lengthy  period  of  time  noting  that  the
    application had been made in 2010 but the decision was not  made  until
    2013 and that because of the length of their residence the consequences
    of removal in the light of that residence was a necessary  and  weighty
    consideration.  Nonetheless, the length of residence was weighed in the
    balance against all the other facts in what must have been a  difficult
    decision for this particular judge.  After such an  assessment  on  the
    proportionality exercise, the  judge  reached  the  decision  that  the
    decision to remove the Appellants together as a family unit  would  not
    be a disproportionate one on the particular facts of this case.  Whilst
    she  had  not  specifically  referred  to  delay,  it  had   not   been
    demonstrated on behalf of the appellants that it would  have  made  any
    difference to the outcome of the appeal and did not add to the  overall
    balance given the fact that she placed weight and took into account the
    length of residence of the  children  which  would  have  included  the
    period between 2010 and 2013.

34. A court should not categorise as an error of law what is no more than a
    disagreement with an assessment  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    findings and assessment.  There is no doubt  that  the  facts  of  this
    appeal gave rise to a difficult evaluative exercise and that the  judge
    weighed in the balance the relevant factors  including  the  length  of
    residence of the eldest child and considered the  effect  that  removal
    would have upon her and the family as a whole, but after  weighing  all
    of those factors carefully and in  a  reasoned  decision,  reached  the
    conclusion that the balance lay in  favour  of  removal  and  that  the
    decision was not a disproportionate one.   In  the  circumstances,  the
    judge in reaching the conclusions and the assessment properly  assessed
    the evidence in this appeal.  The conclusions were adequately  reasoned
    and were fully open to the judge on the evidence that was  before  her.
    The question which I have to answer is not whether another  Immigration
    Judge or I myself would have reached the same conclusion in  this  case
    but whether no Immigration Judge could properly have reached  the  same
    conclusion.  Whilst Mr Al-Rashid has referred to the  judge's  findings
    at paragraph 76 as perverse, and that this meant that the decision  was
    flawed as a whole, I do not  find  it  is  possible  to  say  that  the
    findings there were perverse or irrational  and  find  that  they  were
    conclusions fully open to the  judge  on  the  evidence.   I  therefore
    conclude that the Immigration Judge did not make a  material  error  of
    law and the determination shall stand.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

