
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/07804/2014
     IA/07808/2014
     IA/07815/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 December 2014                |On 11 December 2014               |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                Brian Waremba
                                Danayi Gapara
                                     and
                      Tapiwa Stanslous Nehemiah Waremba

                       (anonymity directions NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr B Hoshi of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are all citizens of  Zimbabwe.   The  first  and  second
    appellants are husband and wife and the third  appellant  is  their  11
    year old son who was born in Zimbabwe but who entered the UK  with  his
    mother (as family dependants) in January 2007 at the  age  of  3.   The
    first appellant originally entered the UK  as  a  student  in  December
    2004.  A further  child  has  been  born  to  the  family  since  their
    application was made in March 2012.  Their application was for  further
    leave to remain in the UK  under  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.

2.   The application was refused by the respondent on 23 January  2014  both
    under paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and,  separately,
    outside the Rules.  The appellants' appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was heard by Judge E B Grant, who, in a determination promulgated on 29
    September 2014, dismissed the appeals.

3.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Foudy on 4 November 2014 on the basis, as set out in the
    grounds, that the judge had failed  to  address  Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 which, by  virtue  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014, came into effect on 28 July 2014.  In  particular
    Section 117B(6) provides as follows:

         "(6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."


    Under Section 117D(1) a "qualifying child" is defined as a person under
    the age of 18 who is either a British citizen or who has lived  in  the
    United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years  or  more.   Thus
    the third appellant in this case is a qualifying child.


4.   Mr Hoshi submitted  that  the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  make  any
    reference at all in her determination to Section 117.  Section  117A(2)
    makes it mandatory for the Tribunal to have regard "in all cases to the
    considerations listed in Section 117B".  It may be that the judge would
    have come to the same conclusion had  she  considered  Section  117  in
    detail but the threshold is a high one and it is by no means clear that
    the judge would have come to the same conclusion.

5.   The second point made by Mr Hoshi  was  that,  throughout  the  judge's
    determination she considered, almost exclusively, the education of  the
    11 year old third appellant without taking  into  account  his  private
    life, other than education.  Reliance was placed  on  the  presidential
    decision in Azimi-Moayed [2013]  UKUT  00197  (a  case  which  was  not
    referred to in the First-tier Tribunal) and to part of the headnote  to
    that case which reads as follows:

         "iii)    Lengthy residence in a country other  than  the  state  of
             origin  can  lead  to  development  of  social,  cultural  and
             educational ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in
             the absence  of  compelling  reason  to  the  contrary.   What
             amounts to lengthy residence is not clear  cut  but  past  and
             present policies have identified seven  years  as  a  relevant
             period.


         iv)  Apart from the terms of  published  policies  and  Rules,  the
             Tribunal notes that seven years from age 4  is  likely  to  be
             more significant to a child than  the  first  seven  years  of
             life. Very young children are focused on their parents  rather
             than their peers and are adaptable."

6.   Mr Hoshi also relied on the fact that nowhere in her determination  had
    the judge considered the private life of the first two appellants,  the
    husband having been in the UK for 10 years and the wife  for  nearly  8
    years.  The judge concentrated on the education of the 11 year  old  in
    relation to Article 8 and on  very  little  else.   Mr  Hoshi  drew  my
    attention to the fact that the appellants had appeared in person in the
    First-tier Tribunal and that the first appellant's Grounds of Appeal as
    well as his witness statement of 18 March 2014 made  reference  to  his
    private life generally in the UK. But those factors were not apparently
    considered in any part of the judge's findings under Article 8.

7.   Mr  Avery,  in  reply,  submitted  that  although  the  judge  had  not
    specifically addressed Section 117  the  outcome  was  unlikely  to  be
    different and any error of law was  not  such  that  the  determination
    should be set aside.  It was clear from the tenor of the  determination
    that the appellants' main thrust in argument had been directed  to  the
    education of the 11 year old child.

8.   I indicated at the end of the submissions that  I  was  satisfied  that
    the judge did err in failing to make any reference at  all  to  Section
    117 - she was statutorily bound to consider those provisions -  and  in
    apparently failing to consider and make findings concerning the private
    lives  of  the  first  and  second  appellants.   Both  representatives
    submitted (and I concurred)  that  that the appeal must be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing  with  no  part  of  the  earlier
    determination being preserved.

Notice of Decision

9.   The First-tier Tribunal determination contains an  error  of  law  such
    that it must be set aside in its entirety with  none  of  its  findings
    being preserved.

10.  The appellants' Article 8 claims will need to be reheard afresh  and  I
    therefore remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal at  Hatton  Cross
    for rehearing (by any judge other than Judge E B Grant).

11   No anonymity direction is made.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
11 December 2014
