
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07408/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 November 2015                  |On 18 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RKN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss E Rutherford, Counsel, instructed by French &
Co, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the
         Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise,  no  report  of  these
         proceedings or any form of publication thereof  shall  directly  or
         indirectly identify the original Appellant, the present Respondent.
         This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure
         to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of  court
         proceedings. I make this order because the  decision  concerns  the
         welfare of children who are entitled to privacy.

      2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
         the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  appeal  of  the  respondent,
         hereinafter "the claimant", against a decision of the Secretary  of
         State on 31 January 2014 to refuse to vary her leave  to  enter  or
         remain.

      3. The point of substance in the case is that the claimant had, on his
         version of events, established himself as  a  father  figure  in  a
         family with a woman who was not free to marry him in  law  but  who
         was clearly committed to him and was the  mother  of,  I  think,  a
         total of four children, two of whom were teenage boys.

      4. It is perfectly plain from reading the papers that  the  claimant's
         partner has had a very difficult time and has suffered a great deal
         of humiliation and ill-treatment at the hands of her  husband  both
         before they became estranged and afterwards.  Little imagination is
         needed to  understand  how  that  background  could  make  it  very
         difficult for her to be a successful mother, particularly where two
         teenage boys are concerned.   Social  Services  were  involved  and
         initially were a little concerned about the claimant,  not  because
         he had done anything particularly wrong, (there  is  no  suggestion
         that misbehaved in any way towards the children),  but  because  he
         was an unknown quantity.  It is quite plain from the  reports  that
         he has proved himself a worthy  addition  to  the  family.  He  has
         helped his partner and the children  significantly.   It  is  quite
         obvious that this  is  the  reason  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         allowed the appeal.

      5. The point is that this is a man who, although  not  satisfying  the
         ordinary requirements of the Rules, was  the  father  figure  in  a
         family and it would have been unduly harsh to have  disrupted  that
         family further by removing him to India or indeed Hong  Kong  which
         was a theoretical possibility.

      6. In places the judge's determination might be thought to  be  rather
         telegraphic although, for my part, I do not see it as a  virtue  to
         plough through endless lists of Rules to explain why  they  do  not
         apply.

      7. It was common ground  that  the  claimant  could  not  satisfy  the
         ordinary requirements of the Rules and the application  could  only
         succeed on an exceptional basis.  When the  determination  is  read
         carefully the reasons for allowing the appeal in  the  first  place
         are perfectly plain and they are sound in law.

      8. Mr Mills had had an  opportunity  to  consider  the  case  and  the
         skeleton argument carefully and  he  felt  unable  to  advance  the
         appeal before me.  This, in  my  judgment,  was  no  more  than  an
         entirely  proper  professional  response.  It  is  not  seemly  for
         Presenting  Officers  to  waste  time  on   hopeless   causes   and
         particularly not when the victims  would  be  young  people,  still
         children, who we are told have to be given primary consideration.

      9. It follows therefore  that  I  dismiss  the  Secretary  of  State's
         appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 15 December 2015               |

