
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07327/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 April 2015                              |On 5 May 2015                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD BANNATYNE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                        Miss Raoom Mohammad S Fatani
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss P Solanki of Counsel instructed by Turpin &
                    Miller Solicitors (Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Saudi Arabia born on 15  June  1988.   On
    18 January 2014 the respondent  refused  her  application  for  further
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of her private  life
    as assessed under Rule 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  A decision  to
    remove the appellant under Section 47 of the 2006 Act was  taken.   The
    appellant appealed this decision and her appeal came before  First-tier
    Judge Gillespie on 5 September 2014.  The judge dismissed  the  appeal.
    Permission was refused by First-tier Judge Foudy on 3 November 2014 but
    the application was renewed and on  27  February  2015  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Rintoul granted permission in the following terms:

         "It is arguable that the judge erred (1)  in  failing  properly  to
         address the appellant's case that she has, through residing in  the
         UK since she was 13 and becoming westernised, that she could not re-
         integrate into Saudi Arabian society, and failed to  give  adequate
         reasons for his  decision;  and  (2)  wholly  failed  to  give  any
         adequate consideration of Article 8."

    Upper Tier Judge Rintoul found all the grounds to be arguable.

2.   As Upper Tier Judge Rintoul observes, the appellant has indeed been  in
    this country for some years.  She arrived in  2001  and  completed  her
    secondary school education.  She took a BSc in  food  sciences  at  the
    University of Reading and then completed a masters degree  in  business
    management at Oxford Brookes University.

3.    Judge  Gillespie  helpfully  summarises  the  respondent's   case   in
    paragraphs 3 to 5 of his determination as follows:

         "3.  The appellant now fulfils the role of guardian  to  her  three
             younger siblings at  [                             ]  Reading,
             Berkshire.  Her parents are both  resident  in  Saudi  Arabia.
             Her mother is a university  lecturer  and  her  father  is  an
             airline pilot.  The Secretary of  State  determined  that  the
             family life she was claiming with her relatives in the  United
             Kingdom did not constitute family life as set out in  Appendix
             FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Therefore,  her  claim  was
             considered on the basis of her private life in accordance with
             Paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.


         4.   At the time of reconsideration of her leave, she was 25 years,
             6 months and 18 days old.  Even though she was aged between 18
             years and 25 years at the time of her application, she had not
             spent half of her life in the United Kingdom.  She  had  spent
             12 years, 11 months and 26 days in  Saudi  Arabia  before  she
             came to the United Kingdom and 13 years, 6 months and 18  days
             living in the United Kingdom since the day she arrived to  the
             date of her reconsideration, having spent 12 years, 11  months
             and 26 days in her home country before coming  to  the  United
             Kingdom.  The Secretary of State therefore concluded that  she
             had not met the requirements of Rule 276ADE(iv) and (v).


         5.   The Secretary of State also considered whether her application
             raised  or  contained  any  exceptional  circumstances  which,
             consistent with the right to respect for  private  and  family
             life contained in Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
             Human Rights, might warrant consideration by the Secretary  of
             State of a grant of leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
             outside the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  but  found
             that there were no such exceptional circumstances."

4.   Judge Gillespie heard oral evidence from the appellant  and  her  three
    brothers, who were born in 1994, 1997 and 2000 respectively.  The judge
    also heard evidence from a friend of the appellant who believed that it
    would be devastating for the appellant's brothers and sisters  as  well
    as for the appellant if she were to be sent back to Saudi Arabia.   She
    shared the appellant's concerns about having to adapt to life in  Saudi
    Arabia.  A female always needed a male companion to manage her simplest
    day-to-day activities such as going  to  work  (as  females  could  not
    drive), opening a bank account, renewing the national ID, and passport.
     The judge was referred to a number of background materials  concerning
    discrimination against women in Saudi Arabia.

5.   In submissions the Presenting Officer said that  the  appellant's  case
    was not an exceptional one and she referred to Section 117B  introduced
    by the Immigration Act  2014  which  stated  that  the  maintenance  of
    effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the  public  interest.    The
    appellant had a limited private life with her various  hobbies  in  the
    United Kingdom and was no longer studying.

6.    The  appellant's  representative  referred  to  Rule  276ADE(vi)   and
    submitted that there were very significant obstacles to the appellant's
    integration into Saudi Arabia having lived in the UK since the  age  of
    13.  She had spent a year in Saudi Arabia to obtain  the  qualification
    permitting her to obtain a scholarship.  She  had  resided  in  the  UK
    since her return after this year in 2005.  Her mother by  contrast  had
    been brought up in Saudi Arabia from birth.

7.   The judge found  that  the  appellant  was  not  able  to  satisfy  the
    provisions of Rule 276ADE for the reasons given by the respondent.  The
    appellant had had no difficulty in returning to Saudi Arabia  to  study
    for a year in order  to  obtain  government  funding  for  her  further
    studies in the UK.   Her  parents  resided  in  Saudi  Arabia  in  good
    occupations.  While reliance was placed on background evidence to  show
    how oppressive life  in  Saudi  Arabia  could  be  the  judge  was  not
    persuaded that these issues in the appellant's case  amounted  to  very
    significant obstacles to integration under Rule 276ADE(vi).  The  judge
    accepted the Secretary of State's view that there were  no  exceptional
    circumstances and the appellant could make an application for an  entry
    clearance under the points-based system.

8.   The judge refers  to  Nagre  v  Secretary  of  State  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin).  The judge considered the guidance in relation to  exceptional
    circumstances -
         "'exceptional' means circumstances in which refusal would result in
         unjustifiably harsh  consequences  for  the  individual  such  that
         refusal of the application would not  be  proportionate.   That  is
         likely to be the case only very rarely."


9.   The judge found that unjustifiably harsh  consequences  was  clearly  a
    high threshold which on the facts he  found  the  appellant  could  not
    meet.  While life in Saudi Arabia might be uncongenial it was  not  the
    responsibility of the respondent to ensure that those who did not  like
    their country of origin were given a right to remain.

10.  The determination concludes as follows:

         "The particular domestic arrangements that the  appellant  oversees
         towards  her  younger  brothers  and   which   are   properly   the
         responsibility of her parents do not give rise  to  rights  in  the
         appellant  protected  under  Article  8.   On   a   proportionality
         assessment, I conclude  that  the  public  interest  considerations
         under Section 117B of the Immigration Act 2014  should  prevail  in
         this case."

11.  Miss Solanki relied on her skeleton argument  and  submitted  that  the
    judge's reasons were  inadequate  in  relation  to  his  finding  under
    paragraph  276ADE  on  the  issue  of  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration.  Counsel submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  have
    regard to the fact that the  appellant  had  resided  in  the  UK  from
    December 2001 to 2004 - between the ages of 13 and 16.  Ten  years  had
    passed since her return to Saudi Arabia in 2004.  She had then spent  a
    lengthy period in the UK from 2005 to 2014 when she was aged 18 to  27.
    She had spent almost all of  her  teenage  years  and  her  adult  life
    residing in the UK.  She had strong family life with  her  siblings  in
    this country.  She had become integrated and  westernised.   She  would
    face  difficulties  in  coping  with  the   different   lifestyle   and
    discrimination in Saudi Arabia.  The judge had failed to make a finding
    on  the  core  issue  which  was  the  level  of  her  integration  and
    westernisation.  A rounded assessment should  have  been  made  in  the
    light of Ogundimu (Nigeria) [2013] UKUT 60.

12.  It was also submitted that the  judge  had  approached  Article  8  and
    Section 117B in an erroneous matter.  In the light of Dube [2015]  UKUT
    00090  (IAC)  judges  were  required   to   take   into   account   the
    considerations in Sections 117A - 117D.  All that the  judge  had  said
    was that the public interest considerations under Section  117B  should
    prevail in this case.  He had not taken into account for  example  that
    while the maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  was  in  the
    public interest under 117B(2) it was in the public interest that  those
    who sought to enter or remain in the United Kingdom were able to  speak
    English - which the appellant did.  It was also a relevant factor under
    117B(3) that it was in the public interest that  those  who  sought  to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom were  financially  independent  -
    again the appellant was.  Furthermore the appellant had throughout been
    in the United Kingdom lawfully and accordingly did not have to meet the
    arguments about giving little weight to  private  life  established  by
    those  whose  position  was  unlawful  or  precarious  (117B(4)).   The
    appellant was fully integrated and it was clear in the light of Dube at
    paragraph  27  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  apply  the  statutory
    considerations in substance.  Apart from being financially  independent
    the appellant had  paid  international  student  fees  and  had  worked
    voluntarily as a teaching assistant.

13.  The judge had conducted no real Article 8 analysis.

14.  Mr Bramble accepted that paragraph 22 of the  determination  was  quite
    brief but he submitted that it was sufficient if the points made in the
    refusal letter were taken into account.  The periods  of  residence  in
    the UK and Saudi Arabia had been specified in the respondent's decision
    and the judge had been entitled to find as he did.  The  appellant  had
    been 16 years old when she had spent a year in Saudi  Arabia.   He  had
    not ignored the country information.  It was clear that the  judge  had
    taken into account the  submissions  of  the  Presenting  Officer  when
    considering the impact of Section 117B.  It was  not  necessary  for  a
    judge to conduct a tick box exercise.  The judge  had  considered  that
    the public considerations outweighed the private life aspects.  The key
    matter was that the judge had  not  directly  addressed  the  interplay
    between the appellant and her siblings and the  westernisation  of  the
    appellant but the judge had  been  clearly  aware  of  the  appellant's
    evidence.  He had referred to the factual issues at paragraphs 3, 7 and
    8 of the determination.  They were clearly in his mind. The  judge  had
    been potentially in error, as argued by Miss Solanki,  in  taking  into
    account the possibility of the appellant applying to  re-enter  the  UK
    under the post-study route  but  this  did  not  take  matters  further
    forward.

15.  In answer to questions from the Tribunal Miss Solanki could not  assist
    whether family life  issues  had  been  argued  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  She confirmed that the appellant's visit to Saudi Arabia  in
    2013 for the purpose of  obtaining  entry  clearance  had  only  lasted
    seventeen days.  If an error of law was identified  she  would  request
    that the matter be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Mr  Bramble
    accepted that this would be appropriate depending on the nature of  the
    fact-finding required.

16.  At the conclusion of the submissions  we  reserved  our  decision.   We
    remind ourselves that we can only interfere with the  determination  of
    the First-tier Judge if it was materially flawed in law.

17.  It does appear to us that there are  difficulties  as  pointed  out  by
    Counsel in the judge's approach to the issues in this case.  The  judge
    placed heavy reliance on the fact that ten years previously in 2004 the
    appellant had returned to Saudi Arabia to do her A levels.  Apart  from
    that period she had resided in the United Kingdom since 2001.  She  had
    paid a very brief visit in 2013 simply to obtain a visa.  It  does  not
    appear to us that the judge has given proper consideration  to  Section
    117B since the appellant speaks English and is financially  independent
    and has not resided in this country unlawfully.  It is  appreciated  of
    course that the judge did not have the benefit of the decision in Dube,
    which was promulgated after the determination in this case.

18.  While Mr Bramble invites us to look at the determination as a whole  we
    do consider that on the facts of this case more was required  from  the
    judge to make  it  clear  that  he  had  had  regard  to  all  relevant
    considerations  and  we  do  not  find  that   the   determination   is
    satisfactorily reasoned on the issue of exceptional  circumstances  and
    Article  8.   We  also  agree  that   the   judge   gave   insufficient
    consideration to the issues of integration and westernisation.  We find
    that the determination is materially flawed in law.  Having  considered
    the submissions to the parties we find that the appropriate  course  in
    this case is for the matter to be remitted for hearing  afresh  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal by a judge other than Judge Gillespie.

Signed                                  Date 24 April 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We have remitted the appeal for re-hearing; we have considered making a  fee
award at this stage and have decided to make no fee award




