

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/07426/2014
                                                               IA/07427/2014
                                                               IA/15985/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|24 October 2014                               |10 December 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                   OMAR TABBI, SUHILA TABBI, KIERRA TABBI
                       (Anonymity directions not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Ball, counsel instructed by J McCarthy
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of Algeria. The first and second appellants
    are husband and wife and the  third  appellant  their  adult  daughter.
    Their respective dates of birth are 4 October 1951, 16 June 1958 and 17
    January 1986. They appeal against decisions of the First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing their appeals both under the immigration rules and on  human
    rights grounds against the decisions made on 14 November 2013  refusing
    their applications for leave to remain  on  human  rights  grounds  and
    giving directions for their removal.

Background

 2. In brief outline the background to this appeal is as follows. The first
    appellant was given leave to enter the UK as a  diplomat  on  8  August
    2001 valid until 8 August 2006. His wife and two of their children, the
    third appellant and her brother Fahd were given co-extensive  leave  as
    his dependants. The first appellant left the UK but returned with entry
    clearance as a visitor on 31 July 2005 valid until 16 November 2005 and
    the third appellant also left the UK  but  returned  with  leave  as  a
    visitor valid until 3 March 2009. It is not in issue that on expiry  of
    their respective visas the family overstayed.

 3. On 17 May 2010 the first appellant applied for leave to remain on human
    rights grounds for himself, the second and third  appellant  and  Fahd.
    Their applications were refused on 21 June 2010 but no directions  were
    given for their removal at  that  time.  A  request  was  made  to  the
    respondent for removal decisions so as to generate a  right  of  appeal
    but no response was received. Judicial review proceedings  were  issued
    in September 2013 and this prompted the respondent to review  the  2010
    decision. Their positions were considered separately with reference  to
    appendix FM and para 276 ADE of HC395. On 21 January 2014  the  refusal
    decisions  in  relation  to  the  first  and  second  appellants   were
    maintained and by letter dated 20 March 2014 the decision  in  relation
    to the third appellant was also maintained. However, on the same day it
    was accepted that Fahd whose date of birth is 22 October 1989  met  the
    requirements of para 276 ADE (v) having spent half his life in  the  UK
    and on 6 June 2014 he was granted leave to remain  until  20  September
    2016. The appellants appealed against the decisions to remove them. The
    grounds to the First-tier Tribunal are succinct: they  argue  that  the
    decisions are incompatible with  the  appellants'  human  rights  under
    article 8, is unlawful or otherwise unreasonable. It is further  argued
    that removal is not proportionate to the facts of the case and that the
    immigration rules are not compatible with article  8  jurisprudence  by
    which the UK is legally bound.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 4. At the hearing the judge heard evidence from the appellants,  Fahd  and
    two witnesses. It was confirmed in submissions [37] that  none  of  the
    appellants placed reliance upon para 395C of the rules (which had  been
    raised in the skeleton argument) nor was it  asserted  that  the  first
    appellant's medical condition  was  such  as  to  reach  the  threshold
    required to engage article 3.

 5. It was accepted by both parties that the public interest considerations
    set out at s117B of the 2002 Act as amended by the Immigration Act 2004
    needed to be considered but it was argued on behalf of  the  appellants
    that as the decision on their applications had been made in 2010  their
    human rights claims should not be considered with reference to appendix
    FM or para 276 ADE with the deference to the rules thereby entailed. It
    was argued on behalf of the respondent that the provisions  of  s19  of
    the 2014 Act specifically applied to all decisions made after  28  July
    2014 and that the  implementation  provisions  for  the  amended  rules
    applied "to all applications to which paragraph 276 ADE to 276  DH  and
    appendix FM apply (or can be applied)  by  virtue  of  the  immigration
    rules and any other ECHR article 8 claims (save for those of a  foreign
    criminal), and which were decided after that date." In  consequence  it
    was submitted that the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  Edgehill  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 402 was no longer of any application and  any  appeal  decided
    after 28 July  2014  fell  to  be  considered  with  reference  to  the
    immigration rules presently in force.

 6. The  judge  accepted  that  submission  and  found  that  none  of  the
    appellants could meet  the  requirements  for  leave  to  remain  under
    appendix FM or of para 276 ADE (vi). He found that  although  they  had
    all been in the UK for a long time it was clear that they had  retained
    a cultural connection to Algeria. They spoke Arabic  at  home  and  the
    first and second appellants had given evidence in that  language.  They
    had another son living in Algeria and their social connections were  in
    the main drawn from the North African community in  this  country.  The
    judge went on to consider the amended rules finding that the appellants
    were unable to show there would be very significant obstacles to  their
    integration into life in Algeria and, although the third appellant  had
    only spent about 5 years of her life there, she had always  lived  with
    her  Algerian  family  whose  antecedents,  cultural  connections   and
    associations she shared. She would return with her parents who would be
    on hand to assist  her  in  reintegrating  into  life  in  Algeria.  He
    therefore dismissed the appeals under the immigration rules.

 7. The judge went onto consider article 8 directing himself in  accordance
    with Haleemudeen v Secretary of State  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  558  that  he
    should first have regard to the requirements of the rules which  should
    be given greater weight than had previously  been  thought  to  be  the
    case. He also took into account the determination of the Upper Tribunal
    in Gulshan (article 8 - new rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640
    where it was said that an appellant needed to show  "non  standard  and
    particular features demonstrating that removal  will  be  unjustifiably
    harsh."

 8. The judge found that as that the appellants fell to be removed together
    there would be no interference with their family life inter  se  except
    that Fahd had been granted leave to remain and it might  reasonably  be
    anticipated that in due course he would  acquire  indefinite  leave  to
    remain but he said that did not seem  to  him  to  be  an  exceptional,
    compelling matter to be considered so as to justify departure from  the
    immigration rules for the rest  of  the  family  and  that  a  line  of
    eligibility had to be drawn somewhere. He noted that the  evidence  was
    that Fahd still lived at home with his parents but he was 24 years old,
    working and in due course it was to be anticipated that he would embark
    on an independent life of his own. Whilst he had leave to remain in the
    UK, there was in reality nothing going  beyond  choice  or  convenience
    preventing him from returning to Algeria with his  family  or  visiting
    them if he chose to do so.

 9. The judge went on to comment in respect of the  third  appellant  that,
    had  he  been  considering  her  appeal  with  reference  to   European
    jurisprudence such as Boultif (2001) 33 EHRR  1179  and  Maslov  [2008]
    ECHR 546, length of  residence  would  be  something  that  would  have
    weighed heavily in her favour but the legal landscape had  changed  and
    he had to have regard to the public  interest  considerations  of  para
    117B of the 2002 Act which provided that the maintenance of  effect  of
    immigration control was in the public interest and that he should  give
    little weight to any private life established by an appellant  when  in
    the UK illegally. He commented that little weight was not the  same  as
    no weight and he had had regard to the fact that there was no  evidence
    that the first and second appellant  spoke  English  to  an  acceptable
    standard or that any of the appellants had passed  a  life  in  the  UK
    test. He was satisfied that in the short term their presence in the  UK
    would represent a burden on public funds  as  it  had  been  the  first
    appellant's evidence that his savings in France had been exhausted. For
    these reasons the appeal was dismissed on article 8 grounds.

The Grounds of Appeal

10. The grounds of appeal raise four  issues.  The  first  focuses  on  the
    approach to be taken to  appeals  in  the  light  of  the  judgment  in
    Edgehill. The applications in the  present  case  had  been  made  well
    before the changes to the rules coming into force on 9 July  2012.  The
    initial application was made in May 2010 and refused with no  right  of
    appeal in June 2010.  Following  judicial  review  proceedings  further
    decisions had eventually been made on 21  January  and  20  March  2014
    respectively. Mr Ball submitted that it was clear  from  Edgehill  that
    the provisions of the new  rules  could  not  lawfully  be  taken  into
    account as a material consideration in an article  8  application  made
    before 9 July 2012. The decision therefore should have been made on the
    basis of how article 8 appeals were assessed before the amendments.  He
    submitted that the judge had erred by finding that the new  rules  were
    applicable including the further amendments coming  into  force  on  28
    July 2014. I referred the parties to  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in YM (Uganda) v Secretary of State [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 but  Mr
    Ball maintained his submission that an article 8 application should  be
    considered without the amended rules being regarded as material.

11. The second  ground  argues  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    relationship between all the family members and in particular the  fact
    that Fahd had been granted limited leave to remain. Mr Ball argued that
    the judge had been wrong to consider whether there were  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances and that contrary  to  the  guidance  of  the
    Court of Appeal in MM v Secretary of  State  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985  at
    [129], an intermediate test had wrongly been applied.

12. The third ground relies on EB (Kosovo) v Secretary of State [2008] UKHL
    41. Mr Ball submitted that the judge had failed to  make  any  adequate
    reference to the delay and the fact that the parties' private life  had
    been built up during that period. This could and should have been taken
    into account. Finally, in reliance on the fourth ground, he argued that
    there had been no adequate assessment of  the  interdependency  of  the
    different family members in circumstances where it had been  recognised
    that to remove Fahd would be disproportionate. This was  a  case  where
    consideration should have been given to the fact that the situation was
    being reached whereby the parents would be dependent on their  children
    rather than the other way round. Fahd was working and  contributing  to
    the family and it would be disproportionate for a brother and sister to
    be separated in the circumstances of this  family.  He  submitted  that
    there had been no proper consideration of the extent to which they  had
    integrated into life  in  the  UK  in  circumstances  where  the  third
    appellant could not read Arabic and had  only  lived  for  5  years  in
    Algeria: it would be unreasonable and disproportionate for  her  to  be
    expected to return there.

13. Mr Bramble submitted that as the application had been made outside  the
    rules, the principles in Edgehill did not apply. This was a case  where
    the applicants were unable to meet the rules and  the  judge  had  been
    right to take that fact into  account.  He  acknowledged  that  Gulshan
    might have fallen by the wayside, as he described it, in the  light  of
    the judgment in the Court of Appeal in MM but there was  no  reason  to
    find that the judge had not taken  all  the  relevant  aspects  of  the
    evidence into account. The judge had clearly been aware of  the  length
    of time the  appellants  had  been  in  the  UK  and  had  specifically
    considered the impact of the grant of leave to Fahd. By the time of the
    hearing the most recent rules applied and the statutory  guidelines  in
    s117B had to be taken into account. In so far as it might  be  arguable
    that the judge had not fully considered the  interrelationship  between
    the family members, the fact remained that the  three  appellants  were
    all overstayers and  the  judge  had  taken  into  account  the  public
    interest and given  sufficient  reasons  for  his  decision.  When  the
    determination was looked at as a whole it was,  so  he  submitted,  one
    properly open to the judge.

Assessment of the Issues

14. I will deal firstly with the  issue  of  whether  the  judge  erred  by
    assessing the article 8 appeal in the context of the immigration  rules
    as amended in 2014 and the statutory guidance set out in the 2014 Act .
    But for the changes in the rules and the coming into force of the  2014
    Act Mr Ball's submissions based on Edgehill would have some force.   In
    that case the Court of Appeal was considering an article 8  application
    and whether  and  to  what  extent  it  should  be  affected  by  rules
    subsequently coming into force on 9 July 2012. Mr Ball argued  that  it
    was wrong to take into account the  new  provisions  in  the  rules  as
    relevant considerations as they were capable of affecting  the  outcome
    of the application.  It is clear,  however,  that  YM  (Uganda),  which
    considered the issue of which rules should be applied in a  deportation
    appeal where the Tribunal had wrongly failed to apply  the  2012  rules
    and the decision had to be re-made under the 2014 rules, held that  the
    new statutory provisions and the 2014 rules applied.  I  do  not  think
    that the fact that YM (Uganda) applied to  deportation  cases  provides
    any proper basis for  distinguishing  it,  as  the  court  specifically
    considered at [39] article 8 claims. For these reasons I  am  satisfied
    that the judge did not err in law by applying the 2014  rules  and  the
    general principles set out in the 2014 Act.

15. Mr Ball also argued that the judge had  failed  to  take  a  number  of
    relevant factors into account including the delay and the consequential
    impact in the nature and extent of the appellant's private life in  the
    UK, the fact that Fahd had been granted limited leave and the extent to
    which the appellants have integrated into society in the UK.

16. I am not satisfied that there is any substance in these grounds.  There
    is no reason to believe and, indeed it is clear,  that  the  judge  was
    well aware of the periods of time the appellants have spent in  the  UK
    and the lack of time the third appellant has  spent  in  Algeria  [48].
    When considering the length of the residence the judge was entitled  to
    take into account the fact that the appellants had all overstayed after
    their leave had expired and he was obliged to consider under para  117B
    the fact that little weight should be given to private life established
    at a time when a person's immigration status was precarious as has been
    the status of the appellants after their leave  to  remain  expired.  I
    agree that Gulshan must of course be read in the light of the  comments
    of the Court of Appeal in MM but I am  not  satisfied  that  the  judge
    interpreted Gulshan as imposing a threshold test  or  that  he  applied
    one.

17. It is also argued that the judge  failed  to  consider  the  appeal  in
    accordance with the guidance in Boultif and Maslov but he was  entitled
    to make the point  that  it  was  now  provided  by  statute  that  the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control  was  in  the   public
    interest. He was also aware of  and  referred  to  the  fact  that  the
    reference to "little weight" in statute was not the same as no  weight.
    I am not satisfied that the judge erred by leaving any relevant factors
    out of account which were capable  of  affecting  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

18. In summary, I am not satisfied that the judge erred in law as  set  out
    in the grounds of appeal. His decision was properly open to him for the
    reasons he gave.

Decision

19. The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law  and  it  follows  that  its
    decision stands.




Signed        Date 9 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Latter


