
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07376/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 July 2014                               |On 4 August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               enrikas skucas
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

The appellant appeared in person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant Enrikas Skucas is a 16 year  old  citizen  of  Lithuania.
    He has appealed, with permission, against the determination  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge M J H Wilson promulgated on 6 May  2014  dismissing
    his appeal against the refusal to grant him a registration  certificate
    as confirmation of his right to reside in the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    dependant  of  an  EEA  national   exercising   treaty   rights.    The
    determination had been made on the papers as the appellant had  elected
    not to have an oral hearing.

2.   The appellant's application had been  refused  because  the  respondent
    did not accept, on the evidence, the relationship between him  and  his
    sponsor.  The appellant's sponsor is his mother Ms Diana  Skucaite  who
    is also a citizen of  Lithuania.   She  is  a  single  mother  and  the
    appellant is her only child.   She  was  granted  an  EEA  registration
    certificate on 3 January 2014 and in her application she  had  included
    the appellant as her dependant.  Her application was granted  but  that
    of the appellant was refused.

3.   In dismissing the appellant's appeal on the papers, Judge Wilson  noted
    that, following the refusal decision, the  appellant  had  submitted  a
    photocopy  of  his  birth  certificate  with  what  appeared  to  be  a
    translation from the Lithuanian.  At [9] and [10] of his  determination
    he gave reasons for not  accepting  the  validity  of  the  copy  birth
    certificate and translation.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted on 16 June 2014.   The  reasons  given
    in granting permission included the following:

         7.   It is important when persons are acting in person to give  the
             broadest of consideration  to  the  decision  before  us,  the
             matters relied upon, and more widely when justice requires.

         8.    Notwithstanding  the  judge's  citation  of  the  burden  and
             standard of proof there is discerned in the judge's assessment
             of  the  appellant's  birth  certificate  evidence,  that  the
             standard operating  when  evaluating  that  evidence  appeared
             higher than that of the balance  of  probabilities,  with  the
             language of the assessment appearing  by  itself  inconsistent
             (para 10).

5.   At the hearing before me the appellant attended with Ms  Skucaite.   Mr
    Deller  had  not  previously  seen  the  copy  birth  certificate   and
    translation that had been in evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and he examined it.  The original of the  photocopy  birth  certificate
    was also produced by the appellant and the Presenting Officer  accepted
    that the photocopy was a true copy.

6.   The judge's determination referred  [10]  to  the  translation  of  the
    certificate into English.  He said in his determination that it  seemed
    to him to be "amateurishly presented with no direct evidential link  to
    the document to which it was stapled attesting  to  its  being  a  true
    translation".  I have examined the documents.   There  was  no  staple.
    The certificate and the translation are sewn together in a professional
    manner with a clear certificate from the translator.  There appears  to
    me to be nothing amateurish about the translation  or  the  certificate
    attached to it.

7.    Following  discussion,   Mr   Deller   conceded   that   the   judge's
    determination at [10] contained a material error of law in relation  to
    his assessment of  the  copy  birth  certificate.   There  is  a  clear
    perception in  the  determination  that  the  judge  applied  a  higher
    standard than the balance of probabilities.  I am  satisfied  that  his
    reference to the translation being "amateurishly  presented"  does  not
    bear close scrutiny.

8.   With the consent of the Presenting Officer, I therefore set  aside  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision.

9.   On reviewing all the evidence and taking the standard of proof  as  the
    balance of probabilities I am satisfied that Ms Skucaite is the  mother
    of the appellant.  The birth certificate says so.   There  is  evidence
    that they live together;  the  evidence  includes  a  letter  from  the
    appellant's school showing his address to be the same  as  that  of  Ms
    Skucaite.   The appellant's Lithuanian passport shows the same date and
    place of birth as that on his birth certificate.

10.  In summary there is no cogent reason for doubting  the  genuineness  of
    their relationship and I find that the appellant is the  dependent  son
    of Ms Diana Skucaite as claimed.  His appeal must therefore be allowed.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
law (as set out above) and is accordingly set aside.
I remake the decision and allow the appellant's appeal.

Anonymity direction not requested and not made.

     Although I have allowed the appeal, I make no  fee  award  because  the
copy birth certificate was not  produced  until  after  the  filing  of  the
original appeal; it was not submitted (as it  should  have  been)  with  the
application.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
31 July 2014








