







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07691/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated on  |
|On: 26 March 2015                    |On 21st April 2015                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                        MRS LINDA OBIAGELI NNATUANYA
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Metibemu, Legal Representative (Rhema
Solutions)


                              DECSION TO REMIT

 1. For the sake of convenience I shall  refer  to  the  appellant  as  the
    secretary of state and to the respondent as "the claimant."

 2. The claimant is a national of Nigeria, born on 30  November  1979.  She
    appealed  with  permission  to   the   Upper   Tribunal   against   the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rothwell, who dismissed  her
    appeal under the Immigration Rules but allowed it under Article 8.

 3. Although the Judge had regard to s.117B(2),  (3)  and  (6),  which  she
    found "applied here" [35] there  was  no  assessment  or  consideration
    given to s.117B(1) and (5) of the 2002 Act.  Under the Act the Tribunal
    is directed to take into account the public interest in the maintenance
    of effective immigration control. Little weight should be  given  to  a
    private life established by a person at a  time  when  her  immigration
    status is precarious.

 4. Moreover, the Judge did not give reasons for finding that it would  not
    be reasonable to expect the  claimant's  child  to  leave  the  UK,  as
    opposed to reasons why it would be  in  his  best  interests  to  stay.
    There was no analysis or reasons given as to why  the  public  interest
    considerations referred to did  not  apply  in  this  case.  The  whole
    emphasis appeared to be that the child was not to be visited  with  the
    sins of his parents.

 5. The skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal  related  only  to
    paragraph 276ADE and paragraph EX.1 of the Immigration Rules. There was
    no further submission made with  regard  to  Article  8.  There  is  no
    reference at all  to  the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  EV
    (Philippines) and  Others  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  874,  where,  at
    paragraph 58, Lord Justice Lewison stated that the  assessment  of  the
    best interests of the child must be made on the basis  that  the  facts
    are as they are in the real world. The ultimate question would  be,  is
    it reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to
    remain in the country of origin?

 6. In assessing whether or not the public interests identified  in  s.117B
    outweighs the best interests of the child, it is necessary to determine
    the relative strength of the factors which made it in the child's  best
    interests to remain here as well as factoring in  those  matters  which
    pointed the other way.

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was accordingly set aside.

 8. At a hearing on 26 March  2015,  both  parties  submitted  that  having
    regard to the extent of fact finding that  would  have  to  take  place
    including the need  to   consider  the  case  in  accordance  with  the
    authorities and the 2002 Act, this was  an  appropriate  case  for  the
    matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be
    re-made.

 9. I  have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President's  Practice  statement
    regarding the remitting of an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
    fresh decision. I am satisfied that this is  an  appropriate  case  for
    remitting the appeal, having regard to the  extensive  amount  of  fact
    finding that would be required to take place.

Decision

The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Hatton  Cross)  for  a
fresh decision to be made. The agreed hearing date is  for  September  2015.
The written instructions to the administration have been duly completed.

         No anonymity direction is made.




         Signed        Date  15 April 2015
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
