
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/07352/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 October 2015                   |On 23 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               DEBORAH OKOJIE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Ms Mair, Counsel


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

      1. The respondent is a citizen of Nigeria.   She  entered  the  United
         Kingdom ('UK') in 1997, having left Nigeria in 1995.

      2. The respondent has a lengthy immigration history  that  included  a
         number of applications that have been refused.  Removal  directions
         have been set on numerous occasions.  It  is  unnecessary  for  the
         purposes of this decision to rehearse that history.  In a  decision
         dated 6 February 2015 the SSHD refused the respondent's application
         for leave to remain under the Immigration Rules and under Article 8
         of the ECHR.  The respondent appealed against this decision to  the
         First-tier Tribunal.

      3. In a decision dated 8 June 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Shanahan
         allowed the appeal under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration
         Rules.   The only issue in dispute in relation  to  that  rule  was
         whether or not "there would be very significant obstacles"  to  the
         respondent's integration into Nigeria, if removed there.  The judge
         resolved that issue in the respondent's favour.

      4. The SSHD appealed against the decision on the basis that the  judge
         erred in law  in  finding  that  the  high  threshold  required  to
         establish 'very significant obstacles' had been met.   The  grounds
         were considered to be arguable and permission to appeal was granted
         on 20 August 2015.  The respondent has cross-appealed and  provided
         a rule 24 response.  The cross-appeal submits that  the  judge  was
         entitled to allow the appeal under the Rules but  if  that  is  not
         accepted the judge should have gone on to consider the human rights
         grounds.

      5. The matter now comes before me to decide whether there has  been  a
         material error of law.  At the beginning of the hearing Mr  McVeety
         indicated that he relied upon the grounds of appeal and had nothing
         to add save that he  recognised  that  the  decision  was  a  well-
         reasoned one.  I indicated to Ms Mair that I did not need  to  hear
         from her as I would be dismissing the appeal.   I  now  provide  my
         reasons for doing so.

      6. I entirely accept the SSHD's submission in the  grounds  of  appeal
         that  the  requirement  of  'very  significant  obstacles'  sets  a
         demanding standard.  I am satisfied that  the  judge  has  properly
         directed herself to the relevant wording of 276ADE(1)(vi) [25]  and
         adequately reminded herself that this requires a high threshold  to
         be met [36, 50, 51]. Whilst the judge recorded a submission on  the
         part of Counsel representing the  respondent  at  [34]  as  to  her
         interpretation of the correct way to approach the test,  the  judge
         directed herself as to that test without any fault.

      7. The judge was entitled to consider the respondent to be a  truthful
         witness [36] and to accept the conclusions of the country expert as
         to her likely plight in Nigeria if returned, for  the  reasons  she
         has provided [37-47].  The grounds of appeal  in  relation  to  the
         expert question her expertise and the out of  date  nature  of  her
         report.  I reject these submissions.  As the rule 24 response notes
         the SSHD failed to consider the supplementary May 2015 report.  The
         judge has provided adequate reasons for accepting the expertise and
         experience of the expert [37] having considered the submissions put
         forward by the SSHD in relation to the expert report at the hearing
         [33].

      8. Having accepted all the relevant evidence the judge was entitled to
         find that the respondent's particular circumstances are  such  that
         she would face very significant obstacles integrating into  Nigeria
         for the reasons she has provided.  The  grounds  of  appeal  submit
         that the  judge  took  into  account  irrelevant  factors.   In  my
         judgment when the grounds of appeal are carefully examined they  do
         no more than disagree with the  judge's  findings  and  assessment.
         The matters said to be irrelevant at paragraph 11 (a) to (f) of the
         grounds, are all matters relevant to  the  respondent's  background
         and her ability  to  reintegrate  into  Nigeria.   I  reject  those
         submissions and accept the submissions advanced in relation to them
         within the rule 24 response.  As the rule  24  response  emphasises
         the judge had detailed written and oral evidence before  her.   She
         accepted this  evidence.   Having  done  so  she  was  entitled  to
         consider the evidence cumulatively to determine whether it met  the
         relevant demanding test.  Having done so the judge's  finding  that
         the relevant test was met does not contain any error of law.

Decision

      9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of an error of law and is not set aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
22 October 2015
