

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/07907/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford, Phoenix House          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 May 2016                            |On 20 May 2016                   |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                         SARANGKUMAR AMRUTLAL PATEL
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Thomas a Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. The Respondent refused the  Appellant's  application  for  leave  to
       remain on 13 February 2015. His appeal  against  that  decision  was
       dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Dickson  ("the   Judge")
       following a hearing on 8 July 2015. This is an appeal  against  that
       decision.

The grant of permission


    2. Designated Judge Appleyard granted permission to appeal (17 February
       2016) on the grounds that it is arguable that the  Judge  failed  to
       consider the best interests of the children in the  context  of  the
       totality of the evidence, may have relied on old evidence,  and  may
       have erred in  the  approach  to  the  evidence  on  the  children's
       language ability.

The Judge's findings

    3. The Judge noted [1-3] that the Appellant was born on  4  April  1978
       and is married. His children were born on 14 January 2007 (R) and 23
       August 2011 (V). They are  all  citizens  of  India.  The  Appellant
       claims to have entered the United Kingdom clandestinely in 2002.  On
       3 September 2005 his wife entered the United Kingdom with  leave  to
       enter as a visitor valid  until  12  February  2006.  The  Appellant
       submitted 2 human rights applications in 2007 that  were  eventually
       dismissed in the circumstances set out below [4]. Appeal rights were
       exhausted on 28 February 2008.


    4. The Judge referred to Judge Sarsfield's determination promulgated on
       14 February 2008 and noted that it was found that;


          [26] "The Appellant entered the United Kingdom without valid entry
          clearance with the assistance of an  agent  via  Switzerland.  The
          Appellant worked in the United Kingdom  illegally.  The  Appellant
          had not regularised his status  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  had
          flagrantly  disregarded  the  immigration  rules.  The   Appellant
          deceived the United Kingdom authorities and his employer  and  his
          wife was an over stayer. The Immigration Judge considered that his
          family and private life could be  continued  in  India  and  there
          would be no obstacles to the Appellant returning to India with his
          family."

    5. The Judge noted that;


          [27] "Even after the determination, the Appellant took  no  steps
          to leave the United Kingdom  with  his  family...  The  Appellant
          continued  to  disregard  the  immigration  rules  as   well   as
          continuing to work illegally. He was encountered  with  his  wife
          working illegally... On 25 January 2013."


          [35] "...on one occasion the Appellant acted as a witness in  some
          criminal proceedings and helped to bring a miscreant to justice. I
          accept that  the  Appellant,  his  wife  and  children  are  well-
          established and live in the Wakefield  area.  Their  children  are
          making the  most  of  their  opportunities  and  are  making  good
          progress at their respective schools."


          [36] "the Appellant and  his  wife  have  shown  a  quite  blatant
          disregard of the immigration laws. The Appellant made no effort to
          regularise his status from 2002 to 2007 and then continued to work
          illegally..."


          [37] "Mrs Patel has  in  my  view  deceived  the  entry  clearance
          officer.  Although  she  had  a  return  ticket  to  satisfy   the
          immigration officer, Mrs Patel had no intention  of  returning  to
          India and indeed she married the Appellant on  the  following  day
          after arriving in the United Kingdom..."


          [40] "I do not consider I have been given a  credible  account  of
          the circumstances of the family of the Appellant and his  wife  in
          India although their respective parents may now be living  in  the
          United States. Children are adaptable and the children  do  in  my
          view have some knowledge of Gujarati. They would easily be able to
          pick up Gujarati on return though the Home Office letter refers to
          various schools in India  where  the  medium  of  teaching  is  in
          English."


          [41] "...the Appellant will be able to seek employment  on  return
          and furthermore he will initially have some family assistance  and
          he and his family return to India as a family unit."


          [42] "With regard to the report of Lynn Coates, I accept that  the
          children will prefer to stay in the United Kingdom where they were
          happy  in  their  respective  schools.  This  is  not   the   only
          consideration and the children are adaptable and would be able  to
          reintegrate into  Indian  society  on  their  return  as  well  as
          learning Gujarati and any other Indian language... If  the  family
          does return to India it may be that the  children's  progress  and
          development will be affected for some time  until  they  readjust.
          The children will however have the benefit and  support  of  their
          parents and other family members and friends in India."


          [43] "it is reasonable to expect the children to leave the  United
          Kingdom with  their  parents...  There  would  be  no  significant
          obstacles to the Appellant and his family reintegrating into India
          even though they have not been in that country for some  years.  I
          accept that  the  children  have  never  been  to  India  but  the
          Appellant and his wife spent a significant period of time in India
          with their friends and  family  prior  to  coming  to  the  United
          Kingdom."


          [44] "with regard to  the  Article  8  claim  I  accept  that  the
          Appellant's removal will interfere with  his  private  and  family
          life and indeed the private and family life of the whole family. I
          have also taken into account Section  117B  which  refers  to  the
          maintenance of effective immigration controls being in the  public
          interest. The Appellant and his wife may have  some  knowledge  of
          English and be able to speak it although they did use  a  Gujarati
          interpreter during their evidence. The Appellant and his wife have
          been in United Kingdom without leave and unlawfully for many years
          and little weight can be given to their relationship  and  private
          life at a time when they have been in United Kingdom  illegally...
          I have reached the conclusion that the Appellant's  removal  would
          be both necessary and proportionate."


Appellant's position


    6. Ground 1 is that the Judge failed to consider the best interests  of
       children. The Judge failed  to  consider  the  anxiety  through  the
       children's lack of language skills in India will have upon them. The
       Judge did not have evidence as to how long the readjustment  process
       would last. In oral submissions it was indicated  that  R  fulfilled
       the immigration rules as she was over the age of 7 and it  would  be
       unreasonable to require her to leave.


    7. Ground 2 is that the Judge did not  consider  the  evidence  in  the
       round. The Judge did not consider  the  evidence  that  the  English
       speaking schools are private and charge tuition fees and that  given
       the lack of education and work experience of the Appellant  and  his
       wife they would struggle to find a job education in addition to food
       accommodation and essentials. The Judge failed to take into  account
       that the Appellant and his wife were too  old  for  many  marginally
       better paid jobs and has not taken into account  that  the  children
       would not be able to gain admission to schools given their  lack  of
       language ability in Gujarati and Hindi. The  Judge  failed  to  take
       into account that the children require a complete  education  rather
       than just lessons at improving English. The  Judge  failed  to  take
       into account that the money the Appellant borrowed from  his  father
       came from other relatives and had to be  repaid.  It  was  submitted
       orally that the Judge did not consider the  social  workers  report.
       There were differences between the cultures and language here and in
       India.


    8. Ground 3 is that the Judge relied on old evidence from 2008  whereas
       the heart of this case relies on circumstances since then.


    9. Ground 4 is that the Judge did not consider Article 8 in the  round.
       He did not  consider  the  importance  of  the  children's  adoptive
       grandparents or the  impact  on  them  and  their  children  of  the
       family's removal. The Judge noted  that  the  children's  biological
       grandparents live in the USA but took no account of  the  fact  that
       the relatives identified in India are virtual  strangers  with  whom
       they  would  have  difficulty  communicating.   The   Judge   placed
       inadequate weight on the ties they  have  with  family  and  friends
       here. It was submitted orally that  the  only  family  remaining  in
       India is an uncle.


   10. Ground 5 is that the Judge erred in his assessment  of  credibility.
       It is unclear whether the children have little or  no  knowledge  of
       Gujarati or that they mostly  speak  English  and  forgot  Gujarati.
       Inappropriate weight has been placed upon the parent's  conduct  and
       the children should not be penalised for their behaviour.


Respondent's position

   11. The Respondent asserted in her reply (24 February 2016)  in  essence
       that the Judge directed himself appropriately, carefully  considered
       the best interests of the children, gave significant scrutiny to the
       expert's report, and was entitled to find  that  the  children  were
       adaptable, had knowledge of Gujarati, and would be  returning  as  a
       family unit with the benefit of support from their parents and other
       family members. The Judge carried out the appropriate assessment and
       the grounds are merely a disagreement with the decision.


   12. It was submitted orally that the children could have  returned  when
       the application was refused whatever language they spoke.  They  can
       be integrated in India. The case boils  down  to  what  the  parents
       want. The best interest of the children were considered throughout.


Discussion

   13. There is no merit in ground 1.  The  Judge  plainly  considered  the
       children's best interests as remaining  with  their  parents  as  he
       plainly identified that the family would be  leaving  together  (see
       above 5 [41]). He looked at their individual circumstances in detail
       and gave detailed consideration to their schooling and life here. He
       was fully aware of the  concern  regarding  their  language  skills.
       However, he determined they would be able to learn the language used
       locally easily [40]  which  would  inevitably  reduce  any  possible
       theoretical anxiety in that period. The parents are of  course  able
       to speak Gujarati  as  they  use  that  at  the  hearing  and  could
       ameliorate any  possible  anxiety  by  teaching  the  children  that
       language now. Their failure to  do  so  is  just  one  of  the  many
       examples of their mendacity in that irrespective of their  appalling
       immigration position and deception they have placed  their  children
       deliberately at a disadvantage. The Judge however  was  entitled  to
       conclude that despite that abject failure in parenting, the children
       would be able to learn the language used locally easily.  The  Judge
       did not need to have a timetable  on  how  long  readjustment  would
       last.


   14. The Judge was fully aware that R had been here  for  over  7  years.
       That does not mean  that  she  met  paragraph  276ADE  (iv)  of  the
       immigration rules. In addition to the age  requirement  she  has  to
       show that it would not be reasonable to require  her  to  leave  the
       United Kingdom. The Judge  gave  multiple  sustainable  reasons  for
       finding that it would be reasonable to require her  to  leave  which
       included that she could be housed, educated, and  supported  by  her
       parents and extended family.


   15. There is no merit in  ground  2.  When  I  looked  at  the  evidence
       produced in relation to the schooling in India, it  was  clear  that
       the only evidence in fact related to one  school.  Miss  Thomas  was
       unable to identify from the evidence  provided  for  the  Judge  any
       other school that had been considered. The  Judge  fully  considered
       the evidence in relation to the ability of the adults to obtain work
       and made findings that were sustainable. The grounds ignore the fact
       that the Appellants have worked illegally here for  many  years  and
       have developed skills that would enable them to work in  India.  The
       grounds fail to take into account that the word of the Appellant was
       worth very little given the multiple assertions he had made that had
       been rejected both in 2008 and 2015. Given the sheer size  of  India
       and the number of schools, the suggestion that a child cannot get  a
       complete education in India or that the evidence  relating  to  only
       one school is  indicative  of  the  general  position  and  lack  of
       alternative provision in India is absurd. The Judge  considered  the
       evidence that had been presented to him both specifically and in the
       round and made findings available to him.


   16. There is no merit in ground 3. The Judge was obliged to identify the
       findings made in the decision from 2008 and  to  have  that  as  the
       starting point of his consideration of the facts in this case.  That
       is precisely what he did.


   17. There is no merit  in  ground  4.  The  Judge  identified  that  the
       children were well-established [35] and that they had a private  and
       family life here [44]. He had detailed the documents  he  had  taken
       into account [24 (b)] and referred to  those  [35]  and  noted  Lynn
       Coates's observation that they had many friends in the community and
       at school [32]. He does not have to  do  detail  individually  every
       piece of evidence. He did not need to summarise the evidence of  the
       "adoptive grandparents" who were adults and who had adult  children.
       The bald assertion made  in  their  statement  that  they  would  be
       greatly affected by the family being removed was in  the  scheme  of
       things a tangential and almost irrelevant issue. The Judge  did  not
       have to deal with every minor point particularly when he dealt  with
       it generally. The grounds entirely fail to engage with  the  finding
       the Judge made that the children would have the ability to learn  to
       speak Gujarati if that was required (see above 5  [40]).  It  was  a
       matter for the Judge what weight to place on the ties they had  with
       family and friends here. That was part  of  the  balancing  exercise
       that he had to undertake within Article 8. The  Judge  attached  the
       weight he felt was appropriate on the competing factors.


   18. There is no merit in ground 5. Whether the children have  little  or
       no  knowledge  of  Gujarati,  or  have  forgotten  it   is   utterly
       irrelevant. The Judge was entitled to find they could  easily  learn
       it. The Judge was entitled  to  place  the  weight  he  did  on  the
       parents' conduct. He was  not  penalising  the  children  for  their
       parents' behaviour but was  determining  whether  removal  from  the
       United Kingdom of the Appellant and his family was proportionate  to
       the need to retain the integrity of immigration control.  He  struck
       the balance he felt was appropriate. The  decision  he  reached  was
       open to him.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

      I do not set aside the decision.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
17 May 2016
