
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/07776/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 August 2016                    |On 02 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 Farooq [D]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T S Choda, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is my remake decision in respect of the Appellant's appeal.  By  a
    decision promulgated on 28 April 2016 I concluded that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had materially erred in law when making its  decision  on  the
    Appellant's appeal (see annex 1).  For  the  reasons  expressed  in  my
    earlier decision I set aside the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   In
    doing so I expressly preserved certain findings of fact. These were  as
    follows.

      i. that the Appellant takes an active role in H's life,  and  that  he
         intends to do so in the future;

     ii. that it is in H's best interests for the Appellant to remain in the
         United Kingdom and continue to take an active role in her life;

    iii. that there is no sound reason  to  displace  the  judge's  implicit
         conclusion that H could not reasonably be  expected  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom.

 2. At the previous hearing I decided to adjourn the matter rather than re-
    making the decision at that stage.  This was for  two  reasons.  First,
    because the core issue in this case, namely the application of  section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  was  the
    subject of some contention.  The Respondent's  position  was  that  the
    conclusion reached by the President in the case of Treebhawon  (section
    117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC) was wrongly decided.  I was aware that
    the Court of Appeal was due to  hear  a  case  on  this  provision  and
    therefore it seemed sensible to await the Court's conclusion before re-
    making the decision.

 3. The second reason for adjourning was because the Presenting Officer, Mr
    Kotas, was of the view that there  may  be  a  factual  dispute  as  to
    whether or not the Appellant  had  a  parental  relationship  with  his
    daughter, H.  It was indicated that questioning of the Appellant  might
    be appropriate.



Intervening procedural history

 4. On 9 June 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor issued further  directions
    in this case.  He made reference to a decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    (Judge Southern) in the case of G E S (IA/45698/2014), in which it  was
    held that Treebhawon was wrongly decided.  This was in  fact  the  case
    that I had understood to be pending before the Court of Appeal  at  the
    previous hearing. Judge O'Connor deemed it appropriate to  adjourn  the
    current appeal off for a later date.



The hearing before me

 5. Shortly after Judge  O'Connor  issued  his  directions,  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705  was  delivered.
    This case specifically deals with section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.   In
    particular it confirms that the approach in Treebhawon was correct (see
    paragraphs 17 to 20 of MA (Pakistan)),  and  that  section  117B(6)  is
    indeed a freestanding provision, the satisfaction of which will  result
    in  an  Article  8  claim   being   successful.    In   addition,   the
    reasonableness test is considered by the Court and it is concluded that
    this term is to have a wider construction (see paragraph 45).

 6. In light of this both representatives were agreed that MA (Pakistan) is
    the binding authority on a particular issue in  this  appeal  and  that
    there was no need for a further adjournment.

 7. The first issue for me to decide is whether or not the Appellant has  a
    parental relationship with his daughter.  In this respect  Mr  Whitwell
    in his customary fair and pragmatic way acknowledged that in  light  of
    the preserved findings of fact it was somewhat difficult to see how  it
    could properly be said that there was no such  relationship.   However,
    he did make the point that the sources of evidence on this matter  were
    fairly limited, emanating primarily from the Appellant himself.

 8. In respect of the second issue for me to determine, namely that of  the
    reasonableness or  otherwise  of  H  leaving  the  United  Kingdom,  Mr
    Whitwell again acknowledged  the  facts  of  the  case,  including  the
    preserved findings. Nonetheless, he asked me to note  that  the  public
    interest was engaged and that the Appellant  had  failed  to  meet  the
    Immigration Rules and this must count against him.

 9. For the Appellant Mr Choda referred me to page 13  of  the  Appellant's
    supplementary  bundle  and  relied  unsurprisingly  on  the   preserved
    findings of fact from the First-tier Tribunal's decision.



Re-making the decision

10. In re-making the decision in this appeal I have had regard not only  to
    the preserved findings of fact as set out in my error of law  decision,
    but also the  evidence  contained  in  the  Appellant's  first  bundle,
    indexed and  paginated  1  to  20,  which  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and also a supplementary bundle, indexed and paginated  1  to
    31, served just before the error of law hearing.  Both  representatives
    were also in possession of this evidence.

Does the Appellant have a parental relationship with his daughter?

11. I find that the Appellant does in fact  continue  to  have  a  parental
    relationship with H.  My reasons for this are as follows.

12. First, I am guided  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in  R  (on  the
    application of RK)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (s.117B(6); "parental relationship") IJR [2016] UKUT  00031  (IAC),  in
    which it  is  said  that  this  issue  be  determined  based  upon  the
    circumstances as a whole  and  that  there  is  no  need  for  parental
    responsibility to exist as a matter of law.

13. Second, there are preserved findings of fact  that  the  Appellant  has
    taken and continues to take an active role in H's  life,  and  that  he
    intends to do so in the future.  There is also a preserved finding that
    it is in H's best interests for the Appellant to continue  to  take  an
    active role in her life.

14. Third, there has been no specific challenge to the evidence  of  either
    the Appellant as contained in his two  statements  in  the  bundles  or
    indeed to the statement of H's mother contained in the latest bundle at
    pages 5 to 6.  I  find  that  this  evidence  clearly  shows  that  the
    Appellant not only has regular contact with H but has assumed the  role
    and continues to assume the role of her parent in respect not  only  of
    financial support but also,  importantly,  a  practical  and  emotional
    support.  Examples of this include the fact that, as I find it, that  H
    stays at his house regularly, that he takes her to and from nursery and
    that he in almost all material respects acts as any  father  would  do.
    The fact that H does not live permanently with the Appellant  does  not
    undermine the claim to have a parental relationship.  It is an  unusual
    feature of this particular case that the Appellant and  H's  mother  do
    not live together and have not done so for some time.  The relationship
    is in the words of H's mother, "uncertain".   She  states  that  it  is
    conceivable that the relationship may improve  at  some  point  in  the
    future, but as the judge found, neither the Appellant  nor  H's  mother
    had any immediate plans to begin living together again in the future.

15. Fourth, there is a letter from H's nursery at 13 of the  second  bundle
    in which it is stated that the Appellant has  parental  responsibility,
    and that he drops H off and picks  her  up.  This  too  counts  in  his
    favour.

Would it be reasonable for H to leave the United Kingdom?

16. First and foremost, I preserved a finding by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (albeit an implicit one) that it not be reasonable for H to  leave  the
    United Kingdom. On this basis  and  in  light  of  MA  (Pakistan),  the
    Appellant's appeal succeeds.

17. For the sake of completeness, I will also deal with the  reasonableness
    question on the basis that there was no previous finding on the issue.

18. It is not in dispute that H is a British citizen.  Whilst this  is  not
    of course a trump card in respect of the  reasonableness  test,  it  is
    nonetheless a significant factor,  as  indeed  was  recognised  by  the
    Respondent in MA (Pakistan) (see  paragraph  35).   In  the  particular
    circumstances of this case H lives for the great majority of  the  time
    with her mother.  The Appellant and H's mother are in effect  separated
    That is not to say that the relationship may not be reconciled  in  the
    future, as the Appellant  appears  to  believe.  However,  for  present
    purposes I find that there is no realistic prospect of the relationship
    being revived, and thus it would  it  be  unreasonable  to  expect  H's
    mother to leave the United Kingdom and go and live in Pakistan with the
    Appellant (or indeed apart from him).  This scenario of  course  has  a
    direct and a very significant bearing on whether it would be reasonable
    for H to leave the United Kingdom.  On the face of it,  if  the  mother
    does not go, H does not go. It is also a preserved finding of the First-
    tier Tribunal that H's best interests lie in the Appellant remaining in
    this country with her.  That is a significant factor as well.

Are there powerful reasons which act to outweigh the above considerations?

19. In light of MA (Pakistan) I must  consider  the  wider  picture,  which
    would include the Appellant's own circumstances. The public interest in
    maintaining effective immigration control is  an  important  factor  of
    course.  Having said that  the  Appellant  has  been  in  this  country
    lawfully throughout,  albeit  on  a  precarious  basis.   There  is  no
    misconduct on his part.  It is not  in  dispute  that  he  speaks  good
    English and that he is self-sufficient.

20. It is right that the First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellant could
    not satisfy Appendix FM because of there was a subsisting  relationship
    between him and H's mother. That finding was based, as  I  see  it,  on
    evidence from the Appellant as at August 2015 to  the  effect  that  he
    perceived the relationship as  being  on-going,  whatever  the  reality
    might have been. Having now had the opportunity to considering evidence
    from H's mother, I find that the relationship is at the very least  'on
    hold', and that the lack of cohabitation  is  not  simply  a  lifestyle
    choice. There is a relationship in as much as H's  care  is  concerned.
    However, it is not one that could on any reasonable view constitute  an
    emotional relationship in the normal sense. Thus, the  finding  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal in this regard is  not  inconsistent  with  my  own
    conclusions on the question of whether it would be reasonable for H  to
    leave the United Kingdom. For the purposes  of  this  remake  decision,
    however, I will continue to proceed on the  basis  that  the  Appellant
    cannot meet the Rules.

21. Taking all of the factors into account I conclude that it would not  be
    reasonable for H to leave the United Kingdom.



Conclusions

22. The Appellant does not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    as they relate to Article 8.  Mr Whitwell has  not  sought  to  suggest
    that I should not consider the Article 8 claim outside of the Rules and
    in light of existing case law it is clear that I should do so.  I  view
    section 117B(6) as a freestanding provision.  H is a  qualifying  child
    in that she is a British citizen.  I have found that the Appellant  has
    a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with H.   I  have  found
    that it would not be reasonable for H to leave the United Kingdom.   In
    light of this the Appellant himself succeeds in his Article 8 claim.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remake the decision by allowing the Appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights
grounds.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 1 September 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because  the  evidence  provided  to  the  Respondent  was   uncertain   and
incomplete. The case required adjudication on appeal.


Signed   Date: 1 September 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



Annex 1: the error of law decision

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07776/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 April 2016                      |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 FAROOQ [D]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T S Choda, Counsel, Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kelly (the judge), promulgated on 3 September  2015,  in
    which he dismissed the appeal on Article 8 grounds.   That  appeal  had
    been against the Respondent's decision of 9 February 2015, refusing the
    application for further leave to remain on Article  8  grounds  and  to
    remove the Appellant under section 47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The Appellant's application had been based firmly on  his  relationship
    with his British daughter, H.  It was the Appellant's case that he  had
    a genuine and subsisting relationship with H, and that  his  Article  8
    rights would be breached by his separation from her.




The judge's decision

 3. The judge found that the Appellant could not satisfy  the  requirements
    of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.  It  was  concluded  that  the
    Appellant could not meet the requirements of either the parent route or
    the partner route (see paragraphs 17-23).  The judge then  went  on  to
    consider the Article 8 case outside of  the  Rules.   In  paragraph  25
    there was a clear finding that there was family  life  as  between  the
    Appellant and H. In paragraph 26 it was found that there  would  be  an
    interference with that family life if the Appellant were to be  removed
    from this country.

 4. The judge went on to consider the best interests of H and it was  found
    at paragraph 29 that those interests would be best served  by  her  and
    the Appellant remaining in this country, with him continuing to take an
    active role in her upbringing.

 5. In paragraphs 29 to 31 the judge goes on and gives a number of  reasons
    as to why, notwithstanding H's best interests,  other  factors  in  the
    case outweighed that  primary  consideration,  and  that  all-told  the
    Appellant's removal from this country would be proportionate.  Thus the
    appeal was dismissed.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but then granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds  on  24  February  2016.
    Having  regard  to  the  Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal   (he   being
    unrepresented at the relevant time), Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds was  of
    the view that it was arguable that the judge  had  failed  to  consider
    Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act and the interpretation  given  to  that
    provision by the case of Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015]
    UKUT 00674 (IAC).




The hearing before me

 7. At the outset of the hearing Mr  Kotas  accepted  that  the  judge  had
    failed to consider section 117B(6) and that this constituted a material
    error of law.  In my view he was right to make that  concession,  there
    being no reference to this provision in the judge's decision and,  more
    importantly, no  consideration  of  the  substance  of  this  important
    factor.

 8. In light of this I set aside the judge's decision.





Disposal

 9. The question arises as to what should happen next.  In the usual course
    of events I would be remaking the decision on the  evidence  before  me
    including any preservable findings of fact from the judge's decision.

10. Mr Kotas argued that in this particular case this  should  not  happen,
    for two reasons.   First,  that  the  respondent's  position  was  that
    Treebhawon is wrongly decided and that legal argument must be addressed
    to this issue in due course.  Secondly, that whilst making a number  of
    unchallenged findings of fact the judge has not expressly  stated  that
    there was a "parental relationship" between the Appellant  and  H.   In
    respect of the Appellant's further evidence submitted for this  hearing
    Mr Kotas said that there was some issues arising from that and he would
    have questions for the Appellant and potentially H's  mother  as  well.
    Given the comment of the judge in paragraph  29  that  the  Appellant's
    departure from this country would not necessarily cause any substantial
    harm to H, Mr Kotas's view was that there was a factual issue here that
    needed to be resolved in due course.  No issue was taken on the judge's
    implicit conclusion that H could not reasonably be  expected  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.

11. Mr Chodha did not have a strong view either way as to disposal  of  the
    appeal.

12. Having considered matters carefully and having regard to paragraph 7 of
    the relevant Practice Statements I am of  the  view  that  this  appeal
    should be adjourned  within  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  a  continuation
    hearing in due course.  Legal argument needs to be addressed orally and
    in skeleton arguments, and relevant case law submitted.   In  addition,
    there are fairly narrow but relevant factual issues that still need  to
    be determined.  This in my  view  should  be  done  at  a  continuation
    hearing.

13.  It  is  my  understanding  that  the  issue  surrounding  the   proper
    construction of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act is to be considered  by
    the Court of Appeal at some point in the near future. However,  without
    full details I am reluctant at this stage  to  stand  this  appeal  out
    pending any judgment from the Court.

14. I adjourn the appeal and will issue relevant directions to both parties
    and administration, below.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I adjourn the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Directions to the parties:

    1. The issue of whether the  Appellant  could  satisfy  the  Immigration
       Rules has been determined against him and is no longer live;

    2. The following findings of the First-tier Tribunal are preserved: that
       the Appellant takes an active role in H's life, and that  he  intends
       to do so in the future; that it is in  H's  best  interests  for  the
       Appellant to remain in the United Kingdom and  continue  to  take  an
       active role in her life. In addition, there is  no  sound  reason  to
       displace the judge's implicit conclusion that H could not  reasonably
       be expected to leave the United Kingdom;

    3. Subject to directions 1 and 2, above, relevant factors at the resumed
       hearing will include (but are not limited to) matters within Part  5A
       of the 2002 Act and in particular whether the "parental relationship"
       element of section 117(6) of the 2002 Act is satisfied;

    4. Both parties are to produce skeleton arguments on the construction of
       section 117B(6). These are to be filed with the  Upper  Tribunal  and
       served on the other side no later than 4pm on 26 May 2016;

    5. The Appellant is also to  file  his  bundle  (including  any  updated
       evidence) on the Upper Tribunal and serve it  on  the  Respondent  no
       later than 4pm on 26 May 2016;

    6. Oral evidence from the Appellant on relevant matters is permitted.



Directions to Listings

    1. The appeal is adjourned, to be heard by  any  judge  on  a  date  not
       before 16 June 2016;

    2. There is a time estimate of 2 hours;

    3. No interpreter is required.


Signed   Date: 26 April 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

