
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07796/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 July 2014                               |On 14 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Ms Jyotsna Pryadarshinee Parsunoo

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Malik


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an application for permission to appeal the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Herbert who allowed the appeal of Ms Parsunoo in  a
    determination dated 1 May 2014.  The appeal was allowed  under  Article
    8.  He found in paragraph 15:

         "First and foremost this is a highly unusual case as the  appellant
         does not have any grounds to remain under the Immigration Rules  or
         under Appendix FM paragraph ADE."

2.   The Secretary of State sought and was granted permission to  appeal  in
    what could be said is the Gulshan point in that it was  submitted  that
    the judge in finding in the appellant's  favour  under  Article  8  had
    failed to consider the principles set out in Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT  640
    (IAC) and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).

3.   Before me Mr Tarlow relied  upon  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to
    appeal but felt that he could not strenuously argue against  the  issue
    that  Miss  Parsunoo  did  in  fact  meet  the  Immigration  Rules,  in
    particular paragraph 276ADE(vi), namely she is aged 18 years or  above,
    has lived continuously in the UK for less than twenty years but has  no
    ties including social, cultural or family with the country to which she
    would have to go if required to leave the UK.

4.   The findings by Judge Herbert which have not been challenged  are  that
    Miss Parsunoo and her sister are clearly credible witnesses,  that  she
    faced complete ostracism from her family in Mauritius  and  the  stigma
    and trauma of having been raped by an ex-boyfriend.  She was subject to
    physical abuse in a manner set out  in  her  statement  which  included
    being forced to have an abortion as a consequence of the rape and  ill-
    treatment that followed.

5.   The relationship that  the  appellant  has  with  her  sister,  who  is
    settled  and  resident  in  the  UK,  is  beyond  the  normal   sibling
    relationship, and that has greatly deepened and strengthened because of
    the support the sister has given to the  appellant  during  the  crisis
    that has continued to affect her life.  He found that the  relationship
    is significant in the scheme of her current application as  removal  to
    Mauritius would effectively make that close bond extremely difficult to
    maintain.

6.   He refers and makes positive findings with regard to  friendships  with
    her peers in the UK, her desire to continue her studies and that if she
    were to be removed to Mauritius there  is  every  likelihood  that  she
    would be destitute and would have no financial or accommodation support
    from her immediate family.

7.   He found that she was likely to suffer from societal discrimination  in
    Mauritius based upon  the  notoriety  of  her  nude  photographs  being
    exhibited and by the fact that it may well  come  out  as  to  why  her
    parents failed to talk to her, namely the rape and abortion.  He  found
    that she would have no accommodation and  maintenance  and  would  have
    nobody to turn to given her parents' attitude to her.

8.   As referred to in the case of Ogundimu [2013] UKUT 60 the  natural  and
    ordinary meaning of the word ties in paragraph 399A of the  Immigration
    Rules imports a concept involving something more than merely remote  or
    abstract links to the country of proposed deportation or  removal.   It
    involves there being a connection to life in that country.

9.   In terms of explaining that it is not merely that there is somebody  in
    that country.  It is also looking at the quality of  the  relationships
    that person has with friends and family members in the country to which
    it is intended to remove her.  This is explained in detail in paragraph
    125 of Ogundimu.

10.  Given the findings of fact by Judge Herbert  which,  as  I  have  said,
    have not been challenged it is quite clear that this young woman has no
    ties that could in any way be said to exist in any meaningful way,  and
    it is therefore quite clear that she meets paragraph 276ADE(vi) of  the
    Immigration Rules.

11.  Given that the  Secretary  of  State  was  granted  permission  on  the
    Gulshan point, namely the consideration of Article 8,  it  is  hard  to
    find that the determination by Judge Herbert,  given  the  findings  of
    fact, did not actually fall within the  Gulshan  and  Nagre  parameters
    even though neither of those cases was referred to and Judge Herbert in
    fact referred to MF [2012] UKUT 00393 rather than the Court  of  Appeal
    decision.

12.  Accordingly I am satisfied that on the findings of fact made, that  she
    meets the requirements of paragraph  276ADE  and  that  this  appellant
    succeeds in her appeal under Article 8 as well.  I therefore set  aside
    the decision of Immigration Judge Herbert and remake  the  decision  by
    allowing her appeal both under the Rules and on Article 8 grounds.






Signed                                  Date 14th July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

