
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/07412/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice, Belfast    |       Decision & Reasons        |
|                                             |Promulgated                      |
|On 27 October 2015                           |       On 30 December 2015       |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                              MR ABDUL KHALIQUE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Muldoon, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Siddiq, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 15 February 1978.  On 4
    July 2012 he made an application for  further  leave  to  remain  as  a
    spouse.  That application was refused in a decision dated  20  February
    2013.

 2. His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge S. T. Fox at a hearing
    on 3 October 2013, whereby the appeal  was  dismissed.   Permission  to
    appeal having been granted by a Judge of the Upper Tribunal, the appeal
    came before me.

 3. The appellant originally applied for further leave  to  remain  on  the
    basis of  his  relationship  with  his  wife  Nichola  Gemma  Johnston.
    However, she had signed a statement confirming  that  the  relationship
    was no longer subsisting and that the appellant no  longer  resided  in
    the family home.  He was thus not able to meet the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. The respondent issued to the appellant a notice under  Section  120  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("a  s.120  notice"),
    thereby requiring him to state any additional  grounds  upon  which  he
    claimed to be entitled to remain in the UK.  In response to  the  s.120
    notice the appellant relied on a new relationship  with  a  Ms  Eireann
    Comhraidh, although her surname is spelt differently in the  First-tier
    Judge's determination.  They have a child, whom I shall identify as  A,
    born on 29 June 2013.

 5. The First-tier Judge concluded, in summary,  that  notwithstanding  the
    appellant's partner's decision to elect to be an  Irish  citizen  only,
    she still remains eligible to apply for a British  passport.   She  had
    been born in the UK.  He concluded that she  is  a  person  who  is  in
    addition to being an Irish citizen also a United Kingdom national.   He
    concluded that she is not exercising Treaty rights.

 6. That aside, the judge also concluded at [22] that he could not consider
    the 'new' circumstances of the appellant's new partner and child, those
    being circumstances which had changed since the application for further
    leave and the decision refusing it.  Referring to the  decision  in  EA
    (Section 85(4) explained) Nigeria [2007] UKAIT 00013, he concluded that
    it would not be permissible for him to act  as  the  "primary  decision
    maker" were he to determine the appeal on the changed circumstances.

 7. For the same reasons, he concluded that  the  ground  of  appeal  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR  failed  on  the  basis  of  the  application  as
    originally made and the decision in consequence of it.

    The Grounds and Submissions

 8. The grounds in summary contend that the judge's decision is contrary to
    the decision in AS (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1076, and the decision of the Supreme  Court
    in Patel and others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
    UKSC 72.  The decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  Jaff  (s.120  notice;
    statement of "additional grounds") [2012] UKUT  00396  (IAC)  was  also
    relied on.  The appellant's skeleton argument that was before the First-
    tier Tribunal made reference to AS (Afghanistan) and Jaff but these are
    not referred to in the judge's determination.

 9. In consequence of the judge's refusal to consider the circumstances  as
    outlined in the Statement of Additional Grounds, it is  contended  that
    the judge erred in failing to consider Article 8 of the ECHR, including
    with reference to the best interests of the appellant's child, and  had
    also erred in failing to give proper consideration to  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the  EEA  Regulations")  in
    terms of the appellant's relationship with his Irish partner and  their
    child.

10. The appellant's grounds refer to other suggested errors in  the  First-
    tier Judge's decision, although stating that those  are  not  material.
    The first of these concerns the constitutional issues  arising  out  of
    nationality for those born in Northern Ireland with reference  to  what
    the judge described as the "McCarthy point".   This  appears  to  be  a
    reference to the decision of the  Court  of  Justice  of  the  European
    Communities in McCarthy [2011] EUECJ C-434/09.   At  [13]-[15]  of  the
    grounds other issues are raised which it is asserted amount to  further
    errors in the judge's decision.

11. Ms Muldoon in her submissions relied on the grounds.  She said that the
    appellant's partner's position is that she could not  renounce  British
    citizenship because her contention is that she  never  had  it  in  the
    first place.  She accepted that under s.12 of the  British  Nationality
    Act  1981  a  person  can  renounce  British  citizenship  provided   a
    declaration is included, but that declaration  includes  an  acceptance
    that a person is  a  British  citizen.   The  appellant's  partner  has
    manifested her Irish citizenship by applying for an Irish passport.

12. I raised with Ms Muldoon the question of whether it could be said  that
    the appellant's partner was exercising  Treaty  rights  since  she  had
    never exercised any free movement rights by moving anywhere between EEA
    states.  Ms Muldoon submitted that this issue was  dealt  with  in  the
    case of Chen  (Chen  and  Zhu)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department Case C-200/02 [2005] QB 325.

13. The judge, it was submitted, needed to consider the issue of a  durable
    relationship and paragraph EX.1 of the Rules.  Background evidence  was
    referred to in general terms as set out in the  appellant's  bundle  in
    relation to the situation for children in Pakistan.

14. Mrs Siddiq accepted that the authorities to which I had  been  referred
    indicated that the judge was  wrong  not  to  consider  s.120  and  the
    additional grounds.

15. Oblique reference on behalf of the respondent in submissions  was  made
    to the Secretary  of  State's  appeals  guidance  in  terms  of  s.120,
    although no copy of that guidance was put before me.  It was  suggested
    on  behalf  of  the  respondent  that  the  circumstances  of  the  new
    relationship are so contrasting  with  the  original  application  that
    there needed to be investigation by the Secretary  of  State  into  the
    circumstances.  It may be that a new application would have to be made.

16. In relation to the nationality point, it was accepted on behalf of  the
    respondent that the Home Office position is that a person such  as  the
    appellant's partner has a  constitutional  right  to  choose  Irish  or
    British citizenship or both.  On the other hand, in the  light  of  the
    British Nationality Act, she had never  renounced  British  nationality
    and therefore would be viewed as both British and Irish.

17. Furthermore, she had never exercised free movement rights.

    My assessment

18. For all that the appeal raises a number  of  issues,  the  question  of
    whether the First-tier Judge erred in law seems to me to be amenable to
    a simple resolution.  The judge's ultimate refusal  to  consider,  what
    could be described in general terms as the  changed  circumstances,  is
    contrary to decisions in AS (Afghanistan) and Patel and others.   Patel
    and  others  considered  the  Court  of   Appeal's   decision   in   AS
    (Afghanistan).  At [35] the Supreme Court stated as follows:

         "Turning to the judgments in AS itself, it would  be  difficult  to
         expand on or improve the depth of legal and contextual analysis  to
         be found in the judgments of all three judges. The  fact  that  the
         analysis  led  such  experienced  judges  to  opposite  conclusions
         suggests that the path  to  enlightenment  will  not  be  found  by
         attempting a similar exercise in this judgment. The problem lies in
         the drafting of the relevant provisions, which defies  conventional
         analysis. It is not only obscure in places and lacking  in  detail,
         but contains pointers in both directions".

19. Further, at [44] it said this:

         "In the end, although the arguments are finely balanced,  I  prefer
         the approach of the majority in AS. Like  Sullivan  LJ,  I  find  a
         broad approach more consistent with the "coherence" of this part of
         the Act. He noted that the standard form  of  appeal,  echoing  the
         effect of the section 120 notice, urged  appellants  to  raise  any
         additional ground at that stage, on pain of not being able to do so
         later, and observed:

             '... it seems to me that appellants would have good reason  to
             question the coherence of the statutory scheme  if  they  were
             then to be told by the AIT that  it  had  no  jurisdiction  to
             consider the additional ground that they had been  ordered  by
             both the Secretary of State and the AIT to put forward.'"

20. The decision in EA predates those authorities, and is in any event  not
    on point so far as the circumstances of this appeal are concerned.

21. At the very least therefore, the judge's  conclusions  in  relation  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR cannot stand.  There has  been  no  consideration
    under Article 8 of the appellant's circumstances as  disclosed  in  the
    s.120 notice and additional grounds.  That is reason enough to set  the
    decision aside to be re-made.

22. So far as the nationality point is concerned, the appellant's  skeleton
    argument sets out a number of authorities on the issue in terms of  the
    interrelationship between the Northern Ireland Act 1998 and the Belfast
    Agreement.  It seems to me that those  authorities  which  consider  in
    various different respects the impact of the Belfast  Agreement  reveal
    that an individual does constitutionally have  the  right  to  identify
    themselves as either British or Irish or both, as set  out  in  Article
    1(vi) of the Belfast Agreement.  Article 1(vi) provides  that  the  two
    Governments:

         "recognise the birthright of all the people of Northern Ireland  to
         identify themselves and be accepted as Irish or British,  or  both,
         as they may so choose, and accordingly confirm that their right  to
         hold both  British  and  Irish  citizenship  is  accepted  by  both
         Governments and would not be affected by any future change  in  the
         status of Northern Ireland".

23. I need only refer to the decision in Robinson v Secretary of State  for
    Northern Ireland and  Others  (Northern  Ireland)  [2002]  UKHL  32  in
    support of the proposition that  the  Northern  Ireland  Act  1998  was
    passed to implement the Belfast Agreement which, amongst other  things,
    recognises the right of the people  of  Northern  Ireland  to  identify
    themselves as Irish or British, or both.

24. So much, it seems to me, was also conceded on behalf of the  respondent
    at the hearing before  me.   Insofar  as  the  First-tier  Judge  found
    otherwise, I am satisfied that he erred in law.   Furthermore,  insofar
    as the appellant's grounds appear to accept that the judge's finding on
    this issue is not material, I disagree.

25. As already indicated, it is clear that the decision will have to be re-
    made.  My doubts expressed at the hearing in terms  of  the  extent  to
    which the appellant would be able to succeed under the EEA  Regulations
    with reference to whether his  partner  was  exercising  Treaty  rights
    because she had not in fact exercised any right of free movement,  were
    not assuaged by Ms Muldoon's submissions.  The  issue  in  relation  to
    Chen, which relates to the appellant's child,  seems  to  me  to  be  a
    separate issue entirely.

26. The parties agreed that it would be appropriate for the  matter  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal if I found that there was an  error
    or errors of law  requiring  the  decision  to  be  set  aside,  and  I
    provisionally agreed with that suggestion. I still consider that to  be
    the appropriate course, having regard to paragraph 7.2  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement of November 2014, given the  nature  and
    extent of the judicial fact finding necessary for the decision  in  the
    appeal to be re-made and having regard to the overriding  objective  in
    rule 2.

27. Accordingly, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    heard by a judge other than First-tier Tribunal judge S.T. Fox.

28. The only finding of fact that is to be preserved is that found at  [23]
    of the First-tier Tribunal's determination, namely that  the  appellant
    is the father of A. The parties are of course at  liberty  to  come  to
    agreement as to other facts.

29. In order to assist  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  make  the  following
    direction. Further directions in relation  to  filing  and  service  of
    witness statements and the like  are  of  course  to  be  left  to  the
    discretion of the First-tier Tribunal.

                                 DIRECTIONS

    No later than seven days  before  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the appellant is to file and serve a skeleton argument:

    (i)  setting out the basis upon which it is contended that he meets the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules, the EEA Regulations (and  on
         what basis), and setting out the appellant's case  in  relation  to
         Article 8 of the ECHR.

    (ii) explaining the basis upon which it is contended that the appellant
         is able to establish that he is an extended family member, being  a
         person in  a  durable  relationship,  in  circumstances  where  his
         partner has never apparently exercised any right of free moment.

    (iii)     explaining  how  it  is  contended  that  the  appellant  can
         legitimately rely on both the Article 8 Immigration Rules  and  the
         EEA Regulations.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                        17/12/15
