
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07675/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice,|Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Belfast                              |                                     |
|On  20 October 2015                  |On 29 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                            CHRISTINE DALE HOLMES
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
Appellant:    Ms F Connolly, of Counsel, instructed by Sheridan Leonard
                    Solicitors
Respondent:   Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision made on behalf of the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (the "Secretary of State"), dated  27th  January  2014,  the
    Appellant's application  for  a  permanent  residence  card  under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 was  refused.   The  decision  maker
    stated:

         "No evidence of how your EEA sponsor was exercising  Treaty  rights
         in the United Kingdom for a continuous period for  five  years  has
         been supplied."

    The  ensuing  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  "FtT")   was
    dismissed.

 2. The sponsor, or EEA national  concerned,  is  the  Appellant's  spouse.
    Having regard to all the evidence and the findings of  the  FtT,  there
    are three indelible and incontestable facts in the overall matrix:  the
    sponsor was born in Northern Ireland, has lived virtually all his  life
    in Northern Ireland and  has  worked  in  no  country  except  Northern
    Ireland.  The second indelible feature of the matrix, which is a matter
    of law, is that the sponsor is both a  British  citizen  and  an  Irish
    national.  The FtT dismissed the appeal on the following basis:

         "He is  not  however  exercising  Treaty  rights  within  the  2006
         Regulations.  He has not exercised Treaty  rights  outside  of  the
         United Kingdom."

 3. In McCarthy - v - Secretary of State for the Home Department  (Case  C-
    434/09), the CJEU decided, at [59](1):

         "[The Citizenship Directive] ... must  be  interpreted  as  meaning
         that [it] is not applicable  to  a  Union  citizen  who  has  never
         exercised his right of free movement, who has always resided  in  a
         Member State of which he is a national and who is also  a  national
         of another Member State."

    The Court further held that,  similarly,  Article  21  TFEU  is  of  no
    application.

 4. The consideration that the Secretary of State's  refusal  decision  was
    not based  upon  the  McCarthy  decision  is  of  no  moment.   Equally
    irrelevant is the arguable error of law  identified  in  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal, namely the FtT's failure to make  clear  findings
    on the evidence pertaining to the  sponsor's  employment.   Insofar  as
    this error occurred, it is plainly immaterial.  The cornerstone of  the
    law in this field is the principle  of  the  efficacious  enjoyment  of
    primary Treaty rights.  This, fundamentally,  involves  migration  from
    one Member State  to  another.   This  is  abundantly  clear  from  the
    recitals of the Directive:

         "(1) Citizenship of the Union confers on every citizen of the Union
             a primary and individual  right  to  move  and  reside  freely
             within the territory of the Member States .....

         (2)   The  free  movement  of  persons  constitutes  one   of   the
             fundamental freedoms of the internal market ....

         ...

         (5)  The right of all Union citizens  to  move  and  reside  freely
             within the territory of the Member States should, if it is  to
             be  exercised  under  objective  conditions  of  freedom   and
             dignity, be also granted to their family members ....

         ...

         (9)  Union citizens should have the right of residence in the  host
             Member State for a period not exceeding 3 months ....

         ...

         (13) The residence card requirements should be restricted to family
             members of Union citizens who are not nationals  of  a  Member
             State for periods of residence of longer than three months."

    In short, this case is  defeated  at  first  base.   The  door  to  the
    Citizenship Directive and the implementing EEA  regulations  is  firmly
    locked by the facts and factors highlighted above and  the  Appellant's
    case is resoundingly defeated by the decision in McCarthy.

DECISION

 5. For the reasons elaborated above, I dismiss the appeal and  affirm  the
    decision of the FtT.


                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                      Dated: 20 October 2015
