
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA079922015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th May 2016                              |On 20th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                            TAMIYO FUKUDA GRIFFIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not MADe)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Hoshi, Counsel instructed by Solomon Taylor and
                    Shaw Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of the United States of America  born
    on 5th July 1928 and hence 87 years of age at the time of the  hearing.
    She first arrived in the UK on 15th May 2014 when she was granted leave
    to enter as a visitor until 15th November 2014,  subsequently  extended
    until 13th December 2014.   On  10th  December  2014  she  applied  for
    further leave to remain on human rights grounds.  That application  was
    refused for the reasons given in the Respondent's Refusal Letter  dated
    11th February 2015.  The  Appellant  appealed  that  decision  and  her
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird (the Judge)  sitting
    at Taylor House on 29th September  2015.   She  decided  to  allow  the
    appeal under Article 8 ECHR, but to dismiss it  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and Article 3 ECHR.  Both the Appellant and the Respondent sought
    leave to appeal that decision and both were granted such permission  on
    18th April 2016.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.  I decided to  hear  the
    Appellant's application first.

 3. The Judge allowed the appeal under Article 8 ECHR because to begin with
    she found that there were exceptional circumstances which  allowed  her
    to consider the Appellant's human rights  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  These exceptional circumstances were that the Appellant was  87
    years of age and was unable to cope without a great  deal  of  personal
    care owing to her physical  and  mental  difficulties.   The  Appellant
    needed the emotional support of her family in the UK.  The  Judge  then
    found that the Appellant had a private life in the UK  which  would  be
    interfered with by the Respondent's decision to  a  degree  of  gravity
    which engaged the Appellant's Article 8  ECHR  rights,  and  which  was
    disproportionate.  The Judge took  into  account  the  public  interest
    represented by the fact that the Appellant had no right  to  remain  in
    the UK under the Immigration Rules,  but  found  that  the  Appellant's
    personal circumstances carried the most weight.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Whitwell argued that the Judge had erred in  law  in
    coming to this conclusion.  He referred to the grounds  of  application
    and  argued  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  identify   sufficiently
    compelling circumstances to consider the  Appellant's  Article  8  ECHR
    rights outside the Immigration Rules as required  by  the  decision  in
    SSHD v SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  Further,  the  Judge
    had erred in  law  by  attaching  insufficient  weight  to  the  public
    interest.  The Appellant had spent only a very limited period  of  time
    in the UK prior to the hearing before the  Judge,  and  the  Judge  had
    earlier found at paragraph 39  of  her  Decision  that  there  were  no
    significant obstacles to her integration into the country of return for
    the purposes of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of HC 395.  There was  evidence
    before the Judge that there were ample financial resources available to
    the Appellant to finance the Appellant's care in the country of return.
     The Judge had  failed  to  attach  sufficient  weight  to  the  public
    interest.  She had failed  to  give  sufficient  consideration  to  her
    earlier finding that the Appellant had failed to meet the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules as an adult dependant relative.

 5. In response, Mr Hoshi argued that there had been no such error of  law.
    He described the Respondent's grounds of application as amounting to no
    more than a disagreement with the decision of the Judge.  The Judge had
    identified at paragraph  40  of  the  Decision  sufficient  exceptional
    circumstances allowing her to consider the Appellant's Article  8  ECHR
    rights.  That being the case, the Respondent's grounds  of  application
    amounted to an irrationality challenge which required a high  threshold
    which had not been met.  At paragraph 32 of the Decision, the Judge had
    found credible the expert medical evidence of  three  physicians  which
    clearly showed that owing to her physical and mental  incapacities  the
    Appellant was unable to look after herself.

 6. Mr Hoshi went on to argue that  the  proportionality  decision  of  the
    Judge was rational.  She had carried out a proper balancing exercise in
    which she had given a proper consideration of the public interest.  The
    Judge had correctly mitigated the weight to be  given  to  that  public
    interest on the basis that there was medical evidence to say  that  the
    Appellant was not fit to fly.

 7. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge to allow the appeal
    on Article 8 ECHR grounds which I therefore  do  not  set  aside.   The
    Judge had first decided that the Appellant did not  qualify  under  the
    Immigration Rules for leave to remain as an adult  dependant  relative,
    and then also found that the Appellant did not meet the requirements of
    paragraph 276ADE of HC 395.  However, those decisions in themselves did
    not preclude the Judge from considering the Appellant's Article 8  ECHR
    rights.  At paragraph 40 of the Decision the  Judge  found  that  there
    were exceptional circumstances which he set out in that paragraph.  She
    gave sufficient reasons for that decision which in my  view  cannot  be
    described as irrational nor perverse.

 8. The Judge then considered the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR  rights.   The
    Judge found that the Appellant had developed a private life in  the  UK
    since her arrival in May 2014 based  upon  her  relationship  with  her
    children  and  grandchildren  resident  in  the  UK.   The  Judge  then
    considered the interference which the Respondent's decision would cause
    to that private life.  She carried out a proper balancing exercise  and
    found the interference to be disproportionate.  The Judge  referred  to
    the public interest at paragraph 41 of the Decision, but found that the
    Appellant's circumstances carried most weight.   This  was  a  decision
    fully explained by the Judge.  It was not irrational nor  perverse  for
    the Judge to find that the Appellant's personal  circumstances  carried
    the most weight,  particularly  those  relating  to  her  health  which
    resulted in the Appellant being incapable of looking after herself.   I
    agree with the submission of Mr Hoshi that the Respondent's  ground  of
    application in this respect amounts to no more than a disagreement with
    the decision of the Judge.

 9. For these reasons I find that the decision of the Judge  to  allow  the
    appeal under Article 8 ECHR contained no error of law and  therefore  I
    do not set it aside.  Having announced that decision  at  the  hearing,
    both parties declined the  opportunity  of  addressing  me  further  in
    respect of the Appellant's application.  I make a decision  that  there
    was no error of law in the decision of the Judge to dismiss the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and on Article 3 ECHR grounds.   I  do  not
    set those decisions aside.  In my view the Judge correctly applied  the
    provisions of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of HC 395, and did not err in law
    in finding that the Appellant's poor health did not meet the very  high
    threshold given by the jurisprudence in Article 3 ECHR cases.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decisions of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside those decisions.

The appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date 20th June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
