
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07303/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 October 2014                            |On 11 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    The Honourable Mr Justice T R A King
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                           Mr Gustave Louie Jarley
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R M Jarley
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a national of The Gambia where he was born on  26
    January 1991,  appeals  with  permission  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Robson, who for reasons given in his determination dated
    15 May 2014 dismissed the appeal by the appellant against the Secretary
    of State's decisions.

 2. Those decisions, which were made on 21 January 2014, were twofold.  The
    first was a decision to refuse to vary the appellant's leave to remain.
     The second was a decision to remove the appellant.  The background  to
    the decision was that the appellant had made  application  based  on  a
    concession under the Immigration Rules on 1 March  2013  for  leave  to
    enlist in Her Majesty's Armed Forces.  On 12  August  2013  whilst  the
    application was pending before the Secretary of State  the  offer  from
    the British Army was withdrawn.  Accordingly  the  Secretary  of  State
    concluded that she was not satisfied that the appellant  has  sought  a
    variation of leave for a purpose covered by the Immigration  Rules  and
    thus refused with reference to paragraph 322(1) of HC 395.

 3. In granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Gill  raised  the
    possibility that the appellant was unable to  rely  on  asylum  grounds
    having regard to the nature of the decision made by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  We are satisfied that her concerns were misplaced.  S.88 of the
    2002 Act bites on decisions refusing to vary  leave  but  it  does  not
    prevent an appellant bringing an appeal on asylum,  race  relations  or
    human rights grounds.  In any event  the  appellant  can  rely  on  the
    removal decision which permits all grounds to be argued,  and  in  this
    regard we have taken account of s.85(2) of the 2002 Act.

 4. The appellant did not mention the basis of his asylum claim,  which  is
    his sexual orientation, until he filed his grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  In this he refers to the difficulties that he had
    encountered in The Gambia and a sense of relief he achieved on  arrival
    in the United Kingdom.  He submitted  with  his  grounds  of  appeal  a
    letter from his brother, who spoke on his behalf before us today.   His
    brother is serving in the British Army.  He  explains  in  that  letter
    that the appellant is gay and that he is afraid to go  back  home.   In
    addition, at some point two items of country of origin information were
    lodged by the appellant regarding the negative attitude of the  Gambian
    authorities to gay people.  That was the extent of the evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The appellant did not attend the hearing.   This  was  because  he  had
    requested that the appeal be determined on the papers.

 6.  The  judge  noted  the  grounds  with  reference  to  the  appellant's
    orientation and reached the conclusion that if he wished to  raise  the
    issue of breach of Article 8 he should make an appropriate  application
    to the respondent.   He  also  observed  that  there  was  insufficient
    information to make a decision as to the entitlement  or  otherwise  to
    humanitarian protection and thus the appeal was dismissed.

 7. The application for permission to appeal states that  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal was wrong.  He was  not  given  the  chance  to
    appeal on asylum grounds and thus this would lead to his  returning  to
    Gambia where he would face fail.  He would lose his  life  if  left  to
    return to that country and that his right to human rights and life  had
    not been fully considered.

 8. In our view the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to  determine  the
    Article 8 and refugee law rights that the appellant relied on.  S.85(2)
    we have referred to already provides that the Tribunal  shall  consider
    any matter raised in the statement which constitutes a ground of appeal
    of a kind listed in s.84(1) against the decision appealed against.

 9. The evidence before the judge was limited as we have described already.
     The appellant had the burden of proof to establish the matters that he
    relied on in support of his claim to refugee protection  and  otherwise
    on Article 8 grounds.  He chose to  have  the  appeal  decided  on  the
    papers and although he was entitled to take that course he had to  take
    the  consequences  of  doing  so.   On  the  evidence  before  him  our
    conclusion is that had the  judge  proceeded  to  determine  the  human
    rights and asylum grounds he could have only come to one decision which
    was to dismiss the appeal on the  basis  that  the  appellant  had  not
    discharged the burden of proof.

10. Under s.12 of the 2007 Act, even if we  find  an  error  of  law  in  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal we may but need not set aside  that
    decision.  As we consider that there was only one outcome open  to  the
    judge had he decided the grounds we do not consider the error  material
    and accordingly his decision stands.

11. We are aware that the appellant maintains his protection claim.  He  is
    aware from our conversation with him today that it is open  to  him  to
    apply to the Secretary of State in accordance with the  usual  practice
    for his claim to be considered and he is able to rely on paragraph  329
    of the Immigration Rules which provides that he  will  not  be  removed
    until that claim has been decided.  Helpfully Ms Isherwood on behalf of
    the Secretary of State will provide him with the address which  he  can
    go to.

12. Accordingly this appeal is dismissed.



Signed                                  Date 10 November 2014

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


