
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/07917/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 23rd June, 2016                       |On 9th August, 2016                 |
|Dictated 23rd June 2016                  |                                    |
|Signed 28th June, 2016                   |                                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                              M D Mehedi Hasan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik of  Counsel, instructed by Thamina
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant was born on 28th November,  1989  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 15th January, 2011  as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student.  On 28th  January,  2012,  he  applied  for
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student attaching a TOEIC
    certificate from Educational Testing Service.  No decision was received
    in relation to the 28th September, 2012, application.

2.   The respondent issued  removal  directions  under  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 on 6th March, 2010, on the basis of the
    appellant having fraudulently obtained an English  speaking  test.   On
    24th September, 2014, the appellant had applied for a residence card as
    the family member of an EEA national, his cousin Abdur Rahim  Mohammed.
    Mr Mohammed is a Portuguese national exercising treaty  rights  in  the
    United Kingdom.

3.   The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  his  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bowler  at  Hatton  Cross  on  14th
    September, 2015.  In his  determination  promulgated  on  7th  October,
    2015, the judge decided:-

    (a)  that the appellant had no in country right of appeal  against  the
         Secretary of State's decision to remove him from the United Kingdom
         under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999; and


    (b)  dismissed the appellant's appeal from  the  Secretary  of  State's
         decision to refuse his application  for  a  residence  card  as  an
         extended family member of an EEA national.


4.   Permission to appeal was granted on four grounds:

    (1)  that the judge misread Section 92 of the Nationality,  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 in holding that there was no in  country  right
         of appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  remove  the
         appellant from the United Kingdom under Section 10 of the 1999 Act;


    (2)  the First-tier Tribunal Judge's conclusion that the appellant  had
         no in country right of appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
         decision to remove the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  under
         Section 10 of the 1999 Act  was  inconsistent  with  the  text  and
         scheme of Section 85 of the 2002 Act;


    (3)  the First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appeal from  the
         Secretary of State's decision  to  refuse  his  application  for  a
         residence card as an extended family member of an EEA national  was
         procedurally unfair; and


    (4)  the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
         appeal from  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse  his
         application for a residence card as an extended family member of an
         EEA national was perverse and based on a material  misdirection  in
         law.


5.   Mr Malik very  helpfully  expanded  on  his  grounds  and  took  me  to
    paragraphs 40 and 41 of the determination.  He suggested that the judge
    was wrong to conclude that the appellant has no right to  bring  an  in
    country appeal against the Section 10 removal directions while he is in
    the United Kingdom.  The judge, and before him  the  Home  Office,  had
    ignored Section 92(4) of the 2002 Act.  Section  92  of  the  2002  Act
    provides:-

         "(1) A person may not appeal under Section 82(1) while he is in the
             United Kingdom unless his appeal is of a kind  to  which  this
             Section applies.


         (2)  This Section applies  to  an  appeal  against  an  immigration
             decision of a kind specified in Section  82(2)(c),  (d),  (e),
             (f) and (j).


         ...




         (4)  This Section also applies to an appeal against an  immigration
             decision if the appellant -


             (a)  has made an asylum claim, or a human rights claim,  while
                  in the United Kingdom, or


             (b)  is an EEA national or a member of the family  of  an  EEA
                  national and makes a claim to the Secretary of State  that
                  the decision breaches the  appellant's  rights  under  the
                  Community Treaties in respect of entry to or residence  in
                  the United Kingdom."


6.   Counsel suggested that as a result  of  the  appellant  having  an  EEA
    national the appellant must also have an in  country  right  of  appeal
    against the Section 10 removal decision.

7.   For the respondent, Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  suggested  that  nothing  in
    Section 92 suggests that an out of country appeal  may  be  brought  in
    country.  The two different decisions cannot be linked.

8.   In relation to  the  second  challenge  Mr  Malik  suggested  that  the
    judge's conclusion that the appellant has no in country right of appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision to remove the appellant  from
    the United  Kingdom  under  Section  10  of  the  1999  Act  is  simply
    inconsistent with the text and scheme of Section 85 of the 2002 Act.

9.   The judge properly accepted that the appellant had an in country  right
    of appeal in respect of the EEA decision.   The  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision  that  an  appeal  against  the  removal  decision  cannot  be
    entertained within the appeal proceedings  from  the  EEA  decision  is
    inconsistent, Mr Malik suggested, with Section  85  of  the  2002  Act,
    which provides:

         "(1) An appeal under Section 82(1)  against  a  decision  shall  be
             treated by the Tribunal as including  an  appeal  against  any
             decision in respect of which the  appellant  has  a  right  of
             appeal under Section 82(1)."


10.  The removal decision is clearly an immigration decision  under  Section
    82(1) and the judge was obliged to treat the  appeal  against  the  EEA
    decision as "including an appeal" against the removal decision.

11.  Mr Malik suggested that the appellant's submissions avoid  multiplicity
    of appeals and the approach taken  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    plainly results in two separate appeals, one in country and one out  of
    country.  He pointed out  that  it  was  perfectly  possible  that  the
    appellant might have a successful in country EEA appeal but not be able
    to exercise his rights in respect of  a  removal  decision  because  he
    remained in country.

12.  For the respondent the Presenting Officer reminded me that  Section  10
    provides for an out of country appeal, but a  decision  under  the  EEA
    Regulations gives an in country right of appeal. There is nothing,  she
    suggested, in those opposing jurisdictional  points  which  means  that
    both appeals have to be heard at the same time and in country.  Without
    jurisdiction, the First-tier Tribunal cannot hear  an  out  of  country
    appeal if the appellant remains in country.  Indeed, an appellant  with
    an out of country appeal cannot exercise his right of appeal  until  he
    has left the United Kingdom.

13.  The Secretary of State gave one reason  for  refusing  the  appellant's
    application for a residence card,  namely  that  he  had  not  provided
    evidence in the form of  birth  certificate  as  evidence  that  he  is
    related as claimed to an EEA national.  The judge  heard  evidence  and
    concluded that the appellant is the cousin of Mr Mohammed.  He recorded
    a submission by the Presenting Officer that if the appellant was  found
    to be the cousin of Mr Mohammed the case  should  be  remitted  to  the
    respondent for further consideration regarding  remaining  elements  of
    the extended family provisions.

14.  Mr Malik pointed out that the judge recorded a further submission  from
    the Presenting Officer to the  effect  that  were  he  to  address  the
    qualification as  an  extended  family  member  there  is  insufficient
    evidence to show dependency.  This submission was made  after  evidence
    was heard.  Applying RM (Kwok On Tong: HC 395 para  320)  India  [2006]
    UKAIT 00039 the appellant went to the appeal hearing to deal  with  the
    sole concern expressed by the  Secretary  of  State  in  her  decision,
    namely his relationship with his cousin.   The  appellant  successfully
    addressed that concern.

15.  The judge permitted a further ground of  refusal  to  be  raised  after
    evidence was heard in oral submissions by the  Presenting  Officer  and
    then dismissed the appeal for that additional ground  without  allowing
    an  appropriate  adjournment  for  the  appellant.   That,   Mr   Malik
    suggested, was wrong.

16.  Finally, in concluding that the evidence was insufficient to show  that
    payments provided  material  support  for  the  appellant's  "essential
    needs" the judge failed to direct himself correctly.  Education is  one
    of the essential needs along with accommodation,  food,  clothing  etc.
    and in that part of Bangladesh where the appellant comes from  a  child
    will remain illiterate and innumerate unless they  can  pay  to  go  to
    school.  In considering the evidence the judge had omitted entirely  to
    give any consideration to transfers at pages 159 to 162 of the  bundle.
    There was no extensive examination of  the  personal  circumstances  to
    justify denial of entry or residence as required by Article 3(2).

17.  The Presenting Officer suggested that the  evidence  before  the  judge
    simply failed to demonstrate that material support  had  been  supplied
    for the appellant's  material  needs.   The  funds  were  paid  to  the
    appellant and he was between the ages  of  18  and  20  and  undergoing
    tertiary education.

18.  I have reserved my decision.

19.   Having   carefully   considered   Counsel's   helpful   and   eloquent
    submissions, I find that there is no in country right of appeal against
    the Secretary of State's decision to  remove  the  appellant  from  the
    United Kingdom under Section 10 of  the  1999  Act.   Counsel  drew  my
    attention to Section 92 and in particular to  Section  92(4).   Section
    92(4)(b) suggests that this Section also applies to an  appeal  against
    an immigration decision if the applicant is an EEA  national  [and  the
    appellant very clearly is not] or a member of  the  family  of  an  EEA
    national who makes a claim to the Secretary of State that the  decision
    breaches the appellant's rights under the community treaties in respect
    of an entry to or  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.   However,  the
    appellant is not a member of the family of an EEA national.  Regulation
    7 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 says:-

         "7.  (1) Subject to  paragraph  (2),  for  the  purposes  of  these
             Regulations the following persons  shall  be  treated  as  the
             family members of another person -


             (a)  his spouse or his civil partner;


             (b)  direct descendants  of  his,  his  spouse  or  his  civil
                  partner who are -


                  (i)  under 21; or


                  (ii) dependants of his, his spouse or his civil partner;


             (c)  dependent direct relatives in his ascending line or  that
                  of his spouse or his civil partner;


             (d)  a person who is to be treated as  the  family  member  of
                  that other person under paragraph (3)."


20.  Paragraph (3) deals of course with extended  family  members  who  have
    been issued with an EEA family permit.  As a cousin of Mr Mohammed, the
    appellant is an extended family member.  To this limited extent, I find
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in this respect does
    not contain an error of law.

21.  So far as Counsel's second  ground  is  concerned,  I  believe  that  a
    removal under Section 10 cannot be treated as a decision in respect  of
    which the appellant has a right of appeal under Section 82(1) while  he
    is in the United Kingdom, because until he has left the United Kingdom,
    he has no right of appeal.

22.  Parliament has decreed that appeals against a section  10  removal  may
    only be exercised from abroad.  I  accept  that  Counsel's  submissions
    avoid multiplicity of appeals, but that is what Parliament has decided.
     Again, to this extent I find no error of law on the part of the judge.

23.  Turning now to the third challenge, I noted from  paragraph  7  of  the
    determination that as  a  preliminary  matter  the  Presenting  Officer
    appearing on behalf of the Secretary of State indicated  to  the  judge
    that in the event that he concluded that the appellant had a  right  of
    appeal in relation to the EEA  decision,  then  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to the Home Office to determine dependency.   I  believe  that
    what the Presenting Officer  meant  was  that  the  judge  should  have
    allowed the appeal to the extent that the  application  remains  to  be
    considered by the Secretary of State in the light of his  finding  that
    the appellant and Mr Mohammed are related as claimed.

24.  The judge pointed out, however, that he was minded to hear evidence  in
    relation to the question of dependency.  I believe that in doing so the
    judge did err.  Counsel suggested that the  judge  should  simply  have
    allowed the appeal to the extent that he found that the  appellant  was
    related to Mr Mohammed and point out to the Secretary of State that  it
    was still for her to make a decision based on the findings as found  by
    the judge.

25.  The respondent had not considered the question  of  dependency;  merely
    whether or not the parties were related as claimed.

26.  I find that the judge did err and that the appellant should  have  been
    allowed an appropriate adjournment in order to avoid any  injustice  by
    him not having been  prepared  to  deal  with  a  new  element  of  the
    Immigration Rules  which  had  come  into  play  as  a  result  of  him
    establishing that he was related to Mr Mohammed.  As it was, the  judge
    went on to consider evidence as to essential needs and did  so  without
    reminding himself or  recording  in  the  determination  the  date  the
    sponsor became an EEA national.

27.  I agree that it would have been  appropriate  for  the  judge  to  have
    allowed the appeal to the extent that it remained for the Secretary  of
    State to consider the question of dependency.

Notice of Decision

For all these reasons I have concluded that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
did err by failing to allow an appropriate adjournment and I  substitute  my
decision for his.  The appellant's appeal is allowed to the extent  that  it
has been found by the judge that the appellant and his sponsor  are  cousins
and related as claimed.  It is now for the respondent  to  further  consider
the application in the light of this finding.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

