
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/08660/2015
     IA086622015
     IA086672015
     IA086732015
     IA086782015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th June 2017                              |On 21st June 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                  ms o.m.E.
                                  mr s.o.e.
                                  mr s.s.e.
                                  mr o.d.e.
                                master m.N.E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Collins,Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  That direction
stands.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants, who are citizens of Nigeria, are a family of five.  The
    first and second Appellants are husband and wife, the third, fourth and
    fifth Appellants are their dependent children.

 2. They appeal to the Upper Tribunal with permission against the  decision
    of a First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Ian  Howard)  which  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 5th December 2016 dismissed their  appeals  against  the
    Respondent's decision to refuse them leave to remain in the UK.

 3. The Respondent's decision was made on 28th July 2015 and the Appellants
    appealed the refusal on the basis that  their  Article  8  ECHR  rights
    would be infringed by that decision.

 4. The grounds seeking permission to appeal Judge  Ian  Howard's  decision
    are comprehensively set out.  It  is  asserted  that  the  decision  is
    incoherent and dismissive of the  Appellants'  appeals.   It  is  said,
    firstly, the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal took place on  22nd
    June 2016 but the decision is recorded as  not  being  made  until  5th
    December 2016, an elapse of almost six months.

 5. Secondly and more  importantly,  the  decision  does  not  address  the
    Appellants' appeals.  Whilst the first  four  paragraphs  set  out  the
    correct names of the Appellants and the decisions appealed against, the
    rest of the decision from the heading "The Hearing"  onwards  bears  no
    resemblance whatsoever  to  the  case.   The  decision  bears  all  the
    hallmarks of relating to a different appeal altogether.

Error of Law Hearing

 6. Before me, Mr Collins appeared for the Appellants and Mr Nath  for  the
    Respondent.  Mr Nath quite properly accepted that the decision of  FtTJ
    Howard could not stand.  It was his view  that  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  full  and  proper  decision
    relating to the evidence. Since the findings  of  fact  in  the  extant
    appeals appeared to relate to people  other  than  the  Appellants,  it
    stood to reason that none of the findings  could  stand  and  that  the
    decision should be set aside in its entirety.

 7. Mr Collins for the Appellants accepted that this  was  the  appropriate
    course, although he had initially voiced the hope that the matter could
    be dealt with before the Upper Tribunal.

Consideration

 8. I am satisfied that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  cannot
    stand.  It is difficult to see what has occurred here, bearing in  mind
    that the substantive body of the decision bears no resemblance  to  the
    cases set out for the Appellants.  What is clear is that  the  decision
    must be set aside in its entirety for the reasons given in the  grounds
    seeking permission, which I have set out above.

 9. There is no alternative in these appeals but to remit these matters  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing to take place. That is  the
    appropriate Tribunal in fairness to  the  Appellants.  Nothing  can  be
    preserved from the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  It is set aside  in
    its entirety.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The  Appellants'
appeals are remitted to that Tribunal for a fresh hearing  which  should  be
before a judge other than Judge I Howard.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     20 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

