

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/08665/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |     Decision Promulgated    |
|On 15 January 2016                            |     On 4 February 2016      |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MURTAZA KHAN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kandola (Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:  Mr Jafar (Lee Valley Solicitors)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against the decision of the
   First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal of Murtaza Khan,  a  citizen  of
   Pakistan born 21 February 1990, originally brought against the  decision
   17 February 2015 to issue removal directions against him  under  section
   10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

2. He had applied for further leave to remain in November 2014 primarily on
   the basis of his relationship with  Laila  Aneesah  Mehboob,  a  British
   citizen who had never been to Pakistan,  who  he  married  via  a  civil
   ceremony on 1  September  2013.  The  application  was  refused  on  two
   grounds: firstly because based on information received from  Educational
   Testing Service (ETS) identifying an English language test  as  invalid,
   the  Home  Office  considered  that  he  had  used  dishonesty  in   his
   application, and secondly because it was not accepted, bearing  in  mind
   that his character therefore disqualified him  for  consideration  under
   Appendix FM, that there was a compelling case  for  departing  from  the
   Rules.


3. The First-tier Tribunal did not accept that the Secretary of  State  had
   discharged  the  burden  of  proof  upon  her  to  sustain  the  serious
   allegation made as to the Respondent's asserted dishonesty,  taking  the
   view  that  the  ETS  finding  that  his  test  results  could  not   be
   authenticated fell far short of proof  of  deception.   That  conclusion
   brought the case back into the ambit of Appendix FM, but as he  had  not
   put  forward  the  specified  evidence  to  establish  maintenance   and
   accommodation, he could only qualify under the  Ten  Year  route,  which
   required that he establish the existence of insurmountable obstacles  to
   life abroad.


4. The First-tier Tribunal found that he did make good such a case:  whilst
   not accepting that Ms Mahboob was  vulnerable  because  of  her  age  or
   build,  and  questioning  her  closeness  to  her  parents   here,   the
   combination of her  stage  of  pregnancy,  the  desirability  of  having
   antenatal  healthcare,  her  lack  of  familiarity  with  Pakistan   and
   inability to speak the language, together demonstrated that  there  were
   insurmountable obstacles to relocation.


5. The Secretary of  State  challenged  both  findings  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, as to character and circumstances abroad,  and  permission  to
   appeal was granted, solely on the latter point,  because  there  was  no
   express reference to requirement Ex.2 of Appendix  FM  in  the  decision
   below.


6. Before me Mr Kandola made brief submissions arguing  that  the  decision
   was perverse; I did not need to call on Mr Jafar.


Findings and reasons

7. As the Appellant lacks immigration status the couple  must  satisfy  the
   exception within Appendix FM at Ex.1 and Ex.2. The latter states:


      "EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable
      obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would be
      faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their family
      life together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would
      entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."




8. The First-tier Tribunal  gave  detailed  reasons  for  its  conclusions.
   Having  expressly  found  that  certain  features  of  her   case   (her
   relationship with her own parents, her youth and fragile build) were not
   themselves  enough  to  cross  the  threshold  of   inconvenience   into
   insurmountability, it then found that certain  specific  obstacles  were
   indeed sufficiently serious to do so: ie her stage of pregnancy and  her
   lack of familiarity with life in Pakistan.


9. It is true that those conclusions  were  concisely  expressed.  However,
   reading the decision as a whole, it represents a very clear and balanced
   assessment  of  the  Appellant's  case,   closely   focussing   on   the
   difficulties his partner would face in confronting an alien culture at a
   time in her life when she was especially vulnerable. It seems to me that
   the First-tier Tribunal had the threshold  of  "very  serious  hardship"
   well in mind when it made  its  decision  albeit  it  without  expressly
   citing it. In  those  circumstances,  Mr  Kandola  was  quite  right  to
   acknowledge that his challenge had  to  identify  irrationality  in  the
   decision below. Given the careful reasoning in the impugned decision,  I
   consider that the Secretary of  State  has  failed  to  demonstrate  any
   material deficiency in the Judge's reasoning.


          Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law.
    The appeal is dismissed




[pic]
Signed:                                            Date: 15 January 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
