
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08253/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27th June 2014                             |On 15th August 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                             MR PRAKASH CHUMBOO

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Khan, Solicitor of Universal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant was  born  on  28th  April  1988  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Mauritius.  He arrived in the United  Kingdom  as  a  student  on  23rd
    August 2010 with  leave  valid  until  14th  December  2012.   On  13th
    December 2012 he applied for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant under the points-based system.

2.   On 27th February 2013 the  respondent  refused  the  application  under
    paragraph 245ZX(c) with reference to paragraph 120A of  Appendix  A  of
    the Immigration Rules, finding that the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements to be awarded points for his  Confirmation  of  Acceptance
    for Studies.

3.   The decision  under  Section  47  of  the  2006  Act  was  subsequently
    withdrawn prior to hearing.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Scott on  25th  September  2013.   The
    appeal was dismissed.

5.   The appellant sought to appeal against that  decision.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted in the light of the decision of the Court of  Appeal
    in Pokhriyal v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 1568.  The matter came before me in  pursuance  of  that  grant  of
    leave.

6.   The appellant came to the United Kingdom to study the three  year  ACCA
    course at LSBF.  Although he was a bona fide student and  attended  his
    classes  when  he  sat  his  examinations  in  October  2012   he   was
    unsuccessful.

7.   It was his decision, upon advice, that he would be  more  suited  to  a
    different course of study namely that of tourism and  hospitality.   He
    was accepted to study for a qualification in professional  tourism  and
    hospitality by Kiara College.  A CAS was duly issued and on that  basis
    he put in his application for leave to remain.  Since then that college
    has closed down.

8.   He has now obtained a conditional offer dated 10th September 2012  from
    Gemal  College  to  study  for  a  BTech  NHC  Diploma  in  Hospitality
    Management also at QCF/NQF level 4.  That offer  was  conditional  upon
    the success of the appeal upon which the CAS will be assigned to him.

9.   As the Judge recognised the basis of the appeal was however the  nature
    of the CAS from Kiara College.

10.  The relevant matter as set out in the CAS is as follows:-

         "Progression Details


         Is current course higher, lower or the same level as  the  previous
         course?  Same.  If same or lower supply justification text  student
         first attempt was unsuccessful.  Student has covered  some  of  the
         modules  for  which  he  is  now  prepared  to  study  tourism  and
         hospitality management.  Student final attempt this year."

11.  The refusal letter of 27th February 2013 indicated that  the  Secretary
    of State was not satisfied that the Tier 4 sponsor had  confirmed  that
    the course for which the CAS had  been  assigned  represented  academic
    progression from the  previous  studies  defined  or  met  one  of  the
    exemptions.

12.  There was an inaccuracy in that decision in that the  decision  further
    went on to say as follows:-

         "As you are intending to study a course at a  lower  level  to  the
         course you were previously issued leave to study, your course  does
         not represent academic progression from your previous studies."

     In fact it was accepted at hearing that such  was  factually  incorrect
    because the two courses were at the same level.

13.  The Judge noted that matter at paragraph 14 of  the  determination  but
    considered that that simply shifted the focus from paragraph 120A(b)(i)
    to paragraph 120A(b)(ii),  so as to express the  requirement  that  the
    appellant still had to show that the  course  for  which  the  CAS  was
    assigned  represented  academic  progress  from   previous   study   or
    complemented the previous course for which the  appellant  was  granted
    leave.

14.  The Judge found that neither requirement had been  satisfied.   As  was
    noted in paragraph 15 of the determination, the CAS assigned  by  Kiara
    College did not confirm that the course  would  involve  further  study
    complementing his previous course.

15.  The Judge highlighted two issues that needed to be met.   Firstly  that
    the CAS should indicate that the course represented  academic  progress
    from the previous study but also if study at the same level there was a
    need to confirm as complementing the  previous  course  for  which  the
    appellant was granted leave.  The Judge found  that  that  confirmation
    was not present and thus the requirement of the Rule was not met.   The
    Judge was of the view as expressed  in  paragraph  25  that  it  was  a
    different course at a different institution and there was  no  relevant
    connection with a particular course or institution  or  an  educational
    sequence.

16.  The court in the case of  Pokhriyal  recognised  the  phrase  "academic
    progress" was a  vague  one.   At  paragraph  46  of  the  judgment  it
    indicated  that  whether  a  particular  course  constitutes   academic
    progress is not a hard-edged question but involves  comparing  the  new
    course with the student's previous academic achievements and  making  a
    value  judgment.   There  was  a  degree  of  subjectivity  which   was
    inescapable.

17.  Paragraph 120B of Appendix A made it clear that it was for the  college
    and not for the Secretary of State to carry out that assessment.

18.  The issue that was before the Court of Appeal was whether  the  college
    was required expressly to state that the  proposed  course  constituted
    academic progress or whether the mere issue of  a  CAS  constitutes  an
    assertion to that effect.  The court found that the mere issue of a CAS
    creates a presumption or expectation that the stated course constitutes
    academic progress.

19.  It is not entirely clear from the  current  determination  whether  the
    Judge is accepting  the  proposition  that  the  CAS  was  representing
    academic progress from previous studies but it is clear from  the  case
    of Pokhriyal that the issue of the CAS could be construed in that  way.



20.  The burden  of  the  concern  of  the  Judge  was  however  potentially
    120A(b)(ii) whether the study was at the same level was  whether  there
    was confirmation that it complemented the previous course.   The  Judge
    seems to take the view that the further study has nothing  to  do  with
    the previous unsuccessful study of the ACCA course.

21.  It is  perhaps  difficult  on  a  factual  basis  to  make  that  sharp
    distinction, given the language in the CAS  which  indicates  that  the
    student has covered some of the modules for which  he  is  prepared  to
    study tourism and hospitality management.  There would  therefore  seem
    to be some link between the previous studies and the  proposed  studies
    but that precise link  perhaps  was  not  examined  in  any  particular
    detail.

22.  The point, which is raised in  the  decision  letter,  is  simply  that
    there was no academic progress without any further consideration of the
    subtleties if there were.  Indeed as I have indicated the  refusal  was
    on the incorrect basis that the study was at a lower level.

23.  It is unclear from the judgment whether  the  Judge  is  first  of  all
    accepting that there was academic progress.  Secondly even if  he  were
    there is perhaps little analysis as to  whether  the  course  is  quite
    different or whether there are links with  the  proposed  course  which
    makes it complementary or having a connection with the former.

24.  It seems to me that as a matter of fairness those matters  should  have
    been considered in more detail.  The Judge, for  example,  comments  in
    paragraph 16 that the  appellant  is  not  re-sitting  examinations  or
    repeating modules.  It would seem however  that  he  may  be  repeating
    modules or at least dealing with modules that were encompassed  in  the
    previous course.  To say that it  was  a  completely  different  course
    without a factual analysis may not be accurate.

25.  It seems to  me  therefore  that  in  the  interests  of  fairness  the
    decision should be set aside.

26.  Given however the factual inaccuracies  in  the  original  decision  it
    seems to me that the original decision was fundamentally flawed  as  to
    the basis of the refusal particularly so in the light of Pokhriyal.

27.  In those circumstances the appeal should  be  allowed  to  the  limited
    extent that it shall be remitted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  a
    decision to be made upon the proper basis and in relation to the proper
    paragraphs in the Immigration Rules.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
