
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08125/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|No hearing                                    |Promulgated on               |
|11 October 2013                               |14 October 2013              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                      Mr C M G Ockelton, Vice President



                                   Between

                                  JIT MOHAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. The appellant, a national of India, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against the decision of the respondent on 26 February 2013 refusing  to
    grant him leave to remain on the basis of  fourteen  years'  residence.
    Judge Doyle dismissed his appeal.   The  appellant  now  has  leave  to
    appeal to this Tribunal.

 2. The judge dismissed the appeal on the ground that the appellant's entry
    to the United Kingdom, allegedly in 1997, was admittedly unlawful.   He
    regarded that as determinative and found no other relevant facts.   But
    in a case such as this, based on over fourteen  years'  residence,  the
    legality of presence here is not a  determining  factor.   It  is  thus
    clear that the judge erred in law, and it is not easy to see  that  the
    error can be cured on the basis of his determination.
 3. On 12 September  2013  I  wrote  to  the  parties'  representatives  as
    follows:-

        "For the reasons given in the grant of permission to appeal to  the
        Upper Tribunal in this case it is clear that the  decision  of  the
        First-tier Tribunal is based on an error of law and  cannot  stand.
        The Secretary of State has indicated, by  letter  dated  21  August
        2013, that that is so.


        The Secretary of State does not specifically consent to remittal to
        the First-tier Tribunal but this was a case in which the judge also
        refused to allow a substantial amount of evidence to be tendered on
        the ground that it was late.  In the circumstances it seems  to  me
        that a fresh hearing before the First-tier Tribunal is desirable.


        I therefore propose to set aside the determination of  Judge  Doyle
        and remit the appellant's appeal for determination by  a  different
        judge in the First-tier Tribunal.  Any proposals  to  the  contrary
        will be considered within 14 days of the date of this letter."


 4. No reply has been received.  I now set aside the determination of Judge
    Doyle and remit the appellant's appeal for determination by a judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal other than Judge Doyle.









                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 11 October 2013
