
[pic]
IAC-AH--V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08195/2014
     IA/08196/2014
     IA/08197/2014
     IA/08198/2014
     IA/08199/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18th November 2014             |On 10th December 2014             |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                 MS GA BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  DA & CEO
                          (& 3 dependent CHILDREN)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Claimants:     Ms Z Jacob (Counsel instructed by Jesuis solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision made by  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Herbert OBE) promulgated on 23rd  September  2014  in  which  he
    allowed the appeals under Article 8 ECHR.

 2. For ease of reference I shall refer to the parties as the "Secretary of
    State", who is the Appellant in this matter, and to the "Claimants".

 3. The Claimants are all members of the same family and  are  citizens  of
    Nigeria. "D" and "C" are the parents of J, G and a recently born  child
    H. Their  respective  dates  of  birth  are  16.8.2009,  15.4.2012  and
    7.5.2014. D was previously involved in a relationship  in  Nigeria  and
    Jan, the eldest child was born on 25.8.2007

 4. The Secretary of State refused their applications for indefinite  leave
    to remain and with reference to their claim outside of the Rules.   The
    Claimants did not fulfil the requirements under Appendix FM either as a
    partner or as a parent. It was accepted that the main Claimants were in
    a relationship akin to marriage. Ex 1 was considered but did not apply.
    The children were all under the age of 7 years and 276ADE did not apply



 5. The decision sets out findings of fact and credibility at paragraphs 14-
    18 and findings in relation  to  the  Law  at  paragraphs  19-21.   The
    Tribunal found that the Claimants could not meet the Rules,  considered
    the "Gulshan" test and then  went  on  to  a  second  stage  assessment
    following the 5 stages of Razgar. The Tribunal  also  considered  where
    the best interests of the children lie and the question of whether  the
    interference was proportionate. It found  that  the  interests  of  the
    children, in particular the eldest child Jan, who had lived in  the  UK
    for 7 years at the date of hearing, together with  the  impact  on  the
    main Claimant's father and step mother outweighed the  public  interest
    in removal.

 6. The Tribunal found that "D" was credible as to the fact  that  she  was
    the victim of rape and child  abuse  in  Nigeria,  that  she  knew  her
    partner C from Nigeria. They did not cohabit. Theirs was  a  subsisting
    relationship but was volatile and intermittent [14].  C had a  role  as
    father of the children. There are 4 children of whom 3 are children  of
    C and D. [14] D's natural father, a UK citizen, was born on  10.5.1938.
    He is elderly, in poor health, has restricted sight  and  diabetes  and
    requires some day to day care.  His wife who is D's step mother  is  71
    years of age, registered disabled and requires help in the house  [15].
    D and her children share the home of her father and stepmother  and  he
    provides financial support for her, her partner  and  the  children.  D
    provides help for her father with cooking, going to the local community
    centre, medical and other appointments  and  attending  to  his  toilet
    needs  at  night.  Although  the  Tribunal  acknowledged  contradictory
    evidence indicating that it was D who was dependent on her  father  for
    finance, accommodation and essentials for the children, this was in the
    context of her past struggle to make a proper home. The Tribunal  found
    there to be "overwhelming" evidence of dependency by her  father  on  D
    above and beyond the normal family ties. The  Tribunal  found  evidence
    that the presence of 4 children in the home added to the quality of the
    family life which would be disturbed by removal of the Claimants [15  &
    17]. There was no recourse to public funds by the  family  members.  At
    [16] the Tribunal found that Jan was established at school  where  both
    Claimants were known to have a role [17]. It found  that  the  children
    were integrated into the British Nigerian culture in the  UK  and  that
    removal would be a significant disruption to their lives, having  never
    travelled to or lived in Nigeria.  The  Tribunal  observed  that  there
    were considerable difficulties faced by children in readjusting to life
    in Nigeria, particularly in rural areas and was in no doubt that if the
    views of the children were canvassed, it would be expressed in terms of
    remaining in the UK [17 & 19f].

 7. In reaching these findings the Tribunal relied on the primary facts and
    its own view of the likely outcome for  the  children  if  returned  to
    Nigeria.

 8. The Tribunal found that the immigration history for both Claimants  was
    poor and that C in particular had  paid  scant  regard  to  immigration
    control and reporting conditions [18].

 9. In considering the appeal under  the  immigration  rules  the  Tribunal
    found that all Claimants failed  to  meet  the  rules.  It  found  that
    although Jan lived in the UK for nearly 7 years, she did not  meet  the
    Rules but came within the spirit of the old seven year rule  and  found
    that it was not reasonable to expect her to leave the UK [19a & b].  [I
    have numbered the paragraphs 19 a,b,c, etc in the absence of  numbering
    in the decision.]

10.  The Tribunal went on to consider the 5 questions in Razgar  [21].   It
    concluded that family and private life  was  established,  the  removal
    would have grave consequences for all four claimants in particular  the
    children and the bond broken with grandparents.  The  decision  was  in
    accordance with the law. In  terms  of  proportionality,  the  Tribunal
    found that the balance  was  in  favour  of  the  Claimants.  The  poor
    immigration history of the parents should not impact  on  the  children
    and weight was placed on the spirit of the seven year rule enshrined in
    Article 8.  C's immigration  history  was  poor  but  he  was  pursuing
    education at the time he failed to report.  He   sought  to  regularise
    his stay and maintain a relationship  with  his  children  [21b].   The
    Tribunal found the facts to be unusual and  exceptional  and  that  the
    removal would serve to penalise the vulnerable members of the family.

    Ground of application

11. In grounds of appeal the Secretary of State argued  that  the  Tribunal
    failed to follow Nagre as there was no consideration of "arguably  good
    grounds" for granting leave outside  of  the  Rules  and/or  compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised by the rules. Secondly,  that
    the Tribunal erred by finding there was a disproportionate interference
    with family life as the Claimants would return to Nigeria as  a  family
    unit. Thirdly, that the Tribunal failed  to  have  regard  to  Nasim  &
    Others (Article 8) [UKUT] 00025 (IAC) which emphasised the limited  use
    of Article 8 for private life. Forthly, the Tribunal had no  regard  to
    the approach in Zoumbas v. SSHD[2013] UKSC 74  as regards the rights of
    children who are not British citizens.

12. Permission was granted by First-tier Judge Parkes on 13th October  2014
    on all grounds.

The hearing

Preliminary issue

13. Mr Walker sought permission to amend the grounds of appeal  to  include
    further grounds that a) the Tribunal erred  in  failing  to  take  into
    account findings made in a previous first determination  in  accordance
    with Devaseelan, and b) the DNA evidence was incomplete as pages of the
    report were missing and it was unclear as it referred to Mr G.  Ottitie
    not Mr O. Ottitie. The Tribunal failed  to  make  a  clear  finding  in
    respect of that evidence.

14. Ms Jacob opposed both applications.

Decision re preliminary issue

15. I refused leave to amend the grounds of appeal.  In a previous decision
    the Tribunal dismissed D's appeal against  refusal  of  asylum  on  the
    grounds that she failed to establish  a  Convention  reason.   Although
    reference was made in the decision to her claim that in  2008  she  had
    been abused and mistreated in Nigeria, the Tribunal made no findings of
    fact or credibility findings in  respect  of  the  same.   I  found  no
    arguable basis in those circumstances for why the  first  determination
    should be followed. As to the second application, I found that  as  the
    incomplete DNA report was not a matter that was drawn to the Tribunal's
    attention, it could not be expected to deal with such a specific issue.
     Furthermore, I am satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  considered  the  DNA
    evidence,  notwithstanding  that  it  made  no  specific  finding,  and
    proceeded on the basis that the Claimant D was living with  and  caring
    for her recently discovered biological father.

Submissions

16. Mr Walker submitted that the main thrust of the appeal was the material
    misdirection  by  failing  to  identify  compelling  circumstances  not
    recognised by the Rules and the failure to follow  Zoumbas  as  to  the
    limited scope of private life for foreign children.   The  response  to
    the circumstances of D's father and step mother was proportionate given
    that none of the family had lawful leave in the UK.

17. Ms Jacob relied on her Rule 24 response which set out the main findings
    and conclusions in  the  decision.   She  further  submitted  that  the
    Tribunal  properly  took  into  account  the   circumstances   of   the
    grandparents in assessing family life of the decision [60].   The  care
    provided to D's father was relevant to economic issues  as  it  reduced
    the burden on the public purse.  The Tribunal made  reasoned  findings,
    as to interference to the children brought up in the UK, that were open
    to it on the evidence from the school.   The  Tribunal  had  regard  to
    differences as between the cultures in Nigeria  and  the  UK  based  on
    judicial experience.  The  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    grandparents constituted part of family life.  The Tribunal  identified
    compelling circumstances as set out at paragraph  22  of  the  Rule  24
    response.  The Tribunal applied the two stage  process  for  Article  8
    following Halemuddin.  The Tribunal was entitled to take  into  account
    that at the date of hearing the length of residence in the UK by eldest
    child met the 7 year period.  The facts in Zoumbas were  different  and
    the Tribunal correctly relied on ZH(Tanzania).

18. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision which I now give  with
    my reasons.

Discussion and decision

19. I am satisfied that the Tribunal's approach to Article 8  disclosed  no
    error of law (ground one). The position with regard to the  "Gulshan  &
    Nagre test" has now been clarified in R (on the application  of  Esther
    Ebun Oludoyi & Ors) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (Article 8 - MM (Lebanon) and Nagre) IJR [2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC)  which
    confirms the view expressed in  MM(Lebanon).   The  headnote  reads  as
    follows: There is nothing in R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720  (Admin),
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT
    640 (IAC) or Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014]  UKUT  00085  (IAC)
    that suggests that a threshold test was being suggested as  opposed  to
    making it clear that there was a need to look at the evidence to see if
    there was anything which has not already been adequately considered  in
    the context of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  which  could  lead  to  a
    successful Article 8 claim. These  authorities  must  not  be  read  as
    seeking to qualify or fetter the  assessment  of  Article  8.  This  is
    consistent with para 128 of R (MM & Others) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985,
    that there is no utility in imposing a further intermediate test  as  a
    preliminary to a  consideration  of  an  Article  8  claim  beyond  the
    relevant criterion-based Rule. As is held in  R  (Ganesabalan)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin), there is no prior  threshold  which  dictates
    whether the exercise of discretion should  be  considered;  rather  the
    nature of the assessment and the reasoning which  are  called  for  are
    informed by threshold considerations.



20. With regard to family life,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  was
    entitled to find family life existed over and above the "normal"  level
    of dependency as between D and her father. The Tribunal  found  that  D
    provides some "additional" care for her father by cooking, attending to
    toilet needs at night and taking him to appointments. There was  little
    independent evidence to support the care needs or medical conditions of
    the father, but it was open to the Tribunal to  make  this  finding  of
    family life and to take into account  the  impact  of  removal  on  the
    parties (Beoku-Betts v SSHD [2009] AC 115). There  was  no  medical  or
    other evidence from D's stepmother as to her medical condition  or  any
    restrictions.

21.  In dealing with the interests of the children the Tribunal  considered
    ZH (Tanzania) [19d] and UNHCR guidelines.  It concluded that removal of
    the family would not be in the interests of the  children,  or  of  the
    grandparents (to whom best  interest  principles  were  of  importance)
    [19f].  The Tribunal  accepted  that  the  children  were  not  British
    citizens, but placed weight on that fact that they had lived in the  UK
    all of their lives [19e].

22. The Tribunal followed all the stages in Razgar and  its  assessment  of
    proportionality was based on a  balancing  exercise.  The  question  of
    weight to attach to the various factors is one for the Tribunal.

23. However, in my view the Tribunal did err in its approach to the private
    lives of the children and its assessment of their best interests (Nasim
    & Others  (Article  8)  [UKUT]  00025  (IAC).  There  was  insufficient
    evidence before the Tribunal to reach a decision that the best interest
    of the children lie in remaining in the UK, and that that was a  factor
    capable of outweighing the  public  interest,  either  on  its  own  or
    together with the dependency of D's father. Aside  from  oral  evidence
    from the parents the Tribunal  had  a  primary  school  report  on  Jan
    stating that she was doing well.  There was no independent evidence  of
    social,  cultural  or  emotional  factors  to  support  the  Tribunal's
    findings. Furthermore, the Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons for
    the same in light of Zoumbas which focused on  the  importance  of  the
    rights of British children. The  Tribunal  failed  to  have  regard  to
    relevant case law including Azimi-Moyaed & Others EWCA Civ 550, Zoumbas
    (cited  above),  EV(Phillipines)  v  SSHD  2014  EWCA  Civ   874,   and
    SS(Nigeria) 2013 EWCA Civ 550.

24. The Tribunal failed in its Article  8  assessment  to  have  regard  to
    public  interest  factors  under  section  117B  of   the   Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

25. I find that there was a material error of law such that the decision is
    set aside.

26. I now go on to remake the decision having regard to the  findings  made
    on the evidence before the Tribunal.

27. In considering the best interests of children  a  distinct  enquiry  of
    both subjective and objective evidence is necessary. The best interests
    of young children under the age of 7 years are  generally  regarded  as
    remaining with both parents. The eldest is now  7  years  of  age.  The
    family would  be  returning  to  Nigeria  together  as  a  unit.  Their
    emotional and physical care and support comes  from  their  parents  at
    this young age and they are not regarded  as  having  established  peer
    relationships of  significance  at  this  age.  Seven  years  residence
    carries more significance when children have spent that period of  time
    in education and  developing  independent  lives  from  their  parents,
    generally a seven year period from  the  age  of  4  year  has  greater
    significance (Azimi-Moyaed).  The two elder children have just  entered
    the education system and  attend  a  nursery/infant  school.  Jan,  the
    eldest has just started school and has not entered into any  meaningful
    period of study nor social independence. Aside from the  oral  evidence
    of her parents there was a school report stating  that  she  was  doing
    well.  There was no other evidence before the Tribunal.  There  was  no
    evidence to indicate that she would be unable to continue her education
    successfully in Nigeria and/or that the younger  children  could  enter
    into the education system in Nigeria. There was  no  evidence  to  show
    that a return to Nigeria would have significantly  deleterious  effects
    on the children's education. There was no strong or compelling evidence
    to show that the children established  any  independent  private  life.
    There was no evidence to indicate that  the  welfare  of  the  children
    would be threatened by removal with their parents. I find that the best
    interests of the children lie in remaining with their parents.

28. Both parents were born and brought up in Nigeria. There was no evidence
    to indicate that they would not be able to adapt on return to  Nigeria,
    together with their young dependent children also Nigerian citizens and
    brought up in the British Nigerian culture. The judgment in Zoumbas  is
    highly relevant on the facts in so far as there  was  poor  immigration
    history, young children under  the  age  of  7  who  were  not  British
    citizens.

29. C would be in a similar position in Nigeria regarding employment as  he
    presently is  in  the  UK.   He  would  be  able  to  put  to  use  the
    qualifications obtained whilst in the UK. There is  no  reason  why  he
    could not continue to live separately from the rest of the family as he
    presently does and maintain his role as father to the  children.  There
    was no detailed evidence as to how financial support  was  provided  by
    the Claimant's father and/or how this could be maintained in  the  long
    term.  There was no evidence  that  the  Claimant's  father  could  not
    continue to provide financial support to the family in Nigeria.

30. The Claimants entered the UK illegally and have  for  the  majority  of
    time been unlawfully resident in the UK. The children were born in  the
    UK when both parents were aware of their precarious immigration status,
    and there was evidence that C  failed  to  report  to  the  immigration
    authorities even as recently as 2014, showing little regard.  Whilst  I
    fully endorse and accept that the children should not be  punished  for
    the actions of their parents, however, there is  insufficient  evidence
    even having regard to the interests of the  children  to  outweigh  the
    public interest in removal.  There is a considerable economic burden in
    educating four children in the  UK  who  do  not  have  entitlement  as
    British citizens. Rightly or wrongly this is a  significant  factor  in
    relation to children emphasised in the case law cited above.

31.  The Claimant's father can reasonably obtain the  necessary  care  from
    other members of the family or seek professional care to which  he  may
    be entitled through the NHS. Economic considerations are  not  relevant
    to the public interest as he is a British citizen. I find that his  ill
    health has  developed  more  recently  and  there  was  no  independent
    evidence detailing his care needs before the Tribunal. As grand parents
    contact can be maintained with the Claimants and their children through
    visits and other forms of communication. There was no  strong  evidence
    on which to support any family life  between  the  children  and  their
    grandparents.

32. I find that the interference having regard to all the factors including
    the children and the  care  of  grandparents  is  proportionate  having
    regard to the public interest in the maintenance of a fair and coherent
    system of immigration control.

33. Section 117b(6) of the 2002 Act (as amended) defines a  child  who  has
    resided in the UK for seven years as a "qualifying child". The  section
    provides that where it is not reasonable to expect that child to return
    to its country, there is no public  interest  in  removal.  This  is  a
    consideration to be taken into account when looking at Article 8 cases.
    There is no evidence to show that it  would  be  unreasonable  for  the
    eldest child or family to return to Nigeria or that it would result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences. I have had regard  to  this  section,
    however it does not alter my decision that in this appeal  the  balance
    lies in favour of the public interest in removal for all of the reasons
    already given.

    Decision

34. There is a material error of law in the decision. The decision  is  set
    aside. I remake the decision by substituting a decision dismissing  the
    Claimants appeals on Human Rights grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Claimants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Claimant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   There  are
children in these proceedings.



Signed        Date 18th November 2014

Judge GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 18th November 2014

Judge GA BLACK
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


