
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08786/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3 September 2014                             |On 3 October 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                 jamil ahmed

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Javed, Rice Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was born on 26  July  1976  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Pakistan.  He appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Henderson)
    against a decision of the respondent dated 12 April 2013 to refuse  him
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  that  his  removal
    would not breach Article 8 ECHR.  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the
    appeal in a determination promulgated on 30 May  2014.   The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal should be  set
    aside.   I  reach  that  conclusion  for  the  following  reasons.    A
    determination should clearly state the outcome of the appeal  and  give
    cogent reasons to explain and support that outcome.  That  is  not  the
    case with this determination.  At the end of  the  determination  under
    the heading "the Decision" Judge Henderson has written:

         The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules with  reference
         to Appendix FM.

         The appeal is dismissed under Article 8 of the ECHR and a grant  of
         discretionary leave of an appropriate period will normally follow.

 3. That latter sentence is ambiguous in any event and the main body of the
    text of the determination fails to provide adequate clarification.  The
    judge made findings adverse to the appellant's appeal  as  regards  the
    claimed genuineness of his relationship with his partner (the  sponsor)
    and her children.  At [57], the judge concluded that "[The sponsor  and
    children] are being used by the appellant in an effort to secure status
    in this country."  On the other hand, at  [45]  the  judge  found  that
    there had been little consideration by the Secretary of State  "of  the
    consequences of the removal of the appellant for the best interests  of
    the children in this appeal.  Both of the children are British citizens
    and, as far as I am aware, have lived in this country all their lives."
     She went on to observe that, "the children have  made  their  feelings
    very clear.  I have read through their  letters.   They  are  happy  to
    accept the appellant into their lives and report that he is playing  an
    active role in their lives."  Most significantly,  at  [53]  the  judge
    stated that her "overall conclusion is that  it  is  not  in  the  best
    interests of these children for the appellant to be removed from  their
    lives."  The last part of that sentence  is  particularly  significant;
    the judge did not simply find that the children's best interests  would
    be served by their  remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom  but  that  the
    appellant should remain with them.  Later in the determination at  [57]
    the judge went on to further conclude that the appellant  "is  pursuing
    his own agenda in this application and in this relationship.  I do  not
    accept taking into account all the factors  I  have  outlined  but  the
    decision to  remove  the  appellant  is  disproportionate."   The  last
    sentence may be taken as determinative of the  appeal  even  though  it
    appears contrary to the proposed grant of discretionary leave which the
    judge indicates should "normally follow".  Obviously, the interests  of
    the children are not a paramount consideration but may be outweighed by
    a  combination  of  other  countervailing  factors.   Here   the   only
    countervailing factor would appear to be the judge's concern  that  the
    appellant is cynically using the sponsor and the children as a means to
    stay in the United Kingdom.  Having found that it was important and  in
    the children's best interests for the appellant to remain part  of  the
    children's lives it is not at all clear why that single  countervailing
    factor should prevail.  The  judge  has  not,  for  example,  made  any
    findings as to the likely future of the appellant's  relationship  with
    the sponsor and the children; she has not found that, because he is not
    genuinely attached to them, the appellant would be likely  to  separate
    from the sponsor and the children in any event.

 4. Mr Javed urged me simply to remake the decision by allowing the  appeal
    but, having read the determination carefully, I am not at  all  certain
    as to whether Judge Henderson had intended to  allow  or  dismiss  this
    appeal.  I consider that the only proper course of action is for me  to
    set aside the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  and  to  direct
    that the decision be remade in that Tribunal  by  a  judge  other  than
    Judge Henderson.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.

DECISION

 5. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    30 May 2014 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  I
    direct that the appeal should be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal
    by a judge other than Judge Henderson.






Signed                              Date 20 September 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

