

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/08284/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 1 December 2016                            |On 20 December 2016          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |Rokib Hasan                                       |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. M Q Hassan of M Q Hassan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:


 1. The appellant appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Malone promulgated on 30 June 2016 by which  he
    decided that there was no valid appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT"). The judge decided the appeal on the papers  as  the  appellant
    had requested (see below). The judge's decision concerned a  Notice  of
    appeal lodged with the FtT on 26 February  2015,  section  2  of  which
    identified the decision sought to be appealed as a  decision  that  was
    dated 25 February 2015 and served on the same date and which related to
    an application made on 30 October 2012.

 2. In the respondent's appeal bundle, there were three decisions  made  by
    the respondent in February 2015, as described at my para 3 below.  None
    of them were dated 25 February 2015. The question therefore  arises  as
    to whether the appellant's appeal related to  all  three  decisions  or
    whether it related only to one of them and, if the latter,  which  one.
    In order to decide this question,  it  is  necessary  to  consider  the
    contents of the three decisions and  the  contents  of  the  Notice  of
    appeal and grounds of appeal.

 3. Before turning to the three decisions made in February 2015,  I  should
    say that, as the appeal concerns an application that  was  made  on  30
    October 2012, the amendments to s.82 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (the "2002 Act") made by the Immigration  Act  2014
    (the "2014 Act") do not apply.

 4. The three decisions made by the respondent in  February  2015  were  as
    follows:

    i.      A decision - undated - entitled: "Refusal  to  grant  leave  to
        remain" which stated that the appellant did not  have  a  right  of
        appeal. This decision refused an application for leave to remain as
        a Tier 4 (General) Student. The Tier 4 application was a  variation
        (dated 26 June 2014) of an earlier application made on  30  October
        2012.

            I shall hereafter  refer  to  this  decision  as  the  "Refusal
        Decision".  According to  the  respondent's  reply  (hereafter  the
        "Respondent's Reply") dated 24 November  2016,  this  decision  was
        prepared and printed on 13 January 2015 but  not  served  then,  to
        file or on the appellant but was placed on file ready to be  served
        alongside a decision to remove under s.10(1)(b) of the  Immigration
        and Asylum Act 1999 (the "1999 Act"). The Respondent's Reply stated
        that the Refusal Decision was served either  on  22  February  2015
        (the day the appellant was arrested)  or  two  days  later,  on  24
        February 2015. Para 6 of the grounds of appeal and para  1  of  the
        appellant's amended grounds in his judicial review claim (see  para
        8.xii below) state that the Refusal  Decision  was  served  on  the
        appellant on 25 February 2015.

    ii.     A decision dated 22 February 2015 to remove the appellant  from
        the United Kingdom made under s.10 of the 1999 Act  (form  "IS.151A
        Part 2") which stated that the appellant  had  a  right  of  appeal
        after he left the United Kingdom. I shall hereafter refer  to  this
        decision as the "Removal Decision".

    iii.    A document dated 22 February 2015 entitled: "Notice to a Person
        Liable to Removal" (form IS.151A) which stated that  the  appellant
        was "specifically  considered  a  person  who  has  overstayed  the
        permitted period of [his] leave...".

    The Removal Decision was taken on the basis of the  information  stated
    in the "Notice to a Person Liable to Removal" (form IS.151A)  dated  22
    February 2015.

 5. The Refusal Decision states that it was considered that letters  and  a
    bank statement from First Security Islami Bank Ltd in the name of  Mrs.
    Sofia Begum, the appellant's mother, submitted by the appellant in  his
    previous application of 30 October 2012 were false. In addition, as the
    appellant had stated in his variation application of 26 June 2014  that
    he had never knowingly used deception when seeking leave  to  enter  or
    remain, the  decision  maker  was  satisfied  that  he  had  also  used
    deception in his variation application of 26 June 2014.  The  Secretary
    of State was not prepared to exercise her discretion in his favour. His
    variation application was therefore refused under  para  245ZX(a)  with
    reference to para 322(1A) and  322(2)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  In
    addition, as he had not submitted a valid "Confirmation  of  Acceptance
    for Studies", his application was also refused under para 245ZX(c)  and
    245ZX(d) of the Immigration Rules.

 6. I turn to the Notice of appeal and the grounds of appeal. It is  to  be
    noted that:

    i.      As stated at para 1 above, section 2 of the  Notice  of  appeal
        identified the decision sought to be appealed as  a  decision  that
        was dated 25 February 2015 and served on the same date.

    ii.     Section 8 of the Notice of  appeal,  where  the  appellant  was
        required to state his grounds of appeal if his appeal related to  a
        non-asylum decision with which he disagreed,  stated:  "Please  see
        enclosed grounds of appeal".

    iii.    The grounds of appeal attached to the  Notice  of  appeal  only
        referred to the Refusal Decision. Para 6 of the grounds  of  appeal
        states that the appellant was served by hand on 25 February 2015 an
        undated refusal decision of his Tier 4 application.

    iv.      The  grounds,  in  effect,  contend  that   the   respondent's
        allegation, that the appellant had submitted false  documents,  was
        not in accordance with the law, erroneous in law and on  the  facts
        and in breach of the appellant's rights under Article 8. It is said
        that the respondent had not explained why  the  appellant  was  not
        given a right of appeal.

    v.      The Removal Decision is not mentioned in terms or  referred  to
        by implication anywhere in the Notice  of  appeal  or  the  grounds
        accompanying it.

 7. The judge decided that, as the appellant had  not  made  an  asylum  or
    human rights claim, the appellant could not rely upon  s.92(4)  of  the
    2002 Act. He therefore had no "in-country" right of appeal.  The  judge
    did not make it clear whether he considered that the Notice  of  appeal
    sought to appeal the Refusal Decision or the Removal Decision or both.

Immigration history and background

 8. The issue of jurisdiction that is before me is a simple  one  and  does
    not require all the information that I have set out at i.-xvii.  below.
    However, I have set out this detail for the reason  given  at  para  18
    below. The information has been obtained from  the  appellant's  appeal
    file and the Upper Tribunal's file in relation to his  judicial  review
    claim (see below):

    i.      On 5 August 2009, the appellant entered the United Kingdom with
        leave granted pursuant to entry clearance issued on 1  August  2009
        as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant valid until 31 October 2012.

    ii.     On 30 October 2012, the appellant applied for further leave  to
        remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.

    iii.    On 26 June 2014, he applied  to  vary  his  application  of  30
        October 2012 to an application for leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
        (General) Migrant. The respondent agreed to treat  his  application
        as varied.

    iv.     On 22 February 2015, the appellant was arrested.  It  is  clear
        that, on this date, the "Notice to  a  Person  Liable  to  Removal"
        dated 22 February 2015 (form  IS.151A)  and  the  Removal  Decision
        dated 22 February 2015 were served on him.

            According to the Respondent's Reply, following the  appellant's
        arrest, enquiries were made of the case database as to his  status.
        It was incorrectly inferred that the Refusal Decision prepared  and
        printed on 13 January 2015 had been served and that, as  there  was
        no  application  for  leave  since  then,  the  appellant  was   an
        overstayer. This is the reason why the "Notice to a  Person  Liable
        to Removal" dated 22 February 2015 (form IS.151A) stated  that  the
        appellant was an overstayer rather than - as had been intended -  a
        person considered to have used deception.

    v.      The next event was service of the Refusal Decision.  As  stated
        at para 4 above, this was served on the appellant (according to the
        respondent) either on 22 February 2015 or on 24 February  2015  and
        (according to the appellant) on 25 February 2015.

    vi.     On 26 February 2015, the appeal lodged with the FtT his  Notice
        of appeal, the salient contents of which I have described above.

    vii.    On 2 March 2015, the respondent issued removal  directions  for
        the applicant's removal from the United Kingdom on 8 March 2015  in
        a document entitled: "Removal Directions" (form IS.151D) (hereafter
        the "Removal directions").

    viii.   On 4 March 2015, the appellant brought a judicial review  claim
        in the Upper Tribunal (case  number:  JR-2627-2015).  According  to
        section 3 of the claim form and para 1 of  the  grounds  that  were
        lodged with the claim, the decisions sought to be  challenged  were
        as follows:

            a.   The undated Refusal Decision.

            b.   The "Notice to a Person Liable to Removal" (form  IS.151A)
             dated 22 February 2015.

            c.   The Removal Directions dated 2 March 2015.

            There were two grounds as follows: (1) that the respondent  had
        produced inadequate proof of the deception; and  (2)  that  it  was
        unfair to deprive the appellant of a right of appeal.

    ix.      On  1  May  2015,  the   Secretary   of   State   lodged   her
        Acknowledgement of Service and summary grounds of  defence  in  the
        judicial review proceedings. This states  that  the  appellant  had
        exercised his right of appeal against the  decision  served  on  24
        February 2015 which refused him leave. It then said: "The  decision
        of 24 January 2015 is also the subject of challenge in the  present
        judicial review proceedings".  However, as can  be  seen  from  the
        above chronology, there was no decision of  24  January  2015  and,
        furthermore, the judicial review claim and grounds attached made no
        mention of any decision of 24 January 2015.

    x.      On 28 April 2015, the respondent issued the  appellant  with  a
        "Notification to a Person Who  is  Liable  to  be  Detained"  (form
        IS.96) because he was "a person without leave who has  been  served
        with a notice of liability to removal".

    xi.     On 26 June 2015, the FtT sent the parties  in  the  appellant's
        instant appeal a Notice of Hearing (form IA37) for a hearing  on  5
        February 2016.

    xii.    On 9 September 2015, the appellant made an application  in  his
        judicial review proceedings (JR-2627-2015) to amend his grounds  of
        claim. The amendment application informed the  Upper  Tribunal  (at
        para 3) that "the [appellant] has been given a right of  appeal  by
        the First-tier Tribunal (IAC) against the  [Secretary  of  State's]
        decisions and has a substantive appeal hearing listed in the First-
        tier Tribunal for  5  February  2016".  Para  4  of  the  amendment
        application stated that, in the light of the appeal, the  appellant
        withdraws his grounds (1) and (2) in  his  judicial  review  claim.
        The amended grounds sought to challenge the following:

            a.   The decision to detain the appellant.

            b.   The decision to issue him with the  "Notice  to  a  Person
             Liable to Removal" (form IS.151A) dated 22 February 2015.

            c.   The Removal Directions dated 2 March 2015

            His amended grounds, in summary, were that:

            a)   The appellant was  unlawfully  detained  pursuant  to  the
             principle in R (Hardial Singh)  v  Governor  of  Durham  Prison
             [1983] EWHC 1 (QB) and other relevant authorities.

            b)   Due to the appellant being unlawfully detained, his rights
             under Article 5 of the ECR have been breached.

            c)   The Secretary of State had acted unlawfully in issuing the
             appellant with a "Notification to a Person Who is Liable to  be
             Detained" (form IS.96) dated 28 April 2015 was unlawful.

    xiii.   On 15 September 2015, the Upper Tribunal sent  to  the  parties
        the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge  Edwards  in  the  appellant's
        judicial review proceedings (JR-2627-2015) by which  Judge  Edwards
        refused the appellant's application for  permission  to  amend  the
        grounds, stating (at para (2) of his decision)  that  the  proposed
        additional grounds can be made the subject of a new application for
        judicial review proceedings and that there is  no  reason  why  the
        amended grounds sought to  be  relied  upon  could  not  have  been
        included in  the  application  as  originally  made.  He  therefore
        considered that the issue of transfer to the  High  Court  did  not
        arise. He also refused the application for permission to apply  for
        judicial review and certified the claim as "totally without  merit"
        stating as follows:

                       "(1) The [appellant] has a right of  appeal  to  the
                       First-tier Tribunal and has a hearing  listed  for  5
                       February 2016. Those proceedings are the  appropriate
                       forum for issues relating to his right to  remain  in
                       the United Kingdom. In the circumstances,  the  other
                       grounds are now academic."

      xiv.  On 5 February 2016, the appellant's appeal in the instant  case
        was heard before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Henderson  who
        adjourned the hearing. The appeal file contains a typed "File Note"
        which is unsigned but was plainly written by the  judge  who  heard
        the appeal on 5 February 2016. According to this "File Note"  which
        plainly summarises what transpired at the  hearing  on  5  February
        2016:

             a.    It  was  noted  and   accepted   by   the   respondent's
             representative that the appellant had a right of appeal as  the
             application was made prior to 2 March 2015.

            b.   It was also accepted by  the  respondent's  representative
             that the "Notice to a Person Liable to Removal" (form  IS.151A)
             was incorrectly issued.

            c.   The File Note states that the main issue in the  case  was
             whether the appellant had submitted false documents.

            d.   The respondent's representative sought an  adjournment  on
             the ground that the respondent's bundle of documents  that  had
             been sent to the Upper Tribunal on  3  February  2015  and  the
             appellant had not been received by the Upper  Tribunal  or  the
             appellant. The appellant opposed the adjournment request on the
             ground that he had already experienced a long delay  since  his
             initial application was made in 2012.

             e.    Whilst  the  judge  accepted  that  the  appellant   had
             experienced a long delay, she considered, having regard to  the
             overriding objective, that it was important for the FtT to have
             all necessary documents to deal  properly  with  the  issue  of
             false documents.

    xv.     On 21 May 2016 and in relation to the instant appeal,  the  FtT
        sent to the parties a "Notice of  Adjourned  Hearing"  (form  IA42)
        informing them that the appeal was listed for  hearing  on  9  June
        2016.

    xvi.    On 1 June 2016, the FtT received a letter  dated  27  May  2016
        from the appellant requesting that his appeal  be  decided  on  the
        papers because he had insufficient funds to pay for representation.

    xvii.   On 15 June 2016, Judge Malone decided the instant appeal on the
        papers. As stated earlier, he concluded that  there  was  no  valid
        appeal.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me, Mr Hassan submitted that,  as  the  appellant
    had made a valid in-time application on 30 October 2012 which he  later
    varied, his leave was extended under s.3C of the Immigration  Act  1971
    (the "1971 Act"). His detention was therefore wrong. The  Secretary  of
    State had accepted that he was not an overstayer.  Although  Mr  Hassan
    did not have the papers in the appellant's judicial review proceedings,
    he  submitted  that  it  had  been  accepted  in  the  judicial  review
    proceedings that the appellant had a right  of  appeal.  The  Order  of
    Judge Edwards stated that the appellant had a right of appeal.

10. Mr Hassan  asked  me  to  consider  "these  facts  and  circumstances".
    Although he said that he accepted that there was  no  jurisdiction,  he
    asked me to make a direction to the respondent to give the appellant  a
    right of appeal as the respondent had accepted in the  judicial  review
    proceedings.

11. I announced that the Tribunal had  no  jurisdiction  to  entertain  the
    appeal for reasons to be given in writing.

Assessment

12. It is clear from the File Note that the appellant believed that he  had
    a substantive hearing and that the judge deciding  his  appeal  on  the
    papers would be considering his substantive challenge  to  the  Refusal
    Decision. Judge Malone took the jurisdiction point without  any  notice
    to the appellant. In view of the  contents  of  the  File  Note,  I  am
    satisfied that the decision of Judge Malone to  take  the  jurisdiction
    issue without notice to the parties amounts  to  procedural  unfairness
    amounting to an error of law. I therefore set  aside  his  decision.  I
    proceed to re-make the decision on the appellant's appeal.

13. As the case before me is a statutory appeal, the  question  whether  or
    not the appellant has a right of appeal depends on whether there  is  a
    right of appeal under the relevant legislation. Jurisdiction cannot  be
    agreed between the parties, nor can  any  considerations  such  as  any
    perception of unfairness have any bearing on whether or not there was a
    right of appeal (see, for example, Virk v SSHD [2013]  EWCA  Civ  652).
    The Tribunal is a creature of statute.  Unless  there  is  a  right  of
    appeal under relevant legislation, the appellant cannot obtain a  right
    of appeal because the parties conceded the issue. Accordingly, the fact
    that the respondent, the appellant and even the judge at the hearing on
    5 February 2016 all accepted that there would be a substantive  hearing
    cannot confer on the Tribunal jurisdiction to hear an appeal  if  there
    was in fact no right of appeal in law.

14. The following are my reasons for concluding that the appellant does not
    have a right of appeal  and  therefore  there  is  no  jurisdiction  to
    entertain this appeal:

    i.      On any proper and reasonable construction  of  the  appellant's
        Notice of appeal and grounds of appeal, the Notice of appeal sought
        to appeal against the Refusal Decision. There was no mention of the
        Removal Decision in the grounds of appeal in terms, nor can  it  be
        said that the grounds sought by implication to appeal  the  Removal
        Decision. To the contrary, the complaint in the grounds  of  appeal
        included a complaint that the respondent had not explained why  the
        appellant did not had a right of appeal,  a  description  which  is
        consistent with the contents of the Refusal Decision  but  not  the
        Removal Decision because the Removal Decision informed him that  he
        did have a right of appeal which was exercisable after he had  left
        the United Kingdom. There was nothing in the grounds of appeal that
        challenged the decision that his right of  appeal  was  exercisable
        after he had left the United Kingdom.

    ii.     I have therefore decided that the appeal related to the Refusal
        Decision.

    iii.    Given that the appellant had not made an asylum or human rights
        claim, he could not rely upon s.92(4) of the 2002 Act. Accordingly,
        s.92(4) was not an avenue by which he could argue that  he  had  an
        "in-country" right of appeal or any right of appeal.

    iv.     The  Removal  Decision  was  made  on  22  February  2015.  The
        chronology is that this decision was served on the appellant on  22
        February  2015.   Whether   the   Removal   Decision   was   served
        simultaneously with the Refusal  Decision  or  two  or  three  days
        before the Refusal Decision, the effect  of  the  Removal  Decision
        being served is that the appellant's leave, which had been extended
        under s.3C of  the  1971  Act  up  until  service  of  the  Removal
        Decision, was invalidated pursuant to s.10(8) of the 1999 Act.

            Since the invalidation of the appellant's leave  was  automatic
        by operation of s.10(8) upon service of the  Removal  Decision,  it
        simply cannot be said that the Refusal Decision was  a  refusal  to
        vary as a consequence of which the  appellant  had  no  leave.  The
        Refusal Decision had  no  effect  on  the  appellant's  leave.  Put
        another way, the fact that the appellant was left with no leave did
        not  arise  from  the  Refusal  Decision  but  from  the  automatic
        operation of s.10(8) of the 1999 Act upon service  of  an  entirely
        different decision, namely the Removal Decision. Thus, the  Refusal
        Decision was not an immigration decision that fell within the ambit
        of s.82(2)(d) of the 2002 Act.

      v.    The respondent plainly erred, as she accepts, in stating in the
        "Notice to a Person Liable to Removal" dated 22 February 2015 (form
        IS.151A)  that  the  appellant  was  an  overstayer   given   that,
        irrespective of  whether  the  Refusal  Decision  and  the  Removal
        Decision were served simultaneously or two or three days apart,  he
        was not an overstayer at the time that  the  "Notice  to  a  Person
        Liable to Removal" was served on 22 February 2015.

            However, this error was immaterial to the issue of whether  the
        appellant had a  right  of  appeal.  This  is  because,  given  the
        automatic operation  of  s.10(8)  of  the  1999  Act,  the  Refusal
        Decision did not fall within the ambit of s.82(2)(d)  of  the  2002
        Act as explained at para 14.iv above and s.92(4) of  the  2002  Act
        did not apply as explained at para 14.iii above.

    vi.     Even if the appeal related to the Removal Decision (contrary to
        what I have said in para 14.i above), the  appellant  still  cannot
        rely upon s.92(4) because he had not made an asylum or human rights
        claim

15. Whilst it appears that the FtT overlooked dealing  with  the  issue  of
    jurisdiction  as  a  preliminary  matter  and  proceeded  to  list  the
    appellant's appeal for substantive hearing on 5 February 2016,  it  may
    be said that the appellant and  his  representatives  as  well  as  the
    Secretary of State in her summary grounds of defence  in  the  judicial
    review claim acted prematurely in assuming that the appellant had an in-
    country right of appeal, apparently on the strength of  the  fact  that
    his appeal had been listed for substantive hearing.  Until  the  appeal
    proceedings were completed in the FtT, they could not, and should  not,
    have acted on the assumption that no jurisdiction point would be  taken
    given that there was no judicial decision made to the effect  that  the
    FtT did have jurisdiction. In the absence of such a judicial  decision,
    even if the FtT had failed to take the jurisdiction point  following  a
    substantive hearing, the Upper Tribunal would have been obliged  to  do
    so if either party had been granted permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal (see Virk).

16. I have considered whether to re-convene the appeal before me  in  light
    of the fact that I have set out (above) information obtained  from  the
    Upper Tribunal's file in the appellant's judicial review claim, much of
    which was not known to Mr Hassan because he told me  that  he  did  not
    have the appellant's papers  in  his  judicial  review  claim.  I  have
    decided that this is unnecessary because the reasons for my decision on
    the jurisdiction issue, which are set out at paras  13  and  14  above,
    were all matters that were  addressed  at  the  hearing  as  they  were
    plainly raised in the Respondent's Reply. The wider information I  have
    set out in the chronology at para 8 above has no  significance  to  the
    issue of jurisdiction before me. In particular, it can be seen that the
    Secretary of State did not concede in the judicial  review  proceedings
    that the appellant had a right of appeal. Like the  appellant  and  his
    representatives, she merely assumed (prematurely) that he had  a  right
    of appeal in light of the fact that the FtT had listed the  appellant's
    appeal for substantive hearing. In turn, Judge Edwards relied upon what
    he was told by the parties, that the appellant had a  right  of  appeal
    before the FtT. His decision is not before me nor could it be. Finally,
    none of these matters can confer a right of appeal if  none  exists  in
    law under the relevant legislation, as I have explained at paras 13 and
    14 above.

17. Mr Hassan asked me to give a direction to the respondent  to  give  the
    appellant a right of appeal because, in his submission,  the  Secretary
    of State had accepted in  the  judicial  review  proceedings  that  the
    appellant had a right of appeal. However, as I have said above,  it  is
    not the case that the Secretary  of  State  conceded  in  the  judicial
    review proceedings that the appellant had a right of appeal.  She  made
    the  same   premature   assumption   that   the   appellant   and   his
    representatives appeared to have made, that he  did  have  a  right  of
    appeal simply because  his  appeal  had  been  listed  for  substantive
    hearing. At the time when the Secretary  of  State  filed  her  summary
    grounds of defence in the judicial review claim and the appellant  made
    his application to amend his grounds in the judicial review claim,  the
    hearing that was the subject of the File  Note  had  not  taken  place.
    Further, and in any event, there is simply no legal basis upon which  I
    could give such a direction, not least because  the  appellant  has  no
    right of appeal. Not even a general perception of  unfairness  or  that
    "something may have gone wrong" can found the legal  basis  for  giving
    such a direction.

18. It is clear from Mr  Hassan's  submissions  that  the  appellant  feels
    aggrieved on account of the mistakes that he perceives have  been  made
    in his case. It is largely for this reason that I have taken  the  time
    and trouble to collect the information I have set out at para 8  above,
    if only to demonstrate that I have considered all relevant material and
    not overlooked anything. I make the point that, in my view and for what
    it is worth, I do not consider that the outcome of his judicial  review
    claim could have been any different even if grounds (1) and (2) had not
    been withdrawn. Ground 1,  which  took  issue  with  the  Secretary  of
    State's case that the appellant had submitted false documents and  used
    deception, could not  have  succeeded  because  the  appellant  has  an
    alternative remedy, in that, he can bring an appeal against the Removal
    Decision after he has left the United Kingdom (R (Mehmood & Ali) v SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 744). He still has that alternative remedy.  Ground  2,
    which took issue with the fact  that  there  was  no  right  of  appeal
    against the Refusal Decision, could  not  have  succeeded  (again,  see
    Mehmood and Ali).

      Decision


    The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law such  that  it  falls  to  be  set
    aside. The Upper Tribunal set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and proceeded to re-make  the  decision  on  the  appeal.  The
    decision is that the appellant does not have a right of appeal  against
    the respondent's decision.




[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill               Date: 17 December 2016
