
                                                                   [pic]
Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: IA/08717/2013
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined at Field House                     |Notice sent                  |
|On:  14 October 2013                          |On: 14 October 2013          |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                               Mr Tariq Idrees
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                          NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND
                   REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. He appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of 6  March  2013.
    The First-tier Tribunal dismissed this appeal in a determination  of  28
    August 2013. Permission to appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    was granted on 20 September 2013.

 2. By way of a letter to the Upper  Tribunal  dated  11  October  2013  the
    appellant's legal representatives state as follows:

       "Our client has informed us that he wishes to  withdraw  his  appeal
       and will  not  pursue  the  matter  any  further.  He  submitted  an
       application for leave to remain whilst the current appeal matter was
       pending and wishes to pursue that matter. Please  amend  your  files
       accordingly and acknowledge receipt of this letter."

 3. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party  to  withdraw  its
    case. Having carefully considered the facts of this appeal as  a  whole,
    and observing that (i) the appellant is legally represented and (ii) the
    Secretary of State was successful before the First-tier Tribunal, I give
    consent to the appellant to withdraw his case.

 4. Accordingly with my consent, and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  this  appeal  is  recorded  as
    "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal".  This  is  a  Notice
    pursuant to rule 17(5) to inform the parties that the  appellant's  case
    is withdrawn.

 5. The effect of the  appellant's  case  being  withdrawn  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper  Tribunal  are  at  an
    end. There is no appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision shall stand.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 14 October 2013











































