
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08556/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 March 2015                     |On 17 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               SHAHZAD YOUSAF
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No attendance


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                Given orally at the hearing of 20 March 2015

Introduction

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department. I shall refer to Mr Yousaf as the claimant herein.

 2. Notice of the hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  sent  to  the
    claimant's legal representatives on 10  February  2015.  Despite  this,
    neither the claimant nor his representatives appeared  at  the  hearing
    today. However, on  the  morning  of  the  hearing  and  in  breach  of
    Directions the Tribunal received a Rule 24 response  "and  submissions"
    from the claimant, the terms of which make it  clear  that  the  he  is
    aware of the date of the hearing and that he has chosen not  to  attend
    (see paragraph 9 thereof). In all the circumstances I admitted the Rule
    24 response, without  objection,  and  concluded  it  to  be  just  and
    appropriate to proceed with the hearing in the absence of the  claimant
    or his legal representatives.

 3. The claimant is a national of Pakistan born on 14 June  1985.   He  was
    originally granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as a student until
    20 November 2010, such leave being subsequently  extended  on  numerous
    occasions and last being conferred until 25 March 2012.

 4. On 24 March 2012, i.e. the day before the claimant's leave expired,  he
    made an application for further leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)
    Student.  When doing so he relied, inter alia, upon an English language
    test certificate provided by ETS ("TOEFL test").

 5. The Secretary of State refused this application in  a  decision  of  21
    December 2012, stating as follows when doing so:

         "The March 3, 2012 TOEFL test scores for Shahzad Yousaf  have  been
         placed on hold by ETS because of inappropriate activity in the test
         centre.  No specific evidence of wrong doing was found for  Shahzad
         Yousaf, however to ensure the validity of TOEFL  scores,  the  test
         taker is being asked to sit the test again at no  additional  cost.
         Therefore you should not consider  these  scores  provided  by  the
         applicant as valid."

 6. The claimant appealed this decision to the First-tier  Tribunal.   That
    appeal was heard by Judge M A Khan on 8 April 2013  and  allowed  in  a
    decision promulgated on 16 April 2013. In his determination Judge  Khan
    concluded that the Secretary of State's decision was vitiated by common
    law unfairness because (i) the claimant had not been  informed  of  the
    irregularities regarding his English  language  results  prior  to  his
    application having been refused and  (ii)  in  such  circumstances  the
    claimant ought to have been given an opportunity to  re-sit  this  test
    prior to  a  decision  having  been  made  on  his  application.  As  a
    consequence, Judge Khan 'remitted' the matter back to the Secretary  of
    State to lawfully consider the claimant's application of 24 March 2012.



 7. It is prudent to observe at this stage  that  in  a  skeleton  argument
    provided for the purpose of the hearing before Judge Khan the  claimant
    said as follows:

         "As  the  appellant  is  innocent  of  any  practice  that  led  to
         invalidation of his English test results, and was ignorant for  the
         factual situation that led to the invalidation until after  he  was
         served with a decision, he should  be  offered  a  reasonable  time
         within which to sit and provide  evidence  of  proficiency  in  the
         English language at the required level.  The appellant has arranged
         to sit a test on 11 May 2013 and it is respectfully requested  that
         the appellant be allowed 28 days after that date of  the  test  for
         him to provide the evidence." (emphasis added)

 8. Judge Khan does not state that he found the claimant's original English
    language test to be valid. Had he found them to be so it  is  difficult
    to understand how, and why, he would have allowed  the  appeal  on  the
    basis he did, rather than simply concluding that the claimant  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules without the need to  undertake  a
    further English language test.

 9. Moving forward in time,  the  claimant's  application  was  once  again
    refused by the Secretary of State in a decision  of  28  January  2014,
    which stated as follows:

         "You have claimed 30 points for your Confirmation of Acceptance for
         Studies (CAS).  However, the Secretary of State  is  not  satisfied
         that you are either competent in English language at minimum  level
         B2 of the  Common European Framework  of  reference  for  languages
         (CEFR)  or  that  you  are  a  person  who  meets  an   alternative
         requirement.  The Secretary of State  is  therefore  not  satisfied
         that you have met the requirements for  30  points  to  be  awarded
         under Appendix A and Appendix O of the Immigration Rules."

10. Later in this same decision the following is said:

         "At  your  allowed  appeal  promulgated  on  16  April   2013   the
         Immigration Judge determined that you should be allowed  a  further
         opportunity to take another English language test.

         On 12 August 2013 you were sent a  letter  confirming  you  had  3c
         leave whilst the appeal was still outstanding  and  you  were  also
         requested to provide details of your new English language test.

         Royal Mail Track and Trace shows that this letter was delivered  on
         20 August 2013 - this letter would  enable  you  to  obtain  a  new
         passport  as you requested and  thus  enable  you  to  take  a  new
         English test.

         Five months have passed since this letter was delivered and we have
         still not received any details of a new English language test taken
         by yourself.

         Therefore you have not met the requirements and 0 points have  been
         awarded for your CAS."

11. On the same date the Secretary of State made a decision to  remove  the
    claimant  pursuant  to  section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

12. Undeterred by the aforementioned rationale the claimant again  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal. This appeal was heard on 14 October 2014 by
    Judge Hussain and allowed in a determination promulgated on 26 November
    2014.  There are a number of pertinent features to the determination of
    Judge Hussain:

      i) There is  no reference within this determination  to  the  original
         decision of Judge Khan;

     ii) There is no reference within the determination to the fact that the
         Secretary of State had sent a letter to the claimant on  12  August
         2013 requesting details of the "new English language test":

    iii) There is no reference in the determination to the 28  January  2014
         refusal decision i.e.  the decision under appeal.

13. In his determination Judge Hussain concluded, in paragraphs 10 and  11,
    as follows:

         "10. There is nothing to suggest that on the face of it, any of the
            appellant's documents are not  reliable.  The  appellant's  CAS
            very clearly records the documents against which he was offered
            a place which includes his TEOFL results. The respondent  seeks
            to  undermine  these  results  relying  on  some  result  of  a
            verification check.

         11.  I have considered the respondent's bundle page by page and was
            not able to find any evidence  of  correspondence  between  the
            respondent and TOEFL. Mere assertion in the refusal  letter  in
            view (sic) is not enough to undermine the appellant's  evidence
            that the document is reliable."

14. For this reason the judge concluded at paragraph 14 that  the  claimant
    met the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

15.  In  an  alternative  finding,  set  out  in  paragraph   13   of   his
    determination, the judge also concluded that the Secretary of State had
    acted unfairly in determining the claimant's application prior  to  him
    having sat for a further English language test; stating as follows when
    doing so:

         "The appellant's life cannot be kept on hold until  that  situation
         is clarified. In my view, the proper  decision  would  either  have
         been to hold on to the appellant's application until the results of
         that  testing  is  known  or  to  have  granted   the   appellant's
         application."

16. The Secretary of State sought and obtained permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, such  permission  being  granted  by  Designated  Judge
    Garratt in a decision of 27 January 2015.  Thus the matter came  before
    me.

Error of Law

17. The grounds of appeal make two discrete points. First, in  paragraph  4
    of the grounds, it is said;

         "The appellant in this case previously provided a test  of  English
         as a  foreign  language  (TOEFL)  certificate  in  support  of  his
         application, however, TOEFL have verified the scores as invalid and
         require the appellant to retake the TOEFL English language test. As
         such, the English language requirement could not be  satisfied  and
         the appellant's application was refused."

18. Second, in paragraph 8 of the grounds the Secretary of State asserts:

         "The findings made at [12] and [13] make clear that the FTT made an
         error of fact. The FTT clearly understood that  the  appellant  had
         not been given the opportunity to retake the English language test.
          This is factually incorrect."

19. Having carefully considered the facts of  the  case  as  a  whole,  the
    submissions made on behalf of the Secretary of State  and  the  written
    Rule 24 response submitted by the claimant, I conclude that the  First-
    tier Tribunal's determination contains  an  error  of  law  capable  of
    affecting the outcome of the appeal.

20. I do so  for  the  following  reasons.  First,  having  considered  the
    determination as a whole I find that there is a clear  failure  by  the
    First-tier to correctly  identify,  or  consider,  the  decision  under
    appeal in these proceedings i.e. that of 28 January 2014.  Paragraph  1
    of the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  sets  out  the  relevant
    history of the claimant in the United  Kingdom.  There  is  no  mention
    therein of the decision under appeal. Paragraph 2 of the  determination
    reads as follows:

         "The respondent's grounds and reasons for the decision are set  out
         in the refusal letter of 21 December 2012."

21. This is not accurate and no reference is made thereafter to there being
    a further decision made by the Secretary of State  on  the  28  January
    2014.

22. Second, there is no reference in the determination to  the  conclusions
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan. This may be symptomatic of the First-
    tier Tribunal misunderstanding the decision that was  under  challenged
    before it. Nevertheless, it fell into error by failing to take  account
    of the fact that there had already been a  judicial  decision  made  in
    relation to the Secretary of State's refusal of 21  December  2012.  In
    particular the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  address  the  issue  of
    whether there had been any explicit  or  implied  acceptance  in  Judge
    Khan's determination of the invalidity the TOEFL results of March 2012.
      Absent  identifying  the  appropriate   starting   point   for   such
    consideration, any conclusion by the Tribunal in 2014 must  be  founded
    on an error and be unsustainable.

23. It is to the  aforementioned  two  matters  that  paragraph  4  of  the
    Secretary of State's grounds of appeal go.

24. Third - and relating to an alternative finding made by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in paragraph 12 of its determination -  the  Tribunal  further
    erred in failing to take account of the fact that a letter was sent  by
    the Secretary of State to the claimant on 12 August 2013. The provision
    of this letter goes  directly  to  the  consideration  of  whether  the
    Secretary of State acted in  a  manner  which  can  be  categorised  as
    procedurally unfair.

25.  For  the  aforementioned  reasons  I  conclude  that  the   First-tier
    Tribunal's determination is vitiated by legal error and I set it aside.



Re-making of Decision

26. Moving on, I see no necessity to  adjourn  this  hearing  in  order  to
    undertake the remaking of the decision under appeal.  The claimant  has
    chosen not to attend the hearing and relies on written  representations
    made on his behalf. The directions sent to the parties with  the  grant
    of permission on 29 January 2015 make clear  that  the  parties  should
    prepare for the hearing before the Upper Tribunal: "on the basis  that,
    if the Upper Tribunal decides to set aside  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, any evidence, including oral  evidence,  that  the
    Upper Tribunal may need to  consider  if  it  decides  to  re-make  the
    decision can be so considered at the hearing."  The  claimant  has  not
    sought to produce any additional evidence before  me  and  in  my  view
    justice does not require an adjournment  either  for  the  claimant  to
    appear at the hearing or for further evidence to be produced.

27. The first question I must ask myself is  whether,  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities,  the  claimant  satisfies  the   requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules.

28. It is not in dispute that the claimant is  required  by  the  Rules  to
    submit to  the  Secretary  of  State  a  valid  English  language  test
    certificate of the type identified in the two  refusal  decisions.  The
    claimant produced, with his application of 24 March  2012,  an  English
    Language test certificate from ETS - an approved English language  test
    provider at that time - dated 3 March 2012. However, by  the  time  the
    Secretary of State considered this application on 21 December 2012  ETS
    had treated these test scores as being "not valid". This was not  as  a
    consequence of any reason directly attributable to  the  claimant,  but
    rather because of "inappropriate activity at the test centre" at  which
    the claimant undertook his English language test.

29. In his Rule 24 response the claimant asserts that it was wrong for  the
    Secretary of State to  accept  the  test  provider's  request  for  the
    claimant's English language test results to be  treated  as  withdrawn,
    when there was no evidence of wrong doing on his behalf.  I  find  this
    submission to be misconceived.

30. As of the date of the Secretary of State's initial consideration of the
    claimant's application i.e. on 21 December 2012, the  English  language
    test certificate provided by the claimant was not valid.  The  validity
    of this test certificate was not a matter for the  Secretary  of  State
    but for the author of the test  certificate.  The  Secretary  of  State
    merely acts on the information before her,  which  was  that  the  test
    provider had treated the claimant's test results as  being  not  valid,
    pending him undertaking a further test.  As regards the  available  and
    appropriate remedy against the decision of 21 December  2012,  that  is
    precisely as identified by Judge Khan in his determination.

31. Judge Khan did not allow the claimant's appeal against the decision  of
    21 December 2012 on the basis that the English language certificate  of
    3 March 2012 was valid, but because the Secretary of  State  had  acted
    unfairly in not giving the claimant an opportunity to obtain a  further
    English language test certificate (undertake a further test)  prior  to
    the determination of his application of 24 March 2012. This was exactly
    the position the claimant advocated in  his  skeleton  argument  before
    Judge Khan's  Tribunal  and  it  is  the  invalidity  of  the  3  March
    certificate that underpins the entirety of the conclusions on the issue
    of fairness made by Judge Khan.

32. The fact that Judge Khan allowed the appeal against the decision of  21
    December 2012 does not somehow reinvigorate the validity of the English
    language test certificate of 3 March 2012 that was otherwise not valid.



33. The claimant has had ample opportunity since the determination of Judge
    Khan to obtain a further relevant English language test certificate but
    he has chosen not to take such opportunity.  As  of  the  date  of  the
    decision under appeal i.e. 28 January 2014, the Secretary of State  did
    not have before her a valid English language test certificate  relating
    to the claimant.

34. Consequently, the claimant could not at that time,  and  still  cannot,
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and the  appeal  brought
    on this ground must be dismissed.

35. Turning to the issue of fairness, the  claimant  must  have  been  well
    aware as of the date of the determination of Judge Khan in April  2013,
    that he  was  required  to  submit  a  further  English  language  test
    certificate to the Secretary of State.

36. In a letter sent to the claimant on 12 August  2014  the  Secretary  of
    State confirmed to the claimant that  he  had  section  3C  leave,  and
    requested details of the new English language test  that  the  claimant
    sought to rely upon in his outstanding application;  the  Secretary  of
    State therein reminding the claimant of the  need  to  provide  further
    English language test results. She also acknowledged her  awareness  of
    the need for the claimant to obtain a new passport, but  observed  that
    the letter of 12 August would be sufficient to allow him to do so.

37. The refusal decision of 28 January 2014 identifies that the  letter  of
    12 August 2013 was sent by "Royal Mail  track  and  trace",  which  had
    shown the letter to have been delivered on 20 August 2013. The fact  of
    this letter having been delivered has not been the subject  of  dispute
    in these proceedings.

38. The Secretary of State subsequently waited a further five months before
    making the  decision  of  28  January  2014  refusing  leave.  In  such
    circumstances it cannot be said, in my  view,  that  the  Secretary  of
    State acted unfairly in making a decision on 28 January 2014 absent any
    further provision by the claimant of a relevant English  language  test
    certificate.  This is particularly so in light of  the  constraints  on
    the procedural fairness grounds when deployed in  Points  Based  System
    cases, as identified by the Court of Appeal in EK (Ivory Coast) v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1517. For this reason I dismiss the appeal  brought  on
    procedural fairness grounds.

39. There were no other grounds pursued at the hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and it is not said in  the  Rule  24  response  that  the
    claimant pursues  any  other  ground  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.  In
    particular, it is not said that the claimant pursues any  human  rights
    grounds. I conclude in all the circumstances that no other grounds  are
    now being pursued.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.  Upon  remaking
the decision under appeal for myself I dismiss the claimant's (Mr  Yousaf's)
appeal against the Secretary of State's decisions of 28 January 2014.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 26 March 2014

