
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08822/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23 October 2013                              |On 11 November 2013        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON
                         UPPER Tribunal JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                      GABRIEL BERNETTA ELAINE CAMPBELL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Jamaica  born  in  1983.   She  appealed
    against a decision of the Respondent made on 5 March 2013 to refuse her
    application to  vary  her  leave  to  remain  as  a  spouse  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. She appealed.  At the hearing at Hatton Cross on 30  July  2013  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Sweet  the  Appellant  attended.   She
    renewed the application for an adjournment which had been made  by  her
    solicitors on 15 July 2013, submitting that her husband was  unable  to
    attend the hearing as he was abroad on holiday and her solicitors  were
    not able to represent her on that day.

 3. The judge refused the adjournment request for the same  reason  as  was
    given by a judge on the papers on 19 July 2013, namely,  the  Appellant
    had had sufficient time to give dates to avoid since notice of  hearing
    was sent out in April 2013 (paragraph [12] of the  determination).   It
    was noted from the travel documents that the booking  for  the  holiday
    had been made in August 2012.  The judge was  "satisfied  that  a  fair
    hearing of this appeal could still proceed" [12].

 4. The judge went on to dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 5. The Appellant sought permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  on  9
    September 2013.

 6. There were three points.  First, the judge was wrong  to  proceed  with
    the hearing in circumstances in which it was  clear  that  the  foreign
    holiday  had  been  booked  before  the  immigration  decision  by  the
    Respondent had been made.  It was also wrong in  the  circumstances  to
    have taken against the Appellant's credibility that neither her  spouse
    nor her solicitor attended the hearing.

 7. Further, the judge  failed adequately to deal with Article 8 ECHR.

 8. We noted a Rule 24 response from the  Respondent  (19  September  2013)
    which stated that the error of law application was not opposed and that
    the Tribunal was invited to determine the  appeal  with  a  fresh  oral
    hearing.

 9. In light of that reply and noting that the error of law hearing was set
    for 1400 hours we were concerned to avoid an unnecessary journey by the
    Appellant who lives in Buckinghamshire, and by her solicitors.  To that
    end we called the case at 1000 hours when we confirmed from Mr  Bramble
    that it was agreed that the judge had materially  erred  in  proceeding
    with  the  hearing  in  the  absence  of  the  spouse  and   that   the
    determination be set aside  for  rehearing.   With  his  agreement  the
    Appellant and her solicitors were contacted  and  told  they  need  not
    attend.

10. The test to decide whether the  judge  erred  in  law  in  refusing  an
    adjournment is whether it was unfair (per SH (Afghanistan) [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 1284).

11. In this case it is clear that a holiday abroad had been booked  by  the
    Appellant's spouse in August 2012  which  was  before  the  immigration
    decision was made.  It is clear also that after notice of  hearing  was
    sent out in April 2013 for the appeal against the immigration  decision
    documentary proof of the booking was put before the Tribunal.

12. We agreed with parties that in the circumstances of this case the judge
    erred in not adjourning the hearing to allow the Appellant's spouse  to
    attend and give oral  evidence  which  might  have  had  an  effect  on
    credibility findings.  The judge also erred  in  finding  as  a  factor
    against the credibility of the  Appellant  the  non-appearance  at  the
    hearing of the spouse and solicitors.

13. The judge in failing to grant an  adjournment  committed  a  procedural
    irregularity capable of making a material difference to the outcome  or
    fairness of the proceedings.

14. For the sake of completeness we would add  that  we  also  agreed  with
    parties that the judge further erred when, having  dismissed  the  case
    under the Rules, he failed to consider Article 8 which had been  raised
    in the original grounds.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal included the making of an  error  on
a point of law.  The decision is set aside.

The effect of the error has been to deprive a party before  the  First  tier
Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's case to  be
put to and considered by the First tier Tribunal. The appeal is remitted  to
the First tier Tribunal in accordance with Practise Statement paragraph  7.2
to be heard afresh by that Tribunal.  No findings stand.








Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

