
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08066/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 6th October 2015                  |On 13th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                faisal nazir
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Representation
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Hawden-Beal (the judge) promulgated on 11th July 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  29th  September  1985  who
    applied for leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant.

 3. The application was refused on 27th  January  2014  with  reference  to
    paragraph 245DD(h) and (i) the Respondent not being satisfied that  the
    Appellant was a genuine entrepreneur and that he genuinely intended  to
    invest the money referred to in Table 4 of Appendix A in his  business,
    and the Respondent was not satisfied that  the  money  referred  to  in
    Table 4 of Appendix A was genuinely available to him.

 4. The Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  FtT)  and
    requested that his appeal be decided on  the  papers  without  an  oral
    hearing.

 5. The appeal was allocated to the judge on 26th June 2014  and  dismissed
    in a decision promulgated on 11th July  2014.   The  judge  noted  that
    neither party to the appeal  had  complied  with  directions,  in  that
    neither had served bundles of documents.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    contending that a bundle of documentary evidence had been served on the
    Tribunal and the Respondent on 13th June 2014 and the judge  had  erred
    in law in not considering this evidence.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  P
    J M Hollingworth on 11th September 2014.

 8. The Respondent  then  lodged  a  response  dated  26th  September  2014
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending that the  judge  had  directed  herself  appropriately,
    although acknowledging that the Respondent did not know what  documents
    were included in the bundle, and therefore whether the  fact  that  the
    judge had not considered the documents was material to the  outcome  of
    the appeal.

 9. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

10. There was no attendance by or on behalf of the Appellant.  I  was  made
    aware that his  representatives  had  on  5th  October  2015  faxed  an
    adjournment application to the Tribunal.  That application requested an
    adjournment on the basis that similar cases had  been  decided  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal in a decision promulgated on 15th June 2015 and the
    appeals had been dismissed.  An application for permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal  had  been  made.   The  basis  of  the  adjournment
    application was that this appeal should be adjourned  until  the  Upper
    Tribunal had decided the test cases.

11. Mr Smart opposed the application on the basis that the  Tribunal  could
    deal with the error of law decision in this appeal, as it was  conceded
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be  set  aside  and
    thereafter the appeal could either be adjourned or remitted to the FtT.

12. I decided that it was not in the interests of justice to  adjourn  this
    appeal at this stage.  It was appropriate to make  a  decision  on  the
    error of law and I therefore decided to proceed with the hearing.

13. Mr Smart confirmed that he did not rely upon the rule 24 response which
    indicated that the appeal was  opposed.   Mr  Smart  confirmed  that  a
    bundle  of  documents  had   been   received   from   the   Appellant's
    representatives on 16th June 2014.  If a bundle had  been  received  by
    the Tribunal, then it was an error of law for that bundle not  to  have
    been considered.

14. Mr Smart also made an application to cite an unreported decision,  that
    being IA/08066/2014 and twelve other cases that  were  decided  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal and dismissed in a  decision  promulgated  on  15th
    July 2015.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. I am satisfied that the decision of the FtT must be set  aside  because
    of a material error of law.  This is not the fault of the judge.

16. I am satisfied that the Appellant's bundle of documents was  posted  to
    the Tribunal on 13th June 2014 as I have seen proof of postage.   I  am
    also satisfied that the documents were received by the Tribunal on 16th
    June 2014.  It appears that they were  not  linked  to  the  file,  and
    therefore the documents were not before the judge when she prepared her
    decision.

17. In finding an error of law I have taken into account the principles  in
    MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00150  (IAC)  and  I  set  out
    below the first paragraph of the head note to that decision;
         (1)  Where there is a defect or impropriety of a procedural  nature
             in the proceedings at first instance, this  may  amount  to  a
             material error of law requiring the decision of the First-tier
             Tribunal (the FtT) to be set aside.

18. There has been a procedural impropriety in that the bundle of documents
    received by the Tribunal from the Appellant's representatives, was  not
    placed before the judge.   This  has  resulted  in  unfairness  to  the
    Appellant, which means that the decision of the FtT is set  aside  with
    no findings preserved.

19. I allowed the application to cite the unreported decision of  the  FtT,
    that being IA/08066/2014 and twelve other linked  decisions  as  I  was
    satisfied that requirements of Practice Direction 11 were satisfied.

20. It was suggested by Mr Smart that it  was  appropriate  to  remit  this
    appeal back to the FtT.  In considering this issue I  have  taken  into
    account the Senior President's Practice Statement 7.2 which states;
         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that;
             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.

21. In my view the requirements of paragraph  7.2  are  met,  in  that  the
    Appellant did not have a fair hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    as the bundle of documents submitted on his behalf was not  considered.



22. The Appellant has requested that his appeal be decided on  the  papers,
    and therefore the appeal will be considered on the papers by  a  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge  Hawden-Beal.   If  the  Appellant
    wishes to have an oral hearing or wishes to have his case stayed  until
    the result of the proceedings in the Upper Tribunal are  concluded,  he
    must make an application to the First-tier Tribunal.  The file will  be
    sent to the Birmingham Hearing Centre.  If  the  appeal  is  considered
    prior to the Upper Tribunal proceedings being concluded, it will  be  a
    matter for the First-tier Tribunal Judge as to what weight to attach to
    the unreported First-tier Tribunal decision which  the  Respondent  has
    been given permission to cite.

23. I direct that the Respondent file a bundle of documents  to  be  relied
    upon on the First-tier Tribunal and the Appellant, within  28  days  of
    the date of this decision being sent out.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no
request to the Upper Tribunal for anonymity, and I see no need  to  make  an
anonymity order.


Signed   Date 7th October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  This must be considered by  the
First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   Date 7th October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

