
IAC-AH-DN-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08838/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 6th January 2015                           |On 22nd January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             nelson dedi koutala
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss P Solanki (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M R Oliver, promulgated  on  25th  September  2014,  following  a
    hearing at Richmond, on 5th September 2014.  In the determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal  of  Nelson  Dedi  Koutala.   The  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Congo, who was born on 8th  April
    1979.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 27th  September  2003  as  a
    student.  His leave extended until 22nd January 2004.  That  leave  was
    subsequently extended five times to 5th August 2013.  On that  day,  he
    applied for further leave to remain, and his solicitors, in that letter
    of application, emphasised the extent of the Appellant's private  life,
    his life with the church, his life as a volunteer, and his work in  IT.



 3. A feature of the Appellant's claim was that he had been in the  UK  for
    ten years, though not in a manner in which he would qualify  under  the
    long residence policy, because of two gaps which were in February  2008
    for six weeks, at a time when he had returned to  Congo  to  renew  his
    passport; and secondly from 1st January 2011 to 11th June  2012,  at  a
    time when he had returned to Congo to see his parents,  who  were  ill.
    During this time, when he was in Congo, the family home  was  destroyed
    on 4th March 2012 in an explosion caused at the arms depot.

 4. Then, the Appellant's father died on 27th March 2012.  His mother  then
    died a few days later, after the Appellant had returned to the UK.  The
    position that the Appellant now finds himself in  is  that  he  has  no
    family home and no parents in  Congo  who  can  help  him  re-establish
    himself in that country, were he to return.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge was, on the whole, favourably  impressed  by  the  Appellant.
    For example, he recognised that the Appellant  spent  seventeen  months
    outside the United Kingdom and that, "On his own account he  is  to  be
    applauded for showing such care for his father until his father's death
    in March 2012", although "By then he had already been absent  for  well
    over a year" (paragraph 13).

 6. The judge also observed that the Appellant had observed immigration law
    while in the United Kingdom.  Moreover, "He has commanded  the  respect
    of his fellow worshippers and others" in  his  church  (paragraph  15).
    The judge also recognised that the Appellant's removal would  cause  an
    interference with his private life such as  to  engage  Article  8  and
    that, "I further accept that he used  his  stay  well  and  has  helped
    others; to this  extent  the  importance  of  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining firm but fair immigration control is less important than it
    otherwise would be, but I find on balance that there are no exceptional
    circumstances  which  make  his  removal  disproportionate"  (paragraph
    8.15).  The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge  ought  to  have  taken
    into account the "public interest provisions" enacted by Part 5 of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, once he had made the sort
    of findings that he did,  in  favour  of  the  Appellant,  such  as  to
    minimise the  impact  of  immigration  controls,  as  against  his  own
    individual rights, upon him.

 8. On 12th November 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

 9. On 19th November 2014,  the  Secretary  of  State  entered  a  Rule  24
    response, to the extent that the Appellant had relatives in  Congo  and
    had qualifications acquired over many years of study in the  UK,  which
    would assist him to set up himself as an IT specialist in that country.

Submissions

10. In her submissions before me, Miss Solanki, appearing on behalf of  the
    Appellant, stated that the judge was required, by way  of  a  mandatory
    obligation upon him, to apply Section 117B of the  2004  Act,  and  the
    failure to do so was an error of law in itself.  The Grounds of  Appeal
    deal with this at paragraphs 12 to 13.

11. Second, had the relevant factors been considered, then the  balance  of
    considerations would have fallen in favour of the Appellant.   This  is
    because the Appellant spoke English and this  Appellant  had  financial
    sustainability.  Both of these were considerations  specifically  going
    to the issue of how the "public interest" was to be assessed in Section
    117B of the 2004 Act.  The failure of the judge to have regard to these
    factors was another reason why he had fallen in error.

12. Third, there was the weight to be given to  "private  life",  and  this
    also fell in the Appellant's favour because he had always been  in  the
    UK with leave to remain, and  yet  this  was  not  a  matter  that  was
    considered by  the  judge.   Fourth,  the  extent  and  nature  of  the
    Appellant's private life activities were  most  significant  such  that
    they could not be overlooked.  For example, the work that the Appellant
    did for the Africa Centre (set out at pages 46 onwards of  the  bundle)
    was such that it was said that his going away would be a "real loss  to
    the centre".  This was not considered by the judge.

13. Moreover, Mr McNally states (at page 33 of his witness statement)  that
    the Appellant was playing a pivotal role in the organisation  following
    the standing down of the current manager due to  health  reasons.   The
    Appellant was described there as a "key figure".  Yet, when  the  judge
    refers (at paragraph 8) to the "seven witnesses who  gave  evidence  of
    benign influence" that the Appellant had on children and youths,  there
    is no reference  made  to  these  matters,  and  no  proper  assessment
    undertaken, with respect to how this would go to the  consideration  of
    the "public interest" factors.

14. Finally, whilst the judge observes that the Appellant's devoted care of
    his father was  commendable,  he  wrongly  concludes  that,  "But  this
    unfortunate event appears to  have  no  relevance  to  the  Appellant's
    claim" (paragraph 13).

15. Miss Solanki submitted that it does have relevance because the death of
    the Appellant's father meant that he would  have  to  struggle  in  the
    Congo, even as an IT specialist, to start a new  life.   There  was  no
    home and there was no father to help him.  Miss Solanki submitted that,
    given the errors in this determination, the proper course was to make a
    finding of an error of law, and remit the case back to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

16. For his part, Mr Tufan submitted that the reference to speaking English
    and to having financial sustainability in  Section  117B  was  neutral.
    The fact that somebody spoke English or was financially secure did  not
    create compelling circumstances  in  his  favour.   Mr  Tufan  drew  my
    attention to paragraph 36 of the determination in UE  (Nigeria)  [2010]
    EWCA Civ 975.  In that case, Sir David Keene decided that,

         "I would  expect  it  to  make  a  difference  to  the  outcome  of
         immigration cases only in a  relatively  few  instances  where  the
         positive contribution to this country is very significant,  perhaps
         of the kind referred to by Lord Bridge in Bakhtaur Singh.  The main
         element in the public interest will normally consist of the need to
         maintain a firm policy of immigration control, and little  will  go
         to undermine that.  It will be unusual for the loss of  benefit  to
         the community to tip the scales in an applicant's  favour,  but  of
         course all will depend upon the detailed facts which exist  in  the
         individual case ..." (paragraph 36).

    Second, Mr Tufan submitted that the case of Patel had long  established
    now that the expectation for a student in the UK was to return back  to
    the country of his origin, and this must apply here.

17. In reply, Miss Solanki submitted that she  was  not  relying  upon  the
    "Patel argument".  It was not being submitted that the Appellant should
    stay in the UK because of his private life.  What was  being  submitted
    was  that  the  private  life  had  not  been  properly  analysed   and
    considered.  For example, paragraph 6 of the determination did consider
    the Appellant's skills as an IT specialist but no findings were made in
    relation to the Appellant's contentions that he could not find work  in
    Congo because of high levels of corruption there.  He would need family
    support and this was absent on account of the death of his father.   In
    the same way, the judge refers to "compelling circumstances"  but  this
    is not now a requirement (paragraph 15).

Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

19. First and foremost, there is a mandatory obligation under the 2004  Act
    to consider the "public interest" provisions in Section 117B.  This has
    not been done.  This failure in itself is enough to  grant  permission.
    What needs to be understood about Section 117B  is  that  it  does  not
    carry a fixed rate in all the circumstances when it  reads  that,  "the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the   public
    interest", because otherwise Section 117B(2) and (3) would not make any
    sense, when these refer to the fact that "it is in the public interest"
    that an applicant is able to "speak English" and that  "it  is  in  the
    public  interest"  that  an  applicant  is  "financially  independent".
    Section 117B  is  also  a  non-exhaustive  list.   It  was  accordingly
    important for the judge to assess Section 117B considerations  in  this
    case.

20. Second, the judge's assessment  of  Article  8  in  the  context  of  a
    requirement of  "any  compelling  circumstances  which  have  not  been
    properly addressed under the Rules" is now misconceived in the light of
    the latest High Court and Tribunal jurisprudence which  maintains  that
    the way in which Article 8 is to be structured is without a stipulation
    of a threshold requirement to be met.

21. The determination at paragraph 15 approaches the facts on  this  basis.
    It ends by saying that,

         "I accept that his removal will  cause  an  interference  with  his
         private life such as to engage Article 8 and I further accept  that
         he used his stay well and has helped others;  to  this  extent  the
         importance of the public interests in  maintaining  firm  but  fair
         immigration control is less important than it otherwise  would  be,
         but I find on balance that there are no  exceptional  circumstances
         ...".

    Such an approach is now to be astute.  On this basis, I  conclude  that
    there has to be a finding of an error of  law,  and  that  this  matter
    should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal under paragraph  7.2
    of the Practice Statement.

Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed to the extent that  it  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be determined by a judge other than Judge  Oliver  so  that
    matters can be considered de novo in accordance with the facts above.

23. No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        21st January 2015

