
                                    [pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/08315/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st September 2016               |On 10th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                              Jagmeet Kaur Brar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kannangara, Counsel for Visa Expert Limited,
                    Hayes, Middlesex
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant was born on 27th February 1991 and is a citizen of India.
     She appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  28th
    November 2014 refusing to grant  her  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student Migrant  under  the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  and
    against the removal directions.  The appeal was heard by Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal James on 17th February  2016.   She  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 1st March 2016.

 2. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant and permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Landes on 15th August 2016.  The Appellant  argues  that
    she was not given a proper opportunity  to  vary  her  application  for
    leave because although she  received  a  60  day  letter  her  original
    educational qualifications  documents  and  a  certified  copy  of  her
    passport were not returned with it  although  the  letter  stated  that
    these were enclosed.  The Respondent's position is that these documents
    were sent with the  60  day  letter.   Because  of  the  terms  of  the
    Respondent's letter, the entry in the database and the omissions in the
    evidence of the Appellant, the judge found that the relevant  documents
    had been sent to the Appellant on the balance of probabilities and that
    the Appellant was not credible.

 3. The permission states that it is arguable that the judge erred  in  law
    by making an adverse credibility finding because the Appellant had  not
    reported her passport missing (paragraph 21).   The  permission  states
    that the Appellant had never suggested that her passport  was  missing.
    It is with the Respondent who is entitled  to  retain  it.   It  states
    however  that  this  was  only  one  aspect  of  the  judge's   adverse
    credibility findings and it can be said to be inevitable that the judge
    would have come to  the  same  overall  conclusion,  even  if  she  had
    realised  that  the  Respondent  was  entitled  to  retain  Mrs  Brar's
    passport.  The judge found that the Appellant could  have  produced  to
    colleges another certified copy of her passport if there  was  not  one
    with the 60 day letter but the permission states it  is  arguable  that
    the 60 day letter and the leaflet imply that an applicant  is  expected
    to produce to the Sponsor the copy certified by the Respondent.

 4. There is a Rule 24 response but the decision was not  attached  to  the
    Grounds of Application.  The Respondent therefore was unable  to  agree
    that there may have been material errors of law in the decision.

The Hearing

 5. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that it is not  disputed  that  the
    Appellant received the 60 day letter from  the  Respondent.   Her  oral
    evidence was that she had written to the Home  Office  by  first  class
    post asking for the missing documents and I was referred to  exhibit  5
    which is purportedly a copy of the letter.  Her evidence  is  that  she
    sent this letter and then on 21st October telephoned the Home Office.

 6. Counsel submitted  that  the  issue  in  this  case  is  fairness.   He
    submitted that the Appellant was unable  to  get  a  CAS  from  another
    Sponsor because she did not have a certified copy of  her  passport  or
    the documents relating  to  her  educational  qualifications.   Counsel
    submitted that in the Appellant's statement she  mentioned  that  these
    documents were not with the 60 day letter and she sent a letter to  the
    Home Office first class in good faith.  I was referred to paragraph  11
    of the decision in which the judge states that other  Tier  4  students
    have fully utilised the 60 day period to obtain an alternative  Tier  4
    Sponsor.  Counsel submitted that it is not clear how the judge got this
    information  and  he  submitted  that  it  is  not  relevant  that  the
    Appellant's solicitor had not kept a photocopy of the  passport  or  of
    the educational qualification documents.

 7. I put to Counsel that the certified copy of the passport does not  have
    to be a certified copy by the Home Office.  There is a copy passport in
    the Respondent's bundle which could have been certified.  I pointed out
    that it is not clear whether, when the  Appellant  went  to  the  other
    colleges, she took her 60 day  letter  with  her.   There  is  also  no
    evidence that she actually went  to  other  colleges,  apart  from  the
    Appellant's oral evidence.

 8. Counsel submitted that a Tier 4 Sponsor requires  these  documents  and
    the Appellant was unable to supply them as  the  Home  Office  retained
    them.  I pointed out that there is no evidence that the Appellant tried
    to get copies of  her  educational  qualification  documents  from  the
    colleges she had attended.

 9. Counsel submitted that 60 days is sufficient for an Appellant to obtain
    a CAS from another college but only if the Appellant has  the  required
    documents and in this case she had not and this goes to fairness.

10. I was referred to paragraph 21 of  the  decision  in  which  the  judge
    states:  "Nor has the Appellant complained to the Respondent about  her
    missing  passport."   Counsel  submitted  that  the  passport  was  not
    missing.  The actual passport was with the Home Office.  I was asked to
    find that this is a material error.  I put to  Counsel  that  what  the
    judge is referring to as missing is the certified copy of her  passport
    which was not enclosed with the 60 day letter to the Home Office.  This
    is not an error.

11. Counsel submitted that the Appellant has given a  credible  explanation
    for her situation and that without the  supporting  documents  she  was
    unable to get a CAS.  He submitted that she should have been given more
    time to obtain one.   60  days  is  only  sufficient  if  the  required
    documents are returned by the Home Office to the Appellant.

12. The Presenting Officer made his submissions referring to paragraph 5 of
    the decision in which the judge states  that  she  has  considered  the
    original application, the further documents presented  for  the  appeal
    and the oral evidence of the Appellant.  He submitted  that  the  judge
    has a clear understanding of the case and  this  is  obvious  from  the
    decision.  He submitted that this is merely  a  dispute  on  the  final
    outcome.  He submitted that the judge's decision is fully reasoned  and
    it is obvious why she came to  the  conclusion  she  did  and  why  she
    dismissed the appeal.

13. The Presenting Officer submitted that at paragraph 11 of the  decision,
    case law is referred to by the judge.  He submitted  that  these  cases
    are different as they are based on the failure  of  the  Respondent  to
    issue a 60 day letter but that is not the case here.  The Appellant had
    the 60 day letter dated 19th September 2014 and what the  Appellant  is
    stating is that she did not get her  certified  copy  passport  or  her
    educational qualification documents with this letter so she  could  not
    get a CAS from another college.

14. The Presenting Officer referred me to  paragraphs  12  and  13  of  the
    decision which refer to  the  lack  of  documents  in  the  Appellant's
    possession.  There  were  no  emails,  texts,  letters  or  any   other
    documentary evidence to show that she had approached any colleges.   No
    dates, names of colleges, names of people she spoke to, or any  account
    of what  was  said  during  those  discussions  were  produced  by  the
    Appellant for the First-tier hearing.  At paragraph 14 the judge  notes
    that although the Appellant states she sent a letter to the Home Office
    on 10th October 2014 there is no proof of postage.  There is  also  no
    evidence that she phoned the Home Office.  He submitted that the  judge
    was entitled to take all these matters into account and it is not  even
    clear whether the 60 day letter was taken  to  these  colleges  by  the
    Appellant if she indeed went to these colleges.

15. I was referred to paragraph 16 of the decision which refers to  the  60
    day letter and exactly what it states which is that  the  Appellant  is
    required to take a copy of the 60 day letter with a certified  copy  of
    her passport and the Sponsor's leaflet with her when she approaches any
    potential new Tier 4 Sponsors.  He submitted that at paragraph 19 it is
    clear that the judge is aware that the Appellant's  college  closed  in
    August 2014.  The Appellant therefore knew  in  August  2014  that  she
    would need to make another  application  with  a  new  Sponsor  and  he
    submitted that there is a copy passport in the Respondent's bundle  and
    this could have been certified.  It  does  not  need  to  be  the  copy
    passport certified by the Home Office.  He submitted that the Appellant
    could also have obtained copies of her educational  qualifications.  At
    paragraph 22 the judge states the Appellant was adamant  that  colleges
    would not accept a certified  copy  of  her  passport  if  it  did  not
    specifically have a Home Office stamp.  The judge states that  that  is
    not what the 60 day letter states.

16. I was referred to paragraph 24 of  the  decision  in  which  the  judge
    states: "Taking the totality of the evidence before me into  account  I
    do not find the Appellant to  be  credible."   The  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that the judge was entitled to this finding based on what was
    before her.  The judge does not  believe  that  the  Appellant  sent  a
    letter to the Respondent  or  telephoned  her  (there  is  not  even  a
    telephone bill to support this claim).  There is also  no  evidence  of
    the appellant  contacting  colleges  to  obtain  a  placement  and  the
    Presenting Officer submitted that this further undermines her claim.

17. At paragraph 25 the judge finds that the Appellant's certified passport
    was returned to her with the 60 day letter  and  that  the  educational
    qualifications documents were returned with the 60 day letter.  That is
    what the letter states.

18. The Presenting Officer submitted that  the  judge  has  not  failed  to
    consider all the evidence.  She has  grappled  with  the  evidence,  in
    particular the oral evidence given at the hearing.  He  submitted  that
    there is no material error of law  in  the  judge's  decision  and  the
    application should be dismissed.

19. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the  Appellant  was  credible.
    He submitted that  because  she  had  no  documents  to  show  she  had
    telephoned or sent a letter to the Home Office, this does not mean  she
    did not do so.  He submitted that what the judge did  was  prefer  what
    was in the 60 day letter to the  Appellant's  evidence.   He  submitted
    that the Appellant gave a consistent account. She could not succeed  in
    obtaining another CAS as she did not have  the  required  documents  to
    submit with the 60 day letter.  He submitted that hers  is  a  credible
    account and the judge's approach was wrong.

Decision and Reasons

20. The judge's decision is detailed and well  thought  out.   All  of  the
    matters put forward at the hearing have been properly considered by the
    judge.

21. The judge found that the Appellant was not credible, referring  to  the
    lack of evidence to support her account.  The appellant stated that she
    telephoned and wrote to the Home Office but there was  no  evidence  of
    this and she was unable to give the name of anyone she had spoken to in
    the Home Office.  She stated that she went to colleges and they refused
    her because she did not have the correct documents but again there  was
    no evidence of what colleges she went to, who she spoke to and what the
    conversations were about.

22. The 60 day letter is absolutely  clear  about  what  is  required  when
    applying for a new  sponsor  and  that  is  a  certified  copy  of  the
    appellant's passport.  The 60 day letter states that this was sent back
    to her. Even if it was not she could have used the copy passport in the
    Respondent's bundle and had it certified and she could have  approached
    colleges with this.  It does not need to be a passport certified by the
    Home Office.  She could also have approached the college where she  got
    her qualifications from and  obtained  duplicates  of  her  educational
    qualifications and these would have enabled her to apply for a CAS from
    another college.

23. The judge has considered all the evidence before her.   Based  on  what
    was before her she did not believe the Appellant but  did  believe  the
    Respondent whose evidence was that the certified copy passport and  the
    educational qualifications documents were  returned  to  the  Appellant
    with the 60 day letter.

24. The judge was entitled to reach the decision she did based on what  was
    before her and she has  given  proper  explanations  for  her  decision
    throughout.  There is no unfairness in the judge's decision.

Notice of Decision

25. There is no material error of law in the First-tier  Judge's  decision,
    promulgated on 1st March 2016.   This  decision  must  stand  and  the
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

26. Anonymity has not been directed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray
