
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/08137/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|on 20 December 2016                      |On 21 December 2016               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               ORHAN MENDIRES
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. By decision promulgated on 6 June 2016 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P  A
    Grant-Hutchison dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  refusal  of
    leave to remain as the spouse of a person present and  settled  in  the
    UK.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the UT, on  grounds  which
    are rather wordy and repetitive.  Lightly edited, they are as follows:




      Failure to apply correct legal test.


      [4] In assessing proportionality under article 8  the  judge  has  not
      referred to the test set out in Bank Mellat v HM Treasury (no 2)  UKSC
      [2013] 39  [to  which]  the  appellant's  representative  referred  in
      submissions [as endorsed in Mirza v SSHD [2015] CSIH 28] ...   if  the
      judge had considered and applied the test... it is likely that he  may
      have decided the case differently... failure to do so was an error  of
      law.

      Failure to consider relevant factors  /  making  findings  which  were
      unreasonable.

      [5] In assessing proportionality  the  judge  sought  to  analyse  the
      possible effects of removal of the appellant and  his  wife...  in  so
      doing he left various relevant factors out of account.

      [6] The first possibility mooted by the judge  is  that  refusal  will
      cause the appellant to leave the UK without his wife.  His  conclusion
      is simply that this would not be contrary to article  8  because  "the
      public interest will not be harmed". However, this fails to take  into
      account... the severe interference with the couple's family life  that
      would result ... By considering  only  the  public  interest  question
      without weighing it against the protected interests of  the  appellant
      and his wife... the judge has left  ...  arguably  the  most  relevant
      factor out of account.

      [7] Another possibility mooted by the judges that  the  appellant  and
      his partner might leave the UK together. He finds that such an outcome
      would entail only "a little interference with their family and private
      life". In so doing he appears not to have taken into account ...  that
      requiring the appellant's partner to leave the  UK  would  uproot  her
      from the community in which she grew up and has lived  all  her  life,
      separate her from an extended family who still live in that community,
      force her to give up employment, and force her  to  live  outside  the
      country of which is a national ... relevant factors  which  the  judge
      was obliged take into account.

      [8] In any event... the conclusion  that  such  an  eventuality  would
      amount to only a "little interference" with private and family life is
      ... unreasonable and irrational.

      Contradictory findings.

      At paragraph 17 the judge made contradictory findings which go to  the
      core of his conclusions.

 3. On 4 October 2016 FtT Judge Davies refused permission, taking the  view
    that it was clear from the summary of submissions in the decision  that
    the authorities had been taken into account;  that  the  ground  headed
    "contradictory findings" was based on no more than a grammatical error;
    that the grounds were simply disagreement with findings made; and  that
    all the evidence  had  been  considered,  and  findings  made  on  that
    evidence.

 4. The appellant renewed his application to the UT, maintaining  the  same
    grounds and arguing further that Bank Mellat v HM Treasury required the
    judge to ask whether removal was  rationally  connected  to  legitimate
    aims protected by article 8 (2), and whether a less  intrusive  measure
    could be adopted without unacceptably compromising that legitimate aim;
    that maintenance  of  immigration  control  is  not  a  legitimate  aim
    included in article 8 (2), and is relevant only as  an  aspect  of  the
    economic well-being of the country and the protection of the rights and
    freedoms of others, not as an end in itself; and that removal would not
    assist the economic well-being of the UK, or  protect  the  rights  and
    freedoms of others.

 5. UT Judge Canavan granted permission on 15 November 2016.  Her  decision
    points  out  that  it  is  trite  law  that  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control is a legitimate aim for purposes of  an  article  8
    assessment outside the rules, a point further clarified by section 117B
    of the 2002 act, and that whereas Bank Mellat v HM  Treasury  sets  out
    broad principles relating to article 8, the approach  taken  in  Razgar
    and in SS (Congo) is specific to immigration cases. She goes on to  say
    that it may be arguable that the judge should have considered paragraph
    EX1 of appendix FM before going on to article 8, outside the rules, and
    failed to consider whether there were insurmountable obstacles  to  the
    appellant and his wife continuing  the  family  life  outside  the  UK,
    either within the context of the rules, or as part of the assessment of
    proportionality outside the rules.

 6. Mr Winter submitted along the  following  lines.  The  judge  correctly
    proceeded on the basis that  the  appellant  and  his  partner  have  a
    genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.  Parties  at  the  FtT  hearing
    appeared  to  have  approached  the  issue   as   one   only   of   the
    proportionality of the outcome in terms of article 8 outwith the rules.
    The  appellant  was  in  difficulty  over  the  English  language  test
    requirement and over the financial thresholds. Although  the  grant  of
    permission mentioned the test of insurmountable  obstacles  within  the
    rules, it was accepted that the point had not been argued to  the  FtT.
    Error of law was to be found in the assessment outside the  rules.  The
    grounds of appeal and the grant of permission, read  together,  yielded
    an argument that the judge failed to assess  factors  relevant  to  the
    proportionality assessment. He did not set them all out as required, at
    paragraph 23 in particular, or  factor  them  into  the  consideration.
    There was a tension within the case law as to whether the question  was
    whether the respondent could justify  separation  of  the  parties,  or
    whether that was just a factor to be taken into account in  determining
    proportionality. In relation to the  appellant's  partner  removing  to
    Turkey the judge failed to consider her nationality,  her  entire  life
    spent here, the  fact  that  she  did  not  speak  Turkish,  and  other
    difficulties. The fact that a prolonged and even indefinite  separation
    might result was another factor  which  should  have  been  taken  into
    account. The judge failed to spell  out  all  these  matters.  Although
    there had been no submission about insurmountable obstacles within  the
    rules, these factors should have informed the consideration outside the
    rules.  The inadequacy of the determination required a fresh  decision.
    The appellant would prefer that to take place on the  basis  of  up-to-
    date evidence and by way of a remit  to  the  FtT.  Alternatively,  the
    evidence which had been presented was sufficient for the decision to be
    remade in his favour. His wife is in employment now, rather than  self-
    employed. She speaks no Turkish. The appellant was here  lawfully  when
    the relationship began. They have been living together  for  a  lengthy
    period, since 2009. He has not  been  a  burden  on  state  funds.  The
    immigration history is not seriously adverse, he having overstayed only
    for about one year prior to making the  application  leading  to  these
    proceedings. It was also relevant that the appellant's wife  is  not  a
    Muslim, given present circumstances in Turkey.

 7. Mrs O'Brien in response submitted as follows.  It  was  not  surprising
    that the judge had not looked at paragraph EX1, when he  had  not  been
    asked to do so.  The appellant had conceded that he could not meet  the
    terms of the immigration rules, which include paragraph EX1.  The  case
    did not meet the  test  of  insurmountable  obstacles,  and  there  was
    nothing which realistically could have given rise to  another  outcome,
    outside the rules. The  judge  was  fully  aware  of  all  the  factors
    mentioned in the grounds and submissions, which  were  plainly  at  the
    heart of the case before him. There was no flaw in the  proportionality
    assessment.  It  was  the  only  outcome  that  could  reasonably  been
    expected in a case which fell well short of the rules and was  conceded
    not to meet the terms of paragraph EX1. There was no basis on which  to
    set aside. In the alternative, the appellant had  made  no  application
    under the rules to lead further evidence and there  was  no  reason  to
    adjourn or to remit. On the evidence presented, the case  plainly  fell
    to be decided against the appellant.

 8. I reserved my decision.

 9. Mr Winter (wisely) did not make any  submissions  on  the  3rd  ground,
    headed "contradictory findings".  It is coyly and optimistically  based
    on paragraph 17 of the decision, where the judge obviously meant to say
    that the judge is that the decision is in accordance with the law,  and
    the word "not" is a typographical error.

10. Mr Winter (again wisely) did not seek to revive the  grounds  referring
    to Bank Mellat v HM Treasury. As pointed out by Judge  Canavan,  it  is
    trite law, set out in cases decided within the immigration jurisdiction
    and now also in statute, that maintenance of immigration control is  in
    the public interest and does not require justification by reference  to
    the economic well-being of the UK, case-by-case.

11. The grounds based on failure to consider relevant  factors  received  a
    certain boost from the grant of permission, but are inevitably deflated
    by the concession that the terms of the rules, which include  paragraph
    EX1, could  not  be  met.  Generally,  on  this  issue,  I  prefer  the
    submissions for the respondent. The grounds and  arguments  under  this
    heading are no more than reiteration of a case the facts of which  were
    plain to the judge.  Considerations were not  overlooked;  they  simply
    did not add up to the outcome the appellant and his partner wished for.

12. The outcome is unwelcome to the appellant and to his wife, for  readily
    understandable reasons. However, the immigration  rules  set  down  the
    circumstances under which parties may expect to carry on their  married
    life within the UK, and when they may not. The proportionality  outcome
    is firmly and realistically based on the facts,  was  well  within  the
    scope of the judge, and discloses no error of law. The determination of
    the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

13. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]
            20 December 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman

