
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/08023/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2nd October, 2013                          |On 24th October 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                           Muhammad awais liaquat

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Mair of Counsel instructed by Silverdale,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant was  born  on  1st  March,  1988  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan.




Immigration History

2.   On 27th May, 2012, the appellant entered the United Kingdom with  leave
    to remain until 27th November, 2012, subject to a condition prohibiting
    employment and recourse to public funds.  He had previously visited the
    United Kingdom in 2008  and  2009;  on  both  occasions  to  visit  his
    brother, a British citizen.  In 2010 the appellant obtained a  multiple
    entry visa and visited twice the United Kingdom in 2011.  On the second
    occasion the appellant met Sobia  Awais  ("the  sponsor").   They  were
    married on 3rd  January,  2012  and  the  appellant  then  returned  to
    Pakistan in  order  to  apply  for  a  marriage  settlement  visa.   He
    successfully passed, and obtained his English language certificate  and
    also obtained a TB certificate.  The appellant  then  returned  to  the
    United Kingdom and on 4th July, 2012 submitted an application for leave
    to remain as the spouse of a person  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    under paragraph 284 of Statement of Changes in  Immigration  Rules,  HC
    395, as amended ("the Immigration Rules").

3.   The Secretary of State refused  the  appellant's  application  on  25th
    February, 2013, because the appellant could not meet  the  requirements
    of paragraph 284(i) of the Immigration Rules.

4.   The judge noted that it was accepted on behalf of  the  appellant  that
    he could not satisfy the Immigration Rules and went on to consider  the
    appellant's Article 8 appeal.  He noted that the appellant and  sponsor
    had a child together, who was born on 28th June, 2012.  The sponsor had
    herself been granted indefinite leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    on 30th April, 2010.  In considering the appellant's Article  8  appeal
    the  Immigration  Judge  appears  to  have  approached  the  issue   of
    proportionality on the basis that the  appellant  and  his  spouse  and
    child will be separated, but he made no finding  that  the  spouse  and
    minor child could not reasonably relocate to Pakistan.  He  found  that
    it would not be disproportionate for the family to be separated  whilst
    the appellant re-applied for leave from  outside  the  United  Kingdom.
    The judge noted that reliance was placed on Section 55 of the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2007 and ZH (Tanzania) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4.

5.     The judge appears to  be  concerned  that  the  appellant  had  "very
    blatantly evaded the Rules by  his  premature  return  [to  the  United
    Kingdom] before applying [for leave to remain]".   He  found  that  the
    appellant had "leapfrogged" over many other applications  and  deprived
    the respondent of being in a position  to  investigate  thoroughly  the
    requisite qualifications for entry as a spouse.  He noted at  paragraph
    28 of the determination that the respondent was not in  a  position  to
    remove the sponsor or child and said:-

         "...She gained status through the  respondent's  domestic  violence
         policy although, with a sound marriage to a Pakistani subject,  she
         has no need of the concession.  The issue is whether the  case  law
         saves the appellant from having to apply and qualify in the  proper
         manner.  In this case, in so blatant and deliberate a circumvention
         of the Rules, I find it is not disproportionate for  the  appellant
         to have to so apply."


6.   The judge went on to note that removal directions had  been  given  and
    that the decision failed to accord with Ahmadi  [2012]  UKUT  00147  or
    (Adamally  and  Jaferi)  Section   47   removal   decisions;   Tribunal
    procedures) [2012] UKUT 00414.

7.   The grounds of appeal criticise the respondent  for  having  failed  to
    make any findings as to the nature and extent of the appellant's family
    life in the United Kingdom and the extent which a period of  separation
    (while the appellant re-applies  for  leave  from  outside  the  United
    Kingdom) would interfere with that  family  life.   I  pointed  out  to
    Counsel that, reading the determination as a whole, it was  clear  that
    the judge did accept that there was family life between  the  appellant
    and the sponsor.  In any event, there is of course family life  between
    the appellant and his minor child.  Mr Harrison accepted  that  if  the
    appellant were to return to Pakistan to make application for leave,  it
    is more likely than not that the Entry  Clearance  Officer  Post  would
    refer the application to London, given  that  the  appellant  has  made
    application in the United Kingdom and been refused.  I suggested to  Mr
    Harrison that it was my  understanding  that  in  the  event  that  the
    application were referred to London, this could  involve  delay  of  at
    least six months.  Mr Harrison accepted that that was possible.

8.   Mr Harrison confirmed that the  sponsor  had  been  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on 30th April, 2010.  The  child,
    Aminah was born on 28th June, 2012 and since she was born to  a  mother
    who was herself settled in the United Kingdom, Aminah was  entitled  to
    British nationality.  Counsel told me that a British passport had  been
    obtained for her.

9.   Mr Harrison, quite properly in my view, accepted that  the  Immigration
    Judge had erred by failing anywhere to consider that the best interests
    of the child would ordinarily be with both his parents.   It  is  clear
    that given that Aminah is a British subject, she cannot be expected  to
    leave the United Kingdom, but the judge did not appear  to  have  taken
    this into account.  As a result he had  failed  to  consider  the  best
    interests of the child.

10.  I asked Mr Harrison if he was in a position to concede the appeal.   He
    made it clear to me that he was not.

11.  However, he quite rightly pointed out that it was  very  difficult  for
    him to argue that in the circumstances of this appeal, the respondent's
    decision was proportionate.

12.  I am satisfied that the  Immigration  Judge  did  err  in  law  in  his
    determination.  The judge has  noted  the  arguments  set  out  in  the
    skeleton argument, but failed to consider the  best  interests  of  the
    child.  He accepted that the respondent was not in a position to remove
    the sponsor or the appellant's child, but he failed to consider whether
    it would be reasonable to expect the appellant's spouse and daughter to
    relocate to Pakistan.   He  did  not  identify  what  is  in  the  best
    interests of the appellant's minor daughter.

13.  I set aside the judge's decision.

14.  The appellant's daughter was born on 28th June, 2012 and is  a  British
    citizen.  She cannot be expected to leave  the  United  Kingdom.   Even
    assuming that the appellant met the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules (and on the evidence before the Immigration Judge it appeared  at
    that time at least, he could not do so), were the appellant  to  return
    to Pakistan and make  application  for  settlement  there  would  be  a
    separation for at least six months, and possibly longer.  Of course, if
    the appellant did not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
    then the period of separation and thus, the extent of the  interference
    with the appellant's Article 8 rights, could be considerably longer.

15.  It clearly is in the best interests of  Aminah  that  she  should  live
    with both her parents.  Given that were  the  appellant  to  return  to
    Pakistan to make application for settlement it could take at least  six
    months and possibly longer, for the application  to  be  considered,  I
    have concluded that the appellant's removal would be a disproportionate
    interference with the appellant's Article 8  rights  and  I  allow  the
    appeal.

Summary

First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish erred in law in making his  determination
which I set aside.   I  re-make  the  decision  and  allow  the  appellant's
Article 8 human rights appeal.






Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

