
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)          Appeal Number: IA/08767/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 2 September 2014          On 4 September 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                                  Sumi Rai
                         (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr M Puar of Counsel instructed by N. C.  Brothers  &
                       Co Solicitors.


                   DETERMINATION AND REASONS: ERROR OF LAW

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Traynor promulgated on 11 June 2014, allowing Ms Rai's appeal  against
      the decision of the Entry Clearance officer  ('ECO')  dated  21  March
      2013 to refuse entry clearance as a dependant.


   2. Although before me the  ECO  is  the  appellant  and  Ms  Rai  is  the
      respondent, for the sake of consistency with  the  proceedings  before
      the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter  refer  to  Ms  Rai  as  the
      Appellant and the ECO as the Respondent.


Background

   3. The Appellant is a  national  of  Nepal  born  on  4  July  1992.  Her
      personal, family, and immigration  histories  are  referenced  in  the
      various documents on file and in the determination of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge: the immigration history is essentially the history  of
      the application for entry clearance. It is unnecessary to  repeat  any
      such details here save as  is  incidental  for  the  purpose  of  this
      decision.


   4. The Appellant's  application  for  entry  clearance  was  refused  for
      reasons set out in a Notice of Immigration  Decision  dated  21  March
      2013.


   5. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


   6. The Appellant's appeal was allowed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
      reasons set out in the determination promulgated on 11 June 2014.


   7. The Respondent applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
      which was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cheales on 8 July 2014.


Error of Law

   8. The  Appellant's  application  was  refused  by  the  Respondent  with
      reference to Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. On  appeal  it  was
      conceded on the  Appellant's  behalf  that  she  could  not  meet  the
      requirements of the Rules and that she accordingly relied upon Article
      8 of the ECHR: see determination at paragraph 6.


   9. It was a feature of the Appellant's Article 8 claim that she enjoyed a
      close family life with her younger sister  Ms  Supriya  Rai  (date  of
      birth 10 November 1995). There were no other siblings.  The  Appellant
      and her sister had remained in Nepal when their mother  had  relocated
      to the UK following her marriage in 2000 to her second husband who was
      in service in the British Army. Their own father  died  in  2008.  The
      Appellant and her sister had remained together until  the  Appellant's
      sister was granted entry clearance to join their mother in the  UK  at
      or about the same time as the Appellant's own refusal.


  10. Although at the date of the appeal hearing the Appellant's sister  was
      in the UK, she did not give evidence in support  of  the  appeal.  The
      Respondent's  representative  emphasised  this  circumstances  in  his
      submissions - which are recorded in the determination in these  terms:
      "There was no evidence from Supriya to say that she  was  in  any  way
      affected as a consequence of separation from the Appellant. Where  she
      is apparently in the United Kingdom the Tribunal should give weight to
      the fact that no evidence had been given by her, especially  where  it
      was claimed by the Appellant that she enjoys a close relationship with
      the Appellant. There was simply no evidence to establish the  strength
      of connection between the Appellant and her sister.  This  was  highly
      relevant when considering the application..." (paragraph 29).


  11. The Judge appears to  accept  the  substance  of  this  submission  at
      paragraph 36 of the determination. The Judge records the fact that the
      Appellant had been living with her sister in Nepal, addresses  himself
      to the apparent circumstances of the sister's application having  been
      made prior to the Appellant's application, and observes  that  "[v]ery
      little information" had been given as to why the applications had been
      made separately "particularly where it is now argued  that  these  are
      sisters who have a very close relationship". The  Judge  then  states:
      "In  the  absence  of  independent  corroborative  evidence  from  the
      Appellant's sister, Supriya, who I note is an  adult  and  capable  of
      providing her own views, then I do not give weight to the  unsupported
      and uncorroborated assertion made by the Appellant that she is in such
      a close relationship with her sister that the Respondent has  affected
      the family life that then subsisted by granting the Appellant's sister
      entry clearance to the UK."


  12. I note that  this  is  expressed  as  a  finding  in  respect  of  the
      Appellant's own assertions as to the closeness of the relationship.


  13. I find that I am unable to reconcile the finding at paragraph 36  with
      the  Judge's  observations  at  paragraphs  34  and  his  analysis  at
      paragraph 40.


  14. In contrast to the adverse finding at paragraph 36, the Judge  appears
      to make a positive finding in respect of the relationship between  the
      Appellant and her sister: "I  have  no  doubt  that  the  relationship
      between the Appellant and her sister, whilst they were living together
      in Nepal, did amount  to  family  life.  I  equally  accept  that  the
      relationship between the Appellant  and  her  sister  will  have  been
      fractured by virtue of the fact that  her  sister  was  granted  entry
      clearance to the United Kingdom and has now left Nepal and  is  living
      in the United Kingdom. Although I note that there  is  almost  a  four
      year gap in ages I accept that they have a close relationship, despite
      the fact that her sister is apparently in the United Kingdom  she  has
      not provided evidence to support the appeal."


  15. At paragraph 40 in carrying out the proportionality balancing exercise
      the Judge places particular emphasis on the  Appellant's  relationship
      with her sister: "I therefore  find  that  in  the  circumstances  the
      Respondent's decision will result  in  a  breach  of  the  Appellant's
      Article 8 rights, particularly in so far as her relationship with  her
      sister is concerned".


  16. I accept that the overall thrust of the determination  is  sympathetic
      towards  the  Appellant.  Indeed  Mr  Puar  invited  me  to  disregard
      paragraph 36 as an errant anomaly, 'sandwiched' as it was between  two
      opposing positive references to the Appellant's relationship with  her
      sister. However, I do not accept that it is appropriate to marginalise
      the analysis at paragraph 36 in this  way  -  particularly  as  it  is
      effectively an  express  adoption  of  the  submissions  made  by  the
      Respondent  in  this  regard.  The  reality  is  that  there   is   an
      inconsistency  of  reasoning  between  paragraphs  34  and   36,   and
      accordingly it is not clear on what basis the Judge was  satisfied  it
      was appropriate to  give  positive,  and  particular,  weight  to  the
      Appellant's relationship with her sister in his ultimate consideration
      of the proportionality balance at paragraph 40.


  17. Whilst of less significance, in my judgement there is also a  lack  of
      clarity in the reasoning at paragraph 39. Whilst paragraph 39  appears
      to be no more than a consideration of the 'intermediary' test pursuant
      to Gulshan now suggested to be otiose in MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA  Civ
      985 - the reasoning  in  the  second  clause  of  the  first  sentence
      following  the  word  'because'  does  not  in  any  way  support  the
      conclusion or  proposition  set  out  in  the  first  clause  of  that
      sentence, which includes a reference  to  the  Appellant's  separation
      from her sister.


  18. Be that as it may, in my  judgement  the  inconsistency  of  reasoning
      referred to in respect of paragraphs 34 and 36 in respect of a  matter
      to which particular weight was attached at paragraph 40, amounts to an
      error of law. Necessarily this is a material  error  of  law,  and  in
      consequence I find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      requires to be set aside and remade.


  19. The representatives before me were in agreement that the appeal should
      be reheard at a fresh hearing with all issues at large -  which  would
      also afford the opportunity of the Appellant's sister now being called
      to give evidence. There was a consensus that the appropriate forum was
      the First-tier Tribunal, which I endorse.


  20. I was told that the Appellant's sister was not  in  attendance  before
      the Upper Tribunal because she was attending  College.  Mr  Puar  also
      indicated that there had been no particular reason  why  she  had  not
      been called before the First-tier Tribunal. His indication was that in
      the event that the decision  was  to  be  remade  there  would  be  an
      expectation that the Appellant's sister would indeed be called to give
      oral evidence. There is, of course, no duty or obligation for  her  so
      to do, but in the particular circumstances of this  case  where  focus
      has been in significant part -  though  not  exclusively  -  upon  the
      Appellant's relationship with her sister, if she does not  now  attend
      to give evidence, and in the absence of any clear explanation for such
      non-attendance,  the  Appellant  should  be  aware  that  an   adverse
      inference may be drawn by the Judge rehearing the appeal.


  21. Whether or not Ms Supriya Rai is called  at  the  next  hearing  is  a
      matter for the Appellant and her sister: it is not necessary  to  make
      any specific Direction in this regard. Further I do  not  consider  it
      otherwise necessary to make any specific Directions in respect of  the
      rehearing:  standard  Directions  will  suffice  whereby  any  further
      materials must be filed and  served  within  seven  days  of  the  new
      hearing.


Decision

  22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  an  error  of
      law and is set aside.


  23. The decision in the appeal is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal by any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor.





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     3 September 2014
