

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/08816/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 5 November 2014                            |on 7 November 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               UDDIN AMIN SYED

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr M Shoaib, of Shoaib Associates


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as described above, but are referred to in the rest of this
    determination as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The SSHD appeals against a determination by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    D'Ambrosio, allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  refusal  of  a
    residence card under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 3. Ground 1 is lack of reasoning for finding that the  appellant  and  his
    partner were in a durable relationship.

 4. Mr Matthews acknowledged that some reasons are given, but  argued  that
    they are seriously defective.  Paragraphs  51  and  52  show  that  the
    appellant and his partner (Magdalena  Dolomisiewicz)  gave  conflicting
    evidence about the periods they spent together in the UK and in Poland.
     The judge failed to explain how these discrepancies could be resolved.
     The appellant and his partner said that there  is  a  child  of  their
    relationship.  A birth  certificate  of  Adam  Dolomisiewicz,  born  in
    Lublin  on  6  November  2011,  identifies  his  mother  as   Magdalena
    Dolomisiewicz and his father as Amin  Dolomisiewicz.   The  judge  said
    that evidence from a Polish notary explained how the  appellant's  name
    might appear  in  that  form,  but  the  information  from  the  notary
    contained nothing to that effect.  There was no adequate explanation of
    how these serious shortcomings in the evidence could be  overcome.   At
    best the evidence did not justify a finding of a durable  relationship.
    While there is no definition in the regulations the requirements of the
    rules form an accepted rule of  thumb,  two  years  cohabitation.   The
    appellant and his partner had not lived together continuously for  such
    a period.  There was no evidence form the parents of the appellant, who
    would have been obvious witnesses.  The  determination  should  be  set
    aside and remade according to the evidence, which fell short of proving
    a durable relationship.

 5. Mr Shoaib submitted that paragraphs 37 - 56 contain a  quite  extensive
    consideration of the evidence.  The relationship went back 7  years  in
    all.  Differences between the two parties over  dates  and  times  were
    immaterial.  It was a sufficient reason at    paragraph  37  to  accept
    their evidence as truthful and reliable  because  they  gave  it  in  a
    candid and straightforward manner.  Mr  Shoaib  acknowledged  that  the
    explanation for the father's name appearing as it  does  on  the  birth
    certificate is problematic, but there was evidence from  the  appellant
    and his partner that they are  the  child's  parents.   The  child  was
    present with them at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal (and  again
    in the Upper Tribunal).  There were photographs of the parties together
    at different times and places.  The evidence had to be looked at in the
    round.  The standard of proof  was  the  balance  of  probability,  not
    beyond reasonable doubt.

 6. I indicated that the appeal did not succeed on ground 1.   Mr  Matthews
    made sensible criticisms, disclosing some errors  and  inadequacies  of
    reasoning.  However, the judge was in the best position to  assess  the
    oral evidence.   He  was  entitled  to  find  the  witnesses  generally
    reliable, notwithstanding discrepancies  over  dates.   They  spoke  in
    broadly similar terms to a relationship of 7 years  which  resulted  in
    the birth of a child on 6 November 2011 and  of  living  most  recently
    together in Glasgow, either since 2011  or  since  October  2012.   The
    determination  says  that  the  terms  of  the  birth  certificate  are
    explained when they are not.  That should  have  been  found  to  be  a
    mystery, but I think it is plain the judge would have come to the  same
    overall view of the evidence.  As a  whole,  the  determination  is  an
    adequately reasoned explanation of why he decided as he did.

 7. Alternatively, if remaking the decision, I would have  found  that  the
    criticisms made of the evidence, although valid, still  leave  it  more
    likely than not that the appellant and his partner  are  in  a  durable
    relationship of several years' standing.

 8. Mr Shoaib accepted that Mr Matthews' submissions on ground 2, referring
    to regulation 17(4) and to SY [2006] UKAIT 00024, were sound.   SY  was
    decided under a previous set of regulations but the  point  remained  a
    good one.  The judge should have limited himself to the  finding  of  a
    durable relationship and should not have held that  the  appellant  was
    entitled to a residence card.   The  respondent  has  discretion  under
    regulation 17(4) which has not yet been exercised.  Parties agreed that
    in that light the outcome of these proceedings should be as follows.

 9. The determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.    The
    appeal, as brought by the appellant  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  is
    allowed on the  ground  that  the  respondent's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.

10. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            5 November 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




