
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA083322015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th June 2016                       |On 13th June 2016                    |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN



                                   Between

                            MS CHINELO MIRIAN OBI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Elliott-Kelly (instructed by Paragon Law)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an application to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant  in
    relation to a Decision and Reasons of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Judge
    Young, promulgated on 13th November 2015, following a hearing at Hatton
    Cross on 7th October 2015.

 2. The first-tier Tribunal dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision to refuse her leave to remain in  the  UK
    on the basis of her family life with her British husband and child.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the first-tier  Tribunal
    who found it arguable that the Judge's consideration of  the  Chikwamba
    [2008] UKHL40 principle was irrational and also that arguably the Judge
    did not take into consideration the best interests of the British child
    as there was no reference to the child's status in the relevant part of
    the decision.

 4. I indicated at the outset to Mr Tufan that it appeared to me  that  the
    Judge had made an error of law, material to the outcome, in failing  to
    adequately consider the Chikwamba [2008] UKHL40 principles and the more
    recent case of R (on the application of Chen) v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -
    Chikwamba - temporary separation -  proportionality)  IJR  [2015]  UKUT
    000189 (IAC).

 5. Mr Tufan sought to defend  the  determination  on  the  basis  case  of
    Agyarko & Ors. [2015] WLR (D) 205. The judge referred to this  case  at
    paragraph 31 and in particular paragraph 25 of  Agyarko  where  it  was
    indicated that the mere fact that a partner who was a  British  citizen
    and who held down a job would be required  to  relocate  did  not  mean
    there  were  "insurmountable  obstacles".  He  submitted  the   Judge's
    conclusions were not irrational.

 6. I was not persuaded by Mr Tufan's arguments. Although the Judge set out
    the case of Chikwamba at paragraph 55, he nevertheless went on, despite
    some robust findings in the Appellant's favour to find the decision  to
    remove her proportionate.  His  conclusion,  that  there  would  be  no
    significant interference, I find to be irrational based on his findings
    that  mother  would  either  have  to  take  her  child  (who  she  was
    breastfeeding) with her to Nigeria while she made  an  application  for
    entry clearance or leave her behind with her father.   Either  way  the
    child would be separated from one parent.  It was clearly accepted that
    the only part of the Immigration Rules  she  could  not  meet  was  the
    eligibility requirement owing to the fact that she was in the UK  as  a
    visitor.  Furthermore the best interests of the child, who  is  British
    were not considered or weighed into the balance.

 7. In setting aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision I indicated that  I
    would re-decide it. It was agreed there  was  no  need  for  additional
    evidence and the facts were unchallenged.

 8. The facts of this case are that the Appellant is  a  Nigerian  national
    born on 6th May 1982. Her husband is  a  British  citizen  of  Nigerian
    origin. They first met online in February 2012 after  being  introduced
    by a mutual friend. They first met in September 2012 when Mr Osuji  was
    visiting Nigeria for his late father's memorial service.

 9. Mr Osuji visited the Appellant in Nigeria several times thereafter  and
    proposed marriage in May 2013. They married in a  traditional  ceremony
    in  Nigeria  in  October  2013  and  that  ceremony  was   subsequently
    solemnised at Lagos State Marriage Registry.

10. Thereafter Mr Osuji returned to the UK to commence  employment  with  a
    firm of consulting engineers. He was seconded by that firm to  work  in
    Finland where he moved in January 2014. After obtaining the appropriate
    visa the Appellant travelled to Helsinki in April 2014 to live with her
    husband.

11. The Appellant found out she was pregnant in May 2014, a pregnancy which
    was not without its medical problems and required monitoring.

12. At the end of June 2014 Mr Osuji was ordered  back  to  London  by  his
    employers and the couple planned to go together  in  July  2014.  After
    seeking advice from the UK authorities the Appellant was issued with  a
    six-month visit visa to enter the UK with a  view  to,  after  arrival,
    seeking a residence card under Regulation 9  of  the  EEA  Regulations.
    However, that application under the EEA Regulations was rejected on the
    basis that the Appellant and her husband had not "built the  centre  of
    their life in Finland before coming to the UK" (Regulation. 9(2)(c)).

13.  It  was  then  decided,  having  taken  legal  advice,  to  make   the
    application, subject to this appeal, for leave to remain as the  spouse
    of a British citizen. That application was made on  7th  January  2015.
    The couple's daughter was born on 17th January 2015 and the  Respondent
    duly notified of the birth on 29th January 2015.

14. The application was refused in a decision dated 12th February 2015. The
    basis of the  refusal  was  that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    eligibility requirements under Appendix FM as she was in the  UK  as  a
    visitor.  She  still  had  extant  leave  on  the  date  she  made  her
    application and so she could not benefit from the provisions  of  Ex.1.
    All of the other requirements of Appendix FM were met and such  is  not
    challenged by the Secretary of State.

15. As previously indicated, the Appellant's husband works full-time in the
    United Kingdom. The Appellant  has  family  in  Nigeria  including  her
    mother and sister. Her mother-in-law is also resident in Nigeria as are
    her husband's brother and sister. When in Nigeria the Appellant  worked
    as a customs relations manager.

16. The Appellant's husband has lived in  the  UK  for  14  years.  He  was
    educated to  the  age  of  17  in  Nigeria  but  attended  college  and
    university in the UK

17. Mr Osuji has been  married  before  and  has  two  daughters  from  his
    previous marriage who live in Germany with their mother. Mr Osuji makes
    regular visits to see his daughters at least once every two months.

18.  It  is  clear  that  the  Appellant  in  this  case  cannot  meet  the
    requirements  of  either  Appendix  FM  or  paragraph  276ADE  of   the
    Immigration Rules. She cannot  benefit  from  the  provisions  of  Ex.1
    because she had extant leave when she made her application. The  appeal
    therefore, if it is to succeed, can only do so under Article 8  of  the
    ECHR. I find that the unusual circumstances  of  this  case  justify  a
    consideration of Article 8 outside the rules.

19. It is a curious anomaly of Appendix FM that a person who enters the  UK
    unlawfully or as a visitor  either  in  good  or  bad  faith  and  then
    overstays can benefit from the provisions of Ex.1  which  provides  (so
    far as relevant to this Appellant's circumstances) that the  fact  that
    she is an overstayer does not bar her eligibility if she has a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with a  child  who  is  a  British
    citizen and it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
    UK or that she  is in a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
    partner who is a British citizen and there are insurmountable obstacles
    to  family  life  with  that  partner  continuing   outside   the   UK.
    Insurmountable  obstacles  are  defined  in  paragraph  Ex.2  as   very
    significant difficulties which would be faced by the applicant or their
    partner continuing their family life  together  outside  the  UK  which
    could not be overcome or would entail very  serious  hardship  for  the
    applicant or their partner. Had this Appellant chosen to  overstay  her
    leave and make her presence in the UK  thus  unlawful  she  could  have
    claimed the benefit of Ex.1 in relation to her  relationship  with  her
    child and it is likely she could  have  established  that  it  was  not
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK. However,  because  this
    Appellant did, as any law-abiding person should be expected to do, made
    her application whilst she still had leave she is barred from  claiming
    that benefit (EL-LTRP.2.1).  That  fact  alone,  I  find,  justifies  a
    consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules.

20. This is not a case, which regrettably this Tribunal sees all too often,
    where Appellants disingenuously enter the UK as visitors, never  having
    any  intention  of  leaving  and  then  seek  to  remain  often  having
    overstayed for many years, claiming rights to remain on the basis of  a
    family life they have built up whilst here unlawfully.  This  Appellant
    has acted throughout entirely properly. Her relationship has never been
    under any suspicion. It was built up  gradually  and  in  Nigeria.  The
    couple married after having got to know each other  over  a  reasonable
    period of time and  the  marriage  was  legitimised  in  the  Registry.
    Neither the Appellant nor her husband has sought to suggest  they  have
    no ties to Nigeria openly stating that  they  both  have  close  family
    members there. The Appellant obtained the appropriate visa and lawfully
    travelled  to  Finland  with  her  husband  for  the  purposes  of  his
    employment. Through no fault of their own that  employment  in  Finland
    was cut short when he was recalled to the UK. That situation meant they
    were unable to benefit from the EEA Regulations. Presumably  they  were
    advised by the UK authorities in Finland that she would be able  to  do
    so which is why she was issued with a visit visa to enter. It was  only
    when it was discovered that she would be unable to benefit from the EEA
    Regulations that the present application was made.

21. The Appellant's daughter  is  now  just  over  one  year  of  age.  The
    Appellant's husband is in full-time well-paid employment and  there  is
    no suggestion that they have been or will be a burden on UK  taxpayers.
    The husband and child are both British citizens and it is  accepted  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State that were the Appellant to  return  to
    Nigeria and make an entry  clearance   application  as  a  spouse  that
    application would be successful. It is plain that were she required  to
    do that she would have to take her young daughter with her  as  she  is
    her primary carer and her husband is in full-time employment. He  would
    be unable to undertake the  full-time  care  of  his  daughter  without
    jeopardising his employment and thus their ability to meet the required
    financial requirements of the Rules.

22. Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 has  to
    be taken into account  in  considering  proportionality.  Section  117B
    makes it plain that the maintenance of effective immigration control is
    in the public interest. Section 117B(2) to (5) do  not  apply  to  this
    Appellant because she speaks English and is not a burden on  taxpayers,
    the family being financially independent. The Appellant's  family  life
    has not been built up  whilst  her  status  was  either  precarious  or
    unlawful. She has never been in the UK  unlawfully  and  indeed  family
    life was built at a time prior to her entry to the UK. Section 117B (6)
    provides that the public interest does not require a  person's  removal
    where they have a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a
    qualifying child, which this Appellant does and where it would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom. This  child
    is a British citizen. It is plainly in her best interests to live  with
    both of her parents at a time when at such a young age she is  building
    a bond. The test of reasonableness is a significantly lower  test  than
    one of "unduly harsh" or "very significant obstacles". As it is in  the
    child's best interest to live in the country of  her  nationality  with
    both of her parents it would be unreasonable to expect her to leave.  I
    therefore find that section 117B(6) does  benefit  this  Appellant  and
    accordingly the public interest does not require her removal.

23. Even if I am wrong in that conclusion I consider the  Chikwamba  point.
    It is clear that this case  is  solely  about  whether  this  Appellant
    should be required to return to Nigeria  to  make  an  entry  clearance
    application or not

24. In Hayat (Mauritius) [2012] EWCA Civ 1054 the Court of Appeal  outlined
    the following guidance as to the effect of Chikwamba and the subsequent
    decisions of the Court of Appeal in TG (Central African Republic)[2008]
    EWCA Civ 997, SZ (Zimbabwe) [2009]  EWCA  Civ  590  and  MA  (Pakistan)
    [2009] EWCA Civ 953 in which it had been considered:

         (i) Where an applicant who did not  have  lawful  entry  clearance
         pursued a claim under Article 8, a dismissal of the  claim  on  the
         procedural ground that  the  policy  required  that  the  applicant
         should have made the application from his home state might, but not
         necessarily would, constitute a disruption  of  family  or  private
         life sufficient to engage Article 8,  particularly  where  children
         were adversely affected;

         (ii) Where Article 8 was engaged, it would be  a  disproportionate
         interference with family or private life to enforce such  a  policy
         unless there was a sensible reason for doing so;

         (iii)  Whether  it  was  sensible  to  enforce  that  policy  would
         necessarily be fact sensitive,  and  potentially  relevant  factors
         included the prospective length and degree of disruption of  family
         life and whether other members of the family were  settled  in  the
         UK;

         (iv) Where Article 8 was engaged and there was no sensible reason
         for enforcing the policy, the decision maker should  determine  the
         Article 8 claim on its substantive merits, having  regard  to  all
         material factors, notwithstanding that the applicant had no  lawful
         entry clearance;

         (v) Nothing in Chikwamba was intended to alter the way  the  courts
         should approach substantive Article 8 issues as laid down  in  such
         seminal cases as Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  and Huang [2007] UKHL 11;

         (vi) If the Secretary of State had no sensible reason for requiring
         the application to be made from the home state, the  fact  that  he
         had failed to do so should not thereafter carry any weight  in  the
         substantive Article 8 balancing exercise (para 30).

25. So far as Appendix FM is concerned, cases such as Gulshan (Article 8  -
    new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC), MF (Article 8  -
    new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC) and Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin) do not deal directly with the issue  of  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect an applicant to return home simply to reapply  for
    entry in the correct capacity. However, they do comment specifically on
    the strength that is now  to  be  given  to  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Since Appendix FM generally requires an applicant to
    have applied in a particular capacity in order to be entitled to  entry
    in that capacity, the practical effect of enforcing the rules,  when  a
    person seeks to remain in one capacity having applied in  another,  may
    in some cases be that the person may need  to  return  home  simply  to
    reapply. In Chen it was held that:-

          i) Appendix FM does not include  consideration  of  the  question
             whether it would be disproportionate to expect  an  individual
             to return to his home  country  to  make  an  entry  clearance
             application to re-join family members in the U.K. There may be
             cases in which there are no insurmountable obstacles to family
             life being  enjoyed  outside  the  U.K.  but  where  temporary
             separation to enable an individual to make an application  for
             entry clearance may be disproportionate. In all cases, it will
             be for the individual to place before the Secretary  of  State
             evidence  that  such  temporary  separation   will   interfere
             disproportionately with  protected  rights.  It  will  not  be
             enough to rely solely upon the case-law concerning Chikwamba v
             SSHD [2008] UKHL 40.

         ii) Lord Brown was not laying down a legal test when he  suggested
             in Chikwamba that requiring a claimant to make an  application
             for entry  clearance  would  only  "comparatively  rarely"  be
             proportionate in a case involving children (per Burnett J,  as
             he then was, in R (Kotecha and Das v  SSHD  [2011]  EWHC  2070
             (Admin)).   However, where a failure to comply in a particular
             capacity is the only issue so far as the Rules are  concerned,
             that may well be an insufficient reason for refusing the  case
             under Article 8 outside the rules.

26. I find the particular facts of this  case,  where  there  has  been  no
    wrongdoing or culpability on the part of the Appellant, where there  is
    a very young child involved and where her removal would be  purely  for
    the purposes of requiring her to make an application from abroad  would
    be disproportionate.

27. Accordingly, having set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    as tainted by material error of law, I re-decide the appeal  and  allow
    the appeal against the Secretary of State's decision.



Notice of Decision

28. The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed  on  Article  8
    grounds.

29. No anonymity direction was sought and I see no justification for making
    one.






Signed                              Date 10th June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
