
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/08993/2012
     ia/08994/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 6 June 2013                                |On 3 September 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                             mr rana tahir iqbal
                            mrs svitlana franchuk
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms T White, Counsel, instructed by Ali Sinclair
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. These appeals were before me on 1 March 2013, following which I gave  a
    written Decision.  I now set out the background of this  appeal,  which
    is in substance what I wrote in my previous Decision.

 2. The first appellant, who was born on 11 November 1972, is a national of
    Pakistan.  The second appellant, who was born on 3  August  1968  is  a
    national of the Ukraine.  The first appellant entered into this country
    as a visitor in 2004, but at the expiration of his visa, he  overstayed
    and has been here without permission ever since.  The second  appellant
    entered this country on a transit  visa  in  2003  and  has  been  here
    without leave since then.

 3. The appellants met some time after and it is accepted by the respondent
    that they are in a genuine relationship.  They underwent  a  religious,
    Islamic marriage in February 2009 but this marriage is  not  recognised
    as a lawful marriage in this country.

 4. The appellants applied for leave to remain in the UK  on  compassionate
    grounds  and  in  reliance  on  Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  but   their
    applications were refused by the respondent, who also made  a  decision
    on 27 March 2012 to remove them from the UK pursuant to Section  10  of
    the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 5. The appellants appealed against this decision, and their  appeals  were
    heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge Gordon, but in  a  determination
    promulgated on 12 June 2012, she dismissed their appeals under  Article
    8.  However, her determination was set aside by the Upper Tribunal in a
    determination dated 22 October 2012 on the basis that when  considering
    whether it was proportionate to remove these appellants, she had failed
    to consider the effect of separation should they be  removed  to  their
    respective countries of origin.  The Upper Tribunal remitted the appeal
    for rehearing, and it  subsequently  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Fox, sitting at Hatton Cross on 22 November 2012.

 6. In a determination promulgated on 26 November 2012, Judge Fox dismissed
    the appeals.

 7. The appellants appealed, yet again, against this decision, and although
    permission to appeal was  originally  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Chambers, the application for permission to  appeal  was  renewed
    before the Upper Tribunal and permission was granted by Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Kebede on 14 January 2013.

 8. Following submissions on behalf of both parties,  I  found  that  Judge
    Fox's determination had contained material errors of law, such that his
    decision must be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.  I gave my  reasons  as
    follows:

        "9.    In my judgment, the determination of Judge Fox did contain a
        material error of law, such that his decision must  be  re-made  by
        the  Upper  Tribunal.   At  paragraph  32,  when  considering   the
        challenges which there might be to either appellant living  in  the
        other's country of origin, he stated that "I  do  not  accept  that
        these amount to insurmountable obstacles".  This, as has been  made
        clear by this Tribunal in MF, is  not  the  appropriate  test  when
        considering whether or not removal is proportionate  under  Article
        8.   Further,  having   considered   whether   removal   would   be
        proportionate, at paragraph 37, Judge Fox states as follows:

              "The available evidence  demonstrates  that  the  appellants'
              private life has been  established  on  the  basis  of  their
              physical presence in the UK.  This is insufficient to  engage
              the respondent's obligations under Article 8 ECHR".

        10.   He then, at paragraph 38, finds that  any  interference  with
        their family and private life is proportionate  to  the  legitimate
        aim in accordance with Article 8(2) ECHR.

        11.   Mr McGirr, on behalf of the  respondent,  accepted  that  the
        finding that Article  8(2)  was  not  engaged  was  not  adequately
        reasoned, and I so find.

        12.   Although Judge Fox records at paragraph 22 that Judge  Gordon
        had failed to consider the effect of separation in the  context  of
        Article 8, he does not  himself  appear  to  have  considered  this
        adequately.  He states at paragraph 30 that "it  must  be  observed
        that the certainty of  the  appellants'  separation  would  be  the
        result of continued non-cooperation by the  appellants",  and  that
        "the appellants are not entitled  to  demand  the  facilitation  of
        their relationship at their strict  convenience".   However,  while
        accepting that there may be challenges to the appellants living  in
        each other's country of origin (although these did  not  amount  to
        "insurmountable  obstacles")  and  while  stating   that   "it   is
        reasonable to conclude that the appellants have chosen to overstate
        potential difficulties to bolster their continued determination  to
        migrate to the UK without the permission of  the  UK  authorities",
        Judge Fox does not deal adequately  with  what  these  difficulties
        would be, and what, if any, separation would thereby be  caused  by
        the appellants' removal, and for how long."

 9. I directed that the appeals should be re-listed before  me  on  6  June
    2013.

The Hearing

10. I heard submissions from Ms White on behalf of the appellants and  also
    submissions on behalf of the respondent from Ms Holmes.  In the  course
    of her submissions, Ms White relied upon the  skeleton  argument  which
    she had submitted prior to the  hearing,  in  which  she  set  out  the
    appellants'  case  with  skill  and  precision.   Both  appellants  had
    submitted witness statements, but Ms Holmes  did  not  wish  to  cross-
    examine   either   of   them.    As   I   recorded   the    submissions
    contemporaneously,  and  these  are  contained  within  the  Record  of
    Proceedings, I shall not set out everything which was said  during  the
    course of the hearing, but shall refer below only to such parts of  the
    submissions as are necessary for the purposes of this determination.  I
    have, however, had regard to everything which was said to me during the
    hearing, as well as to all the documents  contained  within  the  file,
    whether or not these are referred to specifically below.

Appellants' Case, as set out in the Skeleton Argument

11. The appellants' claim can be summarised relatively briefly.  The  first
    appellant is a Pakistani male and  the  second  appellant  is  a  white
    Ukrainian female.  It is accepted that they  cannot  satisfy  paragraph
    276ADE or Appendix FM of the Rules, but it is argued on their  behalves
    that Article  8  should  be  considered  on  established  jurisprudence
    outside the Rules, following MF (Nigeria) [2012] UKUT  393  and  Izuaza
    (Nigeria) [2013] UKUT 45.  It is submitted on their  behalves  that  in
    the circumstances of their case, as set out below, their removal  would
    be disproportionate.

12. The principal facts are not in  dispute.   The  first  appellant  is  a
    national of Pakistan and has never been in the Ukraine and  the  second
    appellant, who is a Ukrainian national, has  never  been  in  Pakistan.
    Both are overstayers, but they  met  shortly  after  arriving  in  this
    country, and did not  leave  because  they  wished  to  continue  their
    relationship.  It is accepted that they are in a genuine  relationship,
    and they had an Islamic marriage in the UK in February 2009, which  was
    genuine, although not recognised as a lawful marriage in this country.

13. Both appellants would  suffer  significant  prejudice  in  the  other's
    country, but in either case, there would be a  very  significant  delay
    before either could obtain a visa to live in the  other's  country,  if
    this was possible at all.  On the evidence, it  was  unclear  that  the
    second appellant would be able to obtain leave to  enter  and  live  in
    Pakistan, and as a matter of practicality, the process might take  five
    years.  In relation to the Ukraine, although there  was  a  theoretical
    possibility that a settlement application could be made, it was not  at
    all clear that the first appellant would qualify (because it  would  be
    difficult to obtain an attested marriage certificate) and in any  event
    a visa would take a very long time to obtain.  The reality was that  it
    was probably (or certainly very possibly) impossible for either to live
    in the other's country of origin; that there would at the very least be
    a very long period of separation before one or other of them  was  able
    to obtain the necessary visa to live in the other's country of  origin;
    and even then, there would be significant prejudice.

14. There was a considerable body of evidence, including FCO advice,  which
    suggested that racial prejudice was a significant problem  in  Ukraine.
    Life for the second appellant in Pakistan, as a white  Christian  woman
    who was married to a Muslim man, would  also  be  extremely  difficult.
    Although it was not submitted that in either case the  obstacles  faced
    would be sufficient to reach the Article 3 threshold, nonetheless, this
    was a relevant factor when considering proportionality under Article 8.



15. The appellants' case is summarised succinctly at paragraph  21  of  the
    skeleton argument, as follows:

         "[The appellants] have a genuine family life established in the  UK
         over some 6-7 years.  They met here, they have been able  to  carry
         on that family life here, and they have never enjoyed  that  family
         life anywhere else.  It is accepted that their presence  has,  save
         for brief periods at the outset, been without leave, but they  have
         been supported by [the first appellant's] work rather than  by  any
         access to public funds.  There is no suggestion of any breach other
         than overstaying.  The decisions made will unquestionably  separate
         them.  The length of separation  is  unclear  but  cannot,  on  the
         evidence, be thought to be other than protracted.  There is a  risk
         that it will be indefinite.  Even if one  of  them  is  able,  from
         his/her country of nationality, to gain admission to  the  other's,
         which is entirely uncertain, there are  difficulties  amounting  to
         more than mere inconvenience facing each of  them  in  the  other's
         country.  Ironically, while Pakistan might  be  more  willing  that
         Ukraine to recognise an  Islamic  marriage  celebrated  in  the  UK
         (reducing the risk of outright refusal of entry), the risks to [the
         second appellant] of life in Pakistan are clearer, more severe  and
         far better documented than the risks for [the first  appellant]  in
         Ukraine.   For  all  these  reasons  it  is  submitted  that  these
         decisions clearly represent a disproportionate interference with  a
         family life which cannot reasonably be expected to  be  carried  on
         anywhere else but in the UK."

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

16. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Holmes accepted that  the  relationship
    between the appellants was genuine, as had been accepted in the refusal
    letter.

17. Were it not for  the  fact  that  the  relationship  was  genuine,  the
    respondent would be taking a much firmer line, because these appellants
    had been abusive of this country's hospitality.  However, Ms Holmes did
    not feel she could go  behind  the  country  information  about  either
    Ukraine or Pakistan.  As far as she was concerned, she was  aware  that
    it could be potentially very difficult for either party  if  they  were
    obliged to travel to each other's countries.  At  the  very  least,  it
    would appear they would have some difficulties.

18. While some points could be made with regard to the country information,
    nonetheless she would find it very difficult to argue that the  removal
    of these appellants would in the circumstances  be  proportionate,  but
    that was a matter for the Tribunal.  Whatever  reservations  she  might
    feel about the evidence, it was clearly not easy being an  outsider  in
    either country.  A lot would be down to luck.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellants

19. Ms White referred the  Tribunal  to  the  evidence  which  was  in  the
    appellants' bundle relating  to  Pakistan,  and  particularly  the  COI
    Report.  In a nutshell, an overview of the evidence was  that  Pakistan
    was a patriarchal society  where  religious  minority  groups  such  as
    Christians (the second appellant is a white  Christian)  are  not  just
    subject to societal and legal discrimination, but, as outlined at 19.10
    of the COI, and at 19.9,  religious  minority  groups  are  subject  to
    frequent violence.  The evidence was summarised at paragraph 19 of  the
    skeleton argument.  Women, as a social group, are discriminated against
    as are religious minority groups.   None  of  this  societal  or  legal
    discrimination, or acts of vigilantes, or abuse of the  blasphemy  laws
    are effectively  stopped  by  the  government  or  police.   These  two
    appellants would stand out "like  a  sore  thumb".   In  a  place  like
    Pakistan, for a Muslim man to marry a white Christian  woman  who  does
    not convert would be seen as an affront.  The first appellant would  be
    seen as someone who was tolerant of non-Islam and could therefore be  a
    target.

20. In answer to a question from  the  Tribunal  as  to  whether  this  was
    accepted on behalf of the respondent, Ms Holmes replied  that  although
    she was sure this was all true, it could not apply in every  case.   In
    answer to a further question as to whether in  those  circumstances  it
    would be  reasonable  to  expect  the  appellants  to  take  this  risk
    (assuming that the second appellant  would  get  permission  to  go  to
    Pakistan) Ms Holmes replied that that would depend on how  dim  a  view
    the Tribunal was to take  of  the  immigration  offending.   Also,  the
    Tribunal might bear in mind that this couple was resourceful.

21. Moving on  to  what  the  couple  would  expect  in  the  Ukraine,  the
    respondent had not disputed that neither of  the  appellants'  families
    would be welcoming in either country,  and  they  did  not  speak  each
    other's home languages.

22. With regard to the situation in the Ukraine, the report from the Asylum
    Research Consultancy, which was in the  appellants'  third  bundle  was
    summarised at paragraph 18 of the skeleton argument.

23. As Ms Holmes, on behalf of the respondent, in answer to a question from
    the Tribunal, stated that she did not  disagree  with  the  summary  at
    paragraph 18 of the appellants'  skeleton  argument,  I  set  this  out
    below, as follows:

         "18. That evidence [relating to the situation in the  Ukraine]  has
             now been supplemented by the report from the  Asylum  Research
             Consultancy, in [the appellants' 3rd bundle].  The  length  of
             the document is explained by the inclusion by the reporter not
             only of relevant excerpts but  then  of  full  citations  from
             documents  on  which  she  has  relied.   This   enables   her
             assertions and conclusions to be checked against the  original
             material, but that is not a necessary exercise.  The  meat  of
             the  report  is  at  pages  2-10.   The  conclusions  can   be
             summarised as follows:

             18.1 There is significant evidence of state racism in Ukraine.
                   This includes particularly acts by the Police, who should
                  be  the  source  of  protection  from   crime,   not   its
                  instigators.  Instances, vouched by Amnesty International,
                  the US  State  department  and  other  reputable  sources,
                  extend  from  harassment  through  unlawful  detention  to
                  extortion and torture.  Victims of xenophobic attacks  are
                  themselves prosecuted.  Officials are not (see pp2-3);

             18.2 There is significant evidence of societal  racism.   NGOs
                  working in this field say it is increasing.   There  is  a
                  significant problem of under-reporting  (p4).   People  of
                  'different' appearance are at  risk  of  physical  attack,
                  frequently severe.  In 2012 an ultra-nationalist party won
                  10% of the vote (p5).  44% of foreign nationals questioned
                  had suffered race-related harassment (p6).   Prejudice  is
                  rife in private sector employment, and there are  few,  if
                  any  cases  where   anti-discrimination   provisions   are
                  applied.  There is prejudice specifically against Muslims,
                  who are conflated in the public mind with terrorists (pp6-
                  7);

             18.3  There  is  no  effective  protection.   The   government
                  formally recognises the existence  of  a  problem  but  in
                  practice officials  play  it  down  (p7).   There  are  no
                  comprehensive  provisions  on   discrimination,   or   for
                  effective enforcement or redress.  5 people were convicted
                  of inciting hatred in 2011, of whom 4 were then  amnestied
                  and the fifth was freed  because  of  'active  repentance'
                  (p8).  There is virtual impunity for racists.  Two  thirds
                  of Ukrainians (which must  mean  of  all  ethnic  origins)
                  distrust the police (p9).

         In a nutshell, if [the first appellant] can obtain a visa to  enter
         Ukraine he will face significant  risks  of  police  harassment  or
         worse, violent racist attacks  with  no  redress,  hostility  as  a
         Pakistani and as a Muslim, and rampant prejudice  if  he  tries  to
         find a job.  Being seen as someone who  has  carried  off  a  white
         Ukrainian woman is  not  going  to  endear  him  to  local  racists
         either."

24. With regard to the appellants' immigration history, having formed their
    relationship in 2004, this was the reason why they did  not  return  to
    their respective countries.  The reason they worked was a  question  of
    economic survival.

25. With regard to the visa problems which each appellant  would  have,  it
    was very difficult to get information.  However, both  embassies  (that
    is the Ukrainian and Pakistani) have said it would take time,  and  the
    respondent had not  shown  that  entry  would  be  possible  to  either
    country.

26. At this point, in answer to a question  with  regard  to  Pakistan,  Ms
    Holmes told the Tribunal that the respondent's position had to be  that
    it was not  known  at  present  what  needed  to  be  done  to  acquire
    settlement in that country.

27. With regard to Ukraine, it was submitted that it was very unlikely that
    the first appellant would get a visa (and the Tribunal was referred  to
    the  evidence  on  this  point).   Within  their  limited  means,   the
    appellants had done what they could to seek information on  settlement.
    Although it might not be impossible for the first appellant  to  get  a
    visa, because they could get  married  lawfully,  this  would  take  an
    unspecified time.

Discussion

28. As accepted on behalf of the appellants, their appeals  cannot  succeed
    under the Rules.  However, in light  of  the  guidance  given  by  this
    Tribunal in MF and Izuazu, I  must  consider  their  Article  8  claims
    outside the Rules, under existing jurisprudence, but giving due  weight
    to the respondent's policy, as now set out in the Rules.

29. The facts are not in dispute.  The appellants both  remained  here  for
    many years after their visas had expired, but a major factor  in  their
    decision to overstay for so long was that this seemed the only  country
    where their relationship could continue.  If they are removed, it is by
    no means certain that either would be allowed to settle in the  other's
    home country, and in any event it is more  likely  than  not  that  the
    parties would be separated for a significant period of time  before  an
    application by either  was  even  considered.   Also,  there  would  be
    significant difficulties either in the first  appellant  going  to  the
    Ukraine or the second appellant going to Pakistan.

30. Other than that, as Ms Holmes  fairly  put  it,  both  appellants  have
    abused this country's  hospitality  (by  remaining  without  leave  and
    working  without  permission),   there   are   no   other   aggravating
    circumstances.

31. It is in the context  of  this  background  that  I  now  consider  the
    questions posited by Lord Bingham in Razgar.

32. Clearly the appellants have a family life together, and, because  their
    removal would involve a separation  for  an  open-ended  period,  their
    Article 8 rights would be engaged.  Removal would be lawful  and  would
    be  necessary  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  fair  and  effective
    immigration control (which  promotes  the  economic  wellbeing  of  the
    country).  The key question in this case, as it is so often, is whether
    removal would be proportionate for this purpose, once all  the  factors
    are taken into account.

33. This is a finely balanced decision.  Any Tribunal must,  in  the  words
    used by Ms  Holmes,  take  a  "dim  view"  of  those  who,  like  these
    appellants, knowingly overstay after their visas have  expired.   Also,
    they must have been aware while their relationship was blossoming, that
    their immigration  position  was  precarious,  and  that  they  had  no
    legitimate right to remain in this country.  However, I do take note of
    the fact that it would have been at best very difficult for  either  to
    move to the other's home country, and that even if permission had  been
    granted by one or other of  these  countries,  they  would  have  faced
    serious difficulties.

34. I find, on the balance of probabilities, that the effect of removal  on
    this couple would be that they would be  separated  for  a  significant
    period, which is currently unknown.  The effect on  their  family  life
    would be substantial.  I also accept that  if  allowed  to  stay,  this
    couple would be unlikely to be a drain on this country's resources  and
    that other than their immigration history,  there  are  no  aggravating
    features as regards their stay in this country.

35. Having taken all these factors into account, and in particular that  on
    behalf of the respondent, Ms Holmes very fairly told the Tribunal  that
    she would find it very difficult to argue that  the  removal  of  these
    appellants would be proportionate, I am just persuaded  that  it  would
    not be.  It follows that their appeals must be allowed.

Decision

I  set  aside  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox   as
containing a material error of law, and substitute the following decision:

The appeal of these appellants is allowed, on human rights grounds,  Article
8.






Signed:                                 Dated:  21 August 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig




