

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/08500/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 March 2014                               |On 12 May 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                       MISS JEANNE MARGARET BOUZA ROSE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate instructed by Maguire
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr R Parkinson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal with permission against a  decision  by  Judge  of  the
   First-tier  Tribunal  Mozolowski  dismissing   the   appeal   under   the
   Immigration Rules and under Article 8.  The appellant is a citizen of the
   USA.  Her appeal is brought against a decision dated 28 February 2013  by
   the respondent refusing to vary leave as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.



2) The appellant's immigration history is unusual.  She worked as a  teacher
   in New York State until she retired in May 2010.  Her first visit to  the
   UK was in 1980 and she returned in 1983 as a Fulbright  Teacher  Exchange
   Scholar.  She taught in Paisley for one year.  She  met  her  husband,  a
   British citizen, whom she married in 1986.  The couple divorced  in  2004
   and they have no children.

3) The appellant and her husband visited the  UK  on  a  regular  basis  and
   their visits included Orkney.  In 2004 the appellant decided  to  set  up
   art workshops and tours of Orkney for American visitors.  She  set  up  a
   business to this effect and every summer  from  2005  to  2008  she  took
   groups of people interested in art to Orkney.  The  enterprise  was  not,
   however, profitable and she ceased this activity.  In the summer of  2009
   she came to Orkney to curate an exhibition of  two  local  artists.   She
   then found out there was a scarcity of supply  teachers  in  Orkney  and,
   given the appellant's experience, she felt she could provide  help.   She
   obtained a provisional teaching certificate  from  the  General  Teaching
   Council of Scotland and a Tier 1 (General) Migrant visa, on the basis  of
   which she came to Orkney in November 2010.  Unfortunately, owing  to  the
   severe winter that year the appellant was unable to travel from her house
   in Orkney to take up supply teaching posts because  she  was  snowed  in.
   She spent the time painting while maintained by her US teacher's pension.
    In the spring of 2011  the  appellant  moved  to  Stromness,  where  she
   started supply teaching and continued with this through 2012.   She  also
   joined in community activities, such as choir singing,  country  dancing,
   Scottish Women's Rural Institute activities, story telling,  volunteering
   on archaeological digs, writing articles and attending  evening  classes.
   The appellant's activities in Orkney were covered in the local media  and
   in specialist publications on travel and art in the USA.  In May 2012 the
   appellant rented a shop in Stromness High Street to  convert  it  into  a
   studio.  From there she started to  run  art  courses  for  tourists  and
   display works by  Orkney  artists  and  craftsmen.   The  lease  on  this
   property was to run until  December  2013  but  the  enterprise  was  not
   profitable.

4) The appellant sought further leave to remain in order to spend more  time
   in Orkney. She did not want a full time job  and  she  did  not  wish  to
   deprive an Orcadian of  a  job.   There  remains  a  shortage  of  supply
   teachers.  The Orkney Islands Council is not able to offer the  appellant
   a supply teaching contract,  however,  as  a  regular  amount  of  supply
   teaching is  not  available.   It  was  conceded  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal that the appellant could not meet the requirements for leave  as
   a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.

5) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal considered the appellant's right  to
   respect for her private life in terms of Article  8  but  found  that  it
   would not be disproportionate to require the appellant to return  to  the
   USA.

6) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was  arguable  that
   the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had not  properly  carried  out  the
   balancing exercise between the public interest and the appellant's  right
   to private  life.   In  particular,  the  judge  did  not  give  adequate
   consideration to the community value contributed  by  the  appellant,  in
   terms of UE (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 975.

7) At the hearing before us Mr Caskie submitted on behalf of  the  appellant
   that the  Secretary  of  State  had  excused  and  condoned  breaches  of
   immigration control by the appellant over many years.  He referred to the
   activities and immigration history set out  in  the  appellant's  witness
   statement.

8) For the respondent, Mr Parkinson submitted that it  was  not  necessarily
   the case that the Secretary  of  State  was  aware  of  the  breaches  of
   immigration control or condoned them.

9) For our part we were concerned by the approach taken by the Judge of  the
   First-tier Tribunal to  the  balancing  exercise  under  Article  8.   At
   paragraph 21 of her determination the judge stated as follows:

    "Also, it has to be considered that the public interest in this case is
    in maintaining fair but firm immigration control and that  is  a  vital
    interest which cannot be overstated.  Usually  public  interest  is  an
    interest which will prevail over the private interests of individuals."


10) While the second sentence of this  excerpt  is  not  objectionable,  the
   first sentence contains a clear  error  of  law.   In  carrying  out  the
   balancing exercise under  Article  8  it  is  necessary  to  balance  the
   interference with the  individual's  right  to  private  or  family  life
   against the public interest.  This balancing exercise has to be conducted
   for each individual case where Article 8 is  engaged,  according  to  the
   facts and circumstances of the case.  Sometimes the interference will  be
   serious, sometimes it will be slight.  Sometimes the public interest will
   weigh heavily but other times it will weigh much less so.  To state as  a
   matter of law that in this balancing exercise the public interest  "is  a
   vital interest which cannot be overstated"  is  an  error  of  law  which
   coloured the balancing exercise conducted by the judge.

11) Normally, of course, the balancing exercise is a matter  for  the  judge
   and were it not  for  the  misdirection  in  paragraph  21  it  would  be
   difficult to say that the judge had not done everything she was  required
   to do.  The judge's error of law has, however, affected the way in  which
   she carried out the balancing  exercise.   Accordingly  her  decision  in
   respect of Article 8 is set aside to be re-made by  us  through  carrying
   out the balancing exercise afresh.

12) The point was made by Mr Parkinson that the Secretary of State  did  not
   condone the previous breaches of immigration control  by  the  appellant.
   That must be, we suppose, an assertion that the Secretary  of  State  was
   not aware of the very public activities of the appellant, as an alien  in
   the  United  Kingdom,  with  leave  variously  renewed  by  her  and  her
   predecessors.    In  any  event,  in  making  the  present  decision  the
   Secretary  of  State  evidently  took  no  account  of  the   appellant's
   longstanding involvement in the community in Orkney and her  close  links
   with that community.  Over the years the appellant has developed  a  very
   significant  private  life  in  Orkney  involving  not  only  links  with
   individuals but with the arts  and  with  education.   The  appellant  is
   financially self-sufficient  and  she  has  invested  her  own  money  in
   fostering artistic activities in Orkney.  Given the  appellant's  history
   of involvement in the Orkney community and her use of her  own  resources
   for this purpose we are not persuaded that the  serious  interference  in
   the appellant's  private  life  arising  from  the  refusal  decision  is
   outweighed by the public interest. We would stress that this is a  highly
   unusual  case  involving  a  well-qualified  individual  with  particular
   interests closely engaged over a lengthy period in  an  island  community
   but we are satisfied that on  its  facts  and  circumstances  the  appeal
   should  be  allowed  on  the  basis  that   the   refusal   decision   is
   disproportionate.

13) No fee award was made by the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  because
   the appeal was dismissed.  No application for a fee award was made before
   us and, given the circumstances of this appeal and its unusual  features,
   we do not consider that it would be appropriate to make a fee award.

Conclusions

14) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.

15) We set aside the decision.

16) We re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing is under Article 8.

Anonymity

17) The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for  anonymity  and  we
   do not consider that an order to this effect is required.

Fee Award          Note: this is not part of the determination

In the light of our decision to  re-make  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
allowing it, we have considered whether to make a fee  award  but,  for  the
reasons set out above, we make no award.





Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans


