
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA082522015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th May 2016                       |On 10th June 2016                    |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     upper tribunal DEPUTY judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                 SHAHID ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Coleman, (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant a citizen of Pakistan (born 8th August 1988) appeals with
    permission against the decision of a First-tier Tribunal (Judge Oakley)
    which in a decision promulgated  on  6th  October  2015  dismissed  his
    appeal against the Respondent's refusal to grant him further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant under the points-based system  and
    giving directions for his removal from the UK.

Background

 2. The Appellant entered the UK on 12th September 2013 in possession of  a
    visa valid until 9th October 2016. On 22nd April 2014  this  leave  was
    curtailed, so as to expire on 25th November 2014.

 3. On 24th November 2014 the Appellant made  a  combined  application  for
    further leave to remain as  a  Tier  2  Migrant  and  for  a  biometric
    residence permit.  This application was considered and refused  by  the
    Respondent in a decision dated 9th February 2015  which  sets  out  the
    reasons for the refusal.  In summary the Appellant failed to provide  a
    valid certificate of sponsorship reference  number  as  required  under
    Appendix A of the Immigration Rules and accordingly failed to score any
    points under the Attributes Section  for  sponsorship  and  appropriate
    salary.

 4. The Appellant appealed  the  Respondent's  refusal  to  the  FtT.   The
    Grounds  of  Appeal  which  although   generalised,   said   that   the
    Respondent's decision was unfair and against the Appellant's Article  8
    ECHR rights.

The FtT Hearing

 5. When the Appellant's appeal came before the FtT, he did not attend. His
    brother attended to renew a request for an adjournment of the  hearing.
    On the day before the hearing, the Appellant's representatives had sent
    a fax letter, to the  Tribunal  requesting  an  adjournment.   The  fax
    letter outlined that the Appellant had been taken ill on 28th September
    (two days before the hearing) and that he had attended his GP practice.
     His GP referred him to hospital. His GP's notes were contained in that
    request for an adjournment.  That adjournment request was considered by
    a duty judge but the application was refused.

 6. On the day of the hearing, the Appellant's brother attended and renewed
    the adjournment application. The Appellant's brother informed  the  FtT
    that the Appellant had been ill and provided in evidence the  discharge
    notification from  Barking  and  Havering  Hospital  NHS  Trust.   This
    confirmed that the Appellant had been  suffering  from  gastroenteritis
    and diarrhoea and had been discharged on a course of medication.

 7. The FtT nevertheless decided to refuse the adjournment and  to  proceed
    with the hearing in the absence of the Appellant. It then  went  on  to
    dismiss the appeal under "the immigration rules"

 8. Permission to appeal was sought on the  grounds  that  refusal  of  the
    adjournment  request  resulted  in   unfairness   to   the   Appellant.
    Permission was granted by DJ Garrett in the following terms:

         "1.  The appellant applies to appeal against the decision of  Judge
             of the First-tier Tribunal Oakley in which  he  dismissed  the
             appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse  leave
             to remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant under the points-based
             system.

         2.   The grounds contend that the judge  should  have  granted  the
             adjournment  requested  by   the   appellant's   brother   who
             specifically attended  the  hearing  to  point  out  that  the
             appellant was ill having just been  discharged  from  hospital
             suffering from gastroenteritis and diarrhoea.

         3.   Whilst the judge gives reasons for refusing the adjournment on
             the  basis  that  the  medical  evidence,  despite  confirming
             illness, did not indicate that  the  appellant  was  unfit  to
             attend the hearing, it is arguable that, with the  appellant's
             brother in attendance to apply for the adjournment, one should
             have been granted in the interests of  fairness.   Further,  I
             note that the decision fails to deal  with  any  human  rights
             issues even though  these  were  claimed  in  the  grounds  of
             appeal."

 9. Thus the matter comes before me to determine whether  the  decision  of
    the FtT contained such error that it requires to be set aside  and  re-
    made.

UT Hearing/ Error of Law

10. I am satisfied, after hearing submissions  from  both  representatives,
    that the decision of the FtT contains  material  error  such  that  the
    decision must be set aside and re-made.  I find that  the  decision  of
    the FtT to refuse the adjournment has resulted in the  Appellant  being
    deprived of his right to a fair hearing and furthermore I am  satisfied
    that there was a failure to take into account  material  considerations
    in this case.  My reasons for so finding are as follows.

11. There is documentation available to show that the  Appellant's  absence
    at the hearing was because of his medical illness,  which  resulted  in
    him being admitted to hospital on 28th September two  days  before  the
    due date of the hearing.  The judge, in refusing the application  seems
    not to have been in possession of all the medical documentary  evidence
    which had been served on the Tribunal in support  of  the  application.
    The judge in his decision says at [5], that the  application  had  been
    made by the Appellant's  brother  and  that  he  provided  a  discharge
    notification from the hospital.  The judge goes on  to  say  there  was
    nothing to indicate in the discharge form that the  Appellant  was  not
    fit to attend the hearing and there was no letter from his GP to  state
    that he was unfit to attend.

12. What is correct to say is that there was detailed evidence which showed
    that the Appellant had attended his GP surgery on the afternoon of 28th
    September and that his GP had  referred  him  for  "immediate  hospital
    attention."  Whilst the documentary evidence from  the  Appellant's  GP
    does not admit of the words "unfit to attend court" the  judge  appears
    to have overlooked the evidence that the appellant  had  been  referred
    for immediate hospital attention and advised to rest for two  weeks  or
    so.

13. Mr Tufan did try to defend the FtT's decision, by pointing out that the
    judge had considered all the evidence before him and even so to date no
    valid certificate of sponsorship had been produced.  He submitted  that
    therefore although the judge may have erred, the  error  could  not  be
    said to be material.

14. I accept that Mr Tufan made a valid point and  this  is  a  matter  the
    Appellant will have to address. However  I  disagree  with  Mr  Tufan's
    submission  that  all  the  relevant  evidence  has  been   considered.
    Permission in this appeal was granted on two bases.  The  Appellant  in
    his original Grounds of Appeal maintained that the Respondent's refusal
    amounted to a breach of his Article 8 ECHR private/ family life. as the
    grant of permission points out, that ground was not considered  by  the
    FtT. There ought to have been some reference made to it.  The Appellant
    is entitled to have all parts of his claim considered, whatever the end
    result may be. To fail to do so amounts to a material error.

15. Accordingly I find the decision of the FtT  must  be  set  aside.   The
    appropriate course which Mr Coleman urged upon  me  is  to  remit  this
    appeal to the FtT for a fresh fact finding exercise to  be  undertaken.
    No findings are to be preserved from the hearing before Judge Oakley.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 6th October  2015  is
hereby set aside.  I remit the matter to that Tribunal  (not  Judge  Oakley)
for a fresh hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     09 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts
