
[pic]
IAC-UT

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/08423/2015
                                                               IA/08445/2015
                                                               IA/08452/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 11 February 2016                   |On 18 March 2016                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)

                                   Between

                                    [V P]
                                    [S G]
                                    [K G]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen, counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by appellants, citizens of India, against a  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge D A Pears) dismissing  their  appeals
    against decisions made on 17 February 2015 refusing to grant them leave
    to remain and deciding to remove them from the UK.

Background

2.   The background to this appeal can be  briefly  summarised  as  follows.
    The first and second appellants are husband  and  wife  and  the  third
    appellant is their son. The first appellant first entered the UK  as  a
    student on 22 April 2005. She was granted further leave  to  remain  in
    that capacity until 31 May 2011 and then as a  Tier  1  Highly  Skilled
    Post-study Migrant until 12 April 2013. Further applications for  leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur were refused on 3  May  2013  and  2
    July 2013. The second appellant has had leave as the dependant  of  his
    wife. The third appellant was born in the UK on 10  May  2007  and  has
    also had leave to remain as a dependant.

3.   The appellant applied for further  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights
    grounds on  3  June  2014  but  this  was  refused  on  29  July  2014.
    Subsequently, the respondent agreed to reconsider the  application  but
    the decision was maintained for the reasons set  out  in  the  decision
    letter of 16 February 2015. The respondent was not satisfied  that  the
    appellant could meet the requirements of the rules for further leave to
    remain. She considered whether  there  were  exceptional  circumstances
    which justified a grant of leave  outside  the  rules.  She  took  into
    account the need to safeguard and promote  the  welfare  of  the  third
    appellant in accordance with her duties  under  s.55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. She  found  that  the  first  and
    second appellants would be returning to India with the third  appellant
    as a family unit and whilst this might involve a degree  of  disruption
    to their private life this was considered to be  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim of maintaining  effective  immigration  control  and  in
    accordance with the s.55 duties.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge

4.   The appellants' appeal against this decision was heard  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 23 July 2015. It was argued on behalf of the appellant
    at [26] that they had strong ties  with  the  UK  and  that  the  third
    appellant had been born and lived all  his  life  here  and  was  fully
    integrated into the UK  educational  system.  It  was  argued  that  in
    accordance with the Immigration Directorate Instructions, it  would  be
    unreasonable  to  remove  the  third  appellant  and  that  there  were
    exceptional circumstances  such  that  the  appellants  should  all  be
    permitted to remain. It was argued that the third  appellant  would  be
    illiterate in India because he had no  understanding  of  the  language
    that was the medium of education there and it would be  detrimental  to
    his  physical,  intellectual,   emotional,   social   and   behavioural
    development for him to be returned.  It was further argued  that  there
    would be a lack of family support in India and there  was  evidence  to
    show that the third appellant  had  integrated  into  the  UK  and  had
    experienced health issues when he visited India [29].

5.   However, the judge was not persuaded by these arguments and he set  out
    his  findings  at  [30]-[41].  He  noted  that  the  first  and  second
    appellants were of different faiths, the first appellant Hindu and  the
    second appellant Roman Catholic but he  was  not  satisfied  that  this
    issue, raised late in the proceedings, would cause any real problem  in
    urban areas and there  was  no  expert  evidence  to  substantiate  any
    significant  problem  on  return.  He  took  into  account  that  their
    immigration status had been precarious since they had arrived in the UK
    and that the third appellant had been at school in the  UK  only  since
    September 2011. He did not accept  the  submission  that  education  in
    English could not be found in India but in any event said that a  child
    of the third appellant's age would soon be able  to  adapt  himself  to
    speaking Hindi.

6.   He found that neither the first nor the second appellant had any  right
    to remain in the UK and there was no reason  why  they  could  not  all
    return  together  to  India.  He  accepted  that  the  appellants   had
    integrated into the UK and had many friends  here  and  would  like  to
    remain but he  found  that  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the  third
    appellant to leave the UK with his parents and go to India where  there
    would be  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  their  integration.  He
    accepted that there would be an interference with private life  in  the
    circumstances  but  he  was  not  satisfied  that  removal   would   be
    disproportionate to a legitimate aim.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

7.    The  grounds  set  out  a  comprehensive  challenge  to  the   judge's
    assessment of the evidence and his conclusions. Ground one argues  that
    the judge having found  that  the  respondent's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law should have remitted the  application  back  to
    the Secretary of State for a lawful decision to  be  made;  ground  two
    that there was no adequate consideration of para 276ADE or of the  fact
    that the third appellant had lived in the UK continuously for at  least
    seven years and it would not be reasonable to expect him to  leave  and
    ground three that the judge failed to consider all the factors relevant
    to the issue of proportionality under article 8, relying again  on  the
    fact that the third appellant had been in the UK  for  at  least  seven
    years and had never lived in India.

8.   At the hearing before me ground one was effectively abandoned  when  Mr
    Avery rightly pointed out that it was  based  on  the  assumption  that
    paragraph 36 set out at the end of [24] was a finding by the judge when
    in fact it was part of the quotation from Ganesabalan [2014] EWHC  2712
    (Admin). Ground one was therefore based on a  misapprehension  and  was
    not pursued.

9.   In respect of the other grounds Ms Allen crystallised  her  submissions
    by arguing that the judge had failed  to  approach  the  issue  of  the
    welfare of the third appellant in the correct way.  He  had  failed  to
    engage with aspects of the evidence such as the  length  of  residence,
    the fact that the third appellant had never resided in  India  save  to
    visit and the nature and extent of his private life  arising  from  his
    school activities and the friendships he had formed.  It  followed,  so
    she submitted, that  the  judge  had  not  properly  engaged  with  the
    particular circumstances of the third appellant.

10.  Mr Avery submitted that the judge had set out all the evidence and  had
    properly directed himself referring to the relevant  authorities.  This
    was an appeal which could only succeed if  it  was  not  reasonable  to
    expect the third  appellant  to  return  to  India  with  his  parents.
    Although the judge might arguably have set  out  his  conclusions  more
    fully, he had identified the key issues and reached a decision properly
    open to him.

Assessment of Whether there is an Error of Law

11.  I must consider at this stage of the hearing whether  the  judge  erred
    in law such that his decision should be set aside. At  [18]  the  judge
    referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]
    UKSC 4 and to the need to take into account the  best  interests  of  a
    child. Lord Kerr in his judgment confirmed that this was not merely one
    consideration that weighed in the  balance  alongside  other  competing
    factors. Where the best interests  of  the  child  clearly  favoured  a
    particular course, that course should be followed unless countervailing
    reasons of  considerable  force  displaced  them.  In  [20]  the  judge
    referred to  recent  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  on  Family
    Migration which says that strong reasons will be required in  order  to
    refuse a case where a child has continuous residence of more than seven
    years. He also  referred  at  [21]  to  the  guidance  in  Azimi-Moayed
    (decisions affecting children: onward appeals) [2013]  UKUT  197  which
    refers to the starting point that  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
    children to be with both their parents and if both are  being  removed,
    the starting point suggests that so should dependent children who  form
    part of their household unless there are reasons to  the  contrary  but
    lengthy residence in the country other than the state of  origin  could
    lead to development of social, cultural and educational  ties  that  it
    would be inappropriate to disrupt in the absence of a compelling reason
    to the contrary and whilst what amounted to lengthy residence  was  not
    clear, past policies had identified seven years as a  relevant  period.
    The Tribunal then commented that the seven  years  from  age  four  was
    likely to be more significant to a child than the first seven years  of
    life.

12.  Having cited these authorities at some length, I do not think that  the
    judge then failed to apply them.  I do not accept  that  he  failed  to
    take into account the third appellant's length of residence in the  UK.
    He referred in [34] to the fact that his  period  of  time  in  the  UK
    included the first years of his life.  This was clearly a reference  to
    the guidance in Azimi-Moayed and there is no reason to believe that the
    judge did not take the guidance as a whole into account.  The judge did
    not accept for the reasons he gave that the fact  that  the  first  and
    second  appellants  were  of   different   faiths   would   cause   any
    difficulties.   His  finding  that  the  appellants  had  attempted  to
    minimise their connections with India and maximise the difficulties  on
    return was a finding open to him on the evidence.  These were issues of
    fact for him to resolve.

13.  The judge carefully summarised the evidence and there is no  reason  to
    believe that  he  did  not  take  all  relevant  matters  into  account
    including the third appellant's schooling and the friendships he  would
    inevitably have made.  He did  not  accept  that  there  would  be  any
    significant problems in him continuing his education in India.  He  had
    extended family in India.  It is clearly in his best  interests  to  be
    with his parents and when the decision is read as a whole it  is  clear
    that the judge was entitled to find that  it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the third appellant to leave the UK with them.  His findings are
    consistent with the guidance in EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ
    874 referred to by the judge at [22].

14   In summary, I am not satisfied that any relevant matters were left  out
    of account.  The judge's findings and conclusions were properly open to
    him for the reasons he gave.

Decision

15.  The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  err  in  law  and  accordingly  its
    decision stands.




Signed   H J E Latter

H J  E  Latter                                           Date:  25  February
    2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

